581709

research-article2015

EPAXXX10.3102/0162373715581709Borman et al.Self-Affirmation at Scale

Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis
March 2016, Vol. 38, No. 1, pp. 21­–42
DOI: 10.3102/0162373715581709
© 2015 AERA. http://eepa.aera.net

An Effort to Close Achievement Gaps at Scale Through
Self-Affirmation
Geoffrey D. Borman
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Jeffrey Grigg
Johns Hopkins University
Paul Hanselman
University of California, Irvine
In this districtwide scale-up, we randomly assigned seventh-grade students within 11 schools to
receive a series of writing exercises designed to promote values affirmation. Impacts on cumulative
seventh-grade grade point average (GPA) for the district’s racial/ethnic minority students who may
be subject to stereotype threat are consistent with but smaller than those from prior smaller scale
studies. Also, we find some evidence of impact on minority students’ standardized mathematics test
scores. These effects address a substantial portion of the achievement gap unexplained by demographics and prior achievement—the portion of the gap potentially attributable to stereotype threat.
Our results suggest that persistent achievement gaps, which may be explained by subtle social and
psychological phenomena, can be mitigated by brief, yet theoretically precise, social-psychological
interventions.
Keywords:	 stereotype threat, self-affirmation, scale-up, randomized trial, achievement gap

Several recent high-profile but small-scale
experimental studies have shown that relatively
simple, brief, but well-conceptualized socialpsychological interventions, which focus on
individual and socially constructed beliefs that
affect school outcomes, can have important
impacts on secondary and postsecondary students’ short- and longer term educational outcomes (Cohen, Garcia, Apfel, & Master, 2006;
Cohen, Purdie-Vaughns, Apfel, & Brzustoski,
2009; Sherman et al., 2013; Yeager & Walton,
2011). Typically, the interventions target student
beliefs that may depress academic performance,
such as stereotype threat, which overwhelmingly
affect minority students. Although these efforts
are rooted in decades of social-psychological
research and theory, to many researchers and
policymakers in the educational enterprise, the

power of such brief mind-set interventions is difficult to understand and, to some extent, lacking
in face validity, as most educational treatments
involve far more costly and comprehensive
reforms of curriculum, instruction, or school and
classroom organization. The puzzle is complicated because the prior small-scale experiments
were not specifically designed to assess whether
the interventions are capable of making a difference at scale and how varying school settings
may moderate the effects of any treatmentinduced psychological changes.
Indeed, of the numerous theories that have
been advanced in the literature to explain the persistent inequalities in academic achievement
between African American and Hispanic students
and their White peers, stereotype threat (C. M.
Steele & Aronson, 1995) simultaneously offers a

Borman et al.

compelling explanation for these achievement
gaps and an avenue to intervene and narrow them.
Stereotype threat systematically undermines the
performance of negatively stereotyped individuals, such as African Americans and Hispanics in
academic subjects or women in mathematics. In
this way, individual psychological processes in
response to socially constructed stereotypes may
contribute to persistent social inequalities (C. M.
Steele & Aronson, 2004). A number of interventions have been developed to mitigate the harm
produced by stereotype threat in real-world settings, including schools (Cohen et al., 2006; Good,
Aronson, & Inzlicht, 2003; Walton & Cohen,
2007; Yeager & Walton, 2011). One of the most
promising of these interventions focuses on student self-affirmation (Liu & Steele, 1986; C. M.
Steele, 1988; C. M. Steele & Liu, 1983) through
expressive writing. Prior research conducted in
three classrooms in a single school found that values affirmation reduced the gap in grade point
average (GPA) between Black and White students
by 40% (Cohen et al., 2006), an effect that persisted over 2 years (Cohen et al., 2009).
In this article, we report on the initial findings
from the first districtwide evaluation of a valuesaffirmation writing intervention developed by
Cohen and his colleagues. This study offers two
major advances to literature on the social-psychological dimensions of racial/ethnic achievement gaps. First, the intervention was conducted
in all of the middle schools in a single school
district, making it the most expansive single test
of such interventions among secondary students
to date. The scale of this initiative offers a realistic field-based appraisal of the potential impacts
of self-affirmation on racial/ethnic minority students. Some but not all of these students suffer
from stereotype threat, which is likely to result in
a lower bound estimate of the impact of stereotype threat and self-affirmation on non-White
students. Second, in addition to GPA, we investigate the potential impacts of self-affirmation on
standardized achievement tests administered at
the beginning and the end of the school year.
These additional outcomes illustrate how stereotype threat and self-affirmation can influence test
performance in real-world settings and how the
impacts of self-affirmation may unfold during
the school year.

22

We find that students who may be subject to
racial/ethnic stereotype threats respond positively to self-affirmation. We find evidence that
self-affirmation positively influences cumulative
student GPA among potentially threatened students, which is consistent with the original study
findings (Cohen et al., 2006; Cohen et al., 2009).
There is no evidence of an impact on reading
achievement, but self-affirmation does show
promise for improving the achievement of students who may suffer from stereotype threat in
mathematics.
Background
A Pattern of Disengagement
GPA, motivation, academic engagement, and
achievement goals appear to decline during middle school for all students, and African American
and Latino students appear to suffer steeper
declines in school performance than their Asian
and White peers (Anderman, 2003; Borman,
Stringfield, & Rachuba, 2000; Cook, PurdieVaughns, Garcia, & Cohen, 2012; Sherman et al.,
2013; Shim, Ryan, & Anderson, 2008).1 Student
achievement appears to mirror this trend.
Although there are empirical exceptions (see
Reardon & Galindo, 2009), substantial evidence
suggests that achievement gaps between White
and non-White students persist and even grow as
they progress through school (Benson & Borman,
2010; Downey, von Hippel, & Broh, 2004; Fryer
& Levitt, 2004; Jencks & Phillips, 1998). The
National Assessment of Educational Progress
(NAEP) shows that achievement gaps persist
between Black and White students (Vanneman,
Hamilton, Baldwin Anderson, & Rahman, 2009)
and between Hispanic and White students
(Hemphill, Vanneman, & Rahman, 2011) and
that differences in mathematics (but not reading)
achievement appear to grow between age 9 and
age 13. Recent work in social psychology suggests that stereotype threat may contribute to
these patterns of disengagement and inequality.
Stereotype Threat
Claude Steele and Joshua Aronson coined the
term “stereotype threat” in a seminal article published in 1995. As they originally described,

Self-Affirmation at Scale
[W]henever African American students perform an
explicitly scholastic or intellectual task, they face the
threat of confirming or being judged by a negative
societal stereotype—a suspicion—about their group’s
intellectual ability and competence. . . . And the selfthreat it causes—through a variety of mechanisms—
may interfere with the intellectual functioning of
these students, particularly during standardized tests.
(p. 797)

Stereotype threat also has been shown to
affect stereotyped individuals’ performance in a
number of domains beyond academics, such as
White men in sports (e.g., Stone, Lynch,
Sjomeling, & Darley, 1999), homosexual men in
providing child care (Bosson, Haymovitz, &
Pinel, 2004), and women in negotiation (Kray,
Galinsky, & Thompson, 2002), but within the
academic realm, it is thought to depress the performance of women in mathematics and related
fields and African Americans and other nonAsian racial/ethnic groups in all academic areas.
Students who are aware that they belong to a
group that is perceived to perform poorly academically often fear behaving in a way that fits
the negative cultural image associated with a
group stereotype, thereby marking them as inferior. This largely unconscious fear elicits anxiety
and other counterproductive responses that can
severely interfere with thinking and performance
on standardized tests or other evaluative activities in the classroom.
Although evidence continues to accumulate
regarding the specific mechanisms through
which stereotype threat depresses academic performance, most researchers agree that physiological and psychological mechanisms such as stress
responses, self-monitoring, and self-regulation
are at play (Schmader, Johns, & Forbes, 2008),
which are in turn manifest in test-taking behaviors (Scherbaum, Blanshetyn, Marshall-Wolp,
McCue, & Strauss, 2011). In addition, Aronson
(2002) noted that perceptions of negative stereotypes lead many individuals to engage in activities such as self-handicapping (Smith, 2004),
challenge avoidance (Good et al., 2003), and
self-suppression (Pronin, Steele, & Ross, 2004;
C. M. Steele, 1997). Beyond these correlates
with poor academic performance, stereotype
threat has also been linked to high blood pressure
among African Americans (Blascovich, Spencer,
Quinn, & Steele, 2001) and social distancing,
particularly from the stigmatized social group of

which the participants are members (Pronin et
al., 2004). Meta-analyses of dozens of laboratory
experiments suggest that standard measures of
ability underestimate the true abilities of Black
and Latino students by about one quarter of a
standard deviation (Nguyen & Ryan, 2008;
Walton & Cohen, 2003). A meta-analysis of field
experiments suggests that the psychological
threats that African American and Hispanic students suffer while taking standardized tests cause
them to underperform by one fifth of a standard
deviation (Walton & Spencer, 2009).
Recent work has extended the initial concern
with performance to address how stereotype
threat might implicate ongoing learning. In other
words, stereotype threat may be a form of “double jeopardy” that interferes with both short-term
performance and long-term knowledge acquisition (Taylor & Walton, 2011). Boucher, Rydell,
Van Loo, and Rydell (2012) found that the mathematics learning of women—but not men—was
compromised by negative stereotypes about
women’s math ability. Also, Taylor and Walton
(2011) found that African American students—
but not White students—who studied under
threatening conditions fared worse on a followup assessment that was conducted under nonthreatening conditions. The implication of these
findings is that removing threats during evaluative situations alone will not be sufficient if negative stereotypes are pervasive. Short-term
underperformance due to stereotype threat may
lead students to alter their career and/or professional aspirations and their sense of belonging in
academic domains and contexts (J. Steele, James,
& Barnett, 2002) and to “protectively disidentify” from academics (Aronson, 2002; Major,
Spencer, Schmader, Wolfe, & Crocker, 1998; C.
M. Steele, 1997), which in turn could lead to
increasing learning deficits (Appel & Kronberger,
2012). In this way, disengagement with the task
or the context in which the task is to be performed
can lead to growing disadvantages among negatively stereotyped students and may play a prominent role in the patterns of disengagement and
widening achievement gaps.
Members of nonstereotyped groups may also
respond to stereotypes, although in their case
their performance is boosted by “stereotype lift,”
the converse of stereotype threat (Walton &
Cohen, 2003). Introducing negative stereotypes
23

Borman et al.

about other groups—which happens “more or
less automatically” during evaluative tests
(Walton & Cohen, 2003, p. 456)—may improve
performance unless the negative stereotype is
removed. This phenomenon has been observed in
laboratory settings but not in field experiments.
Although it is possible that removing the effect of
stereotype threat could negatively affect the performance of White and Asian students, field
experiments have not revealed a trade-off between
the performance of White students and African
American or Latino students (Cohen et al., 2006;
Cohen et al., 2009; Sherman et al., 2013). The
possibility, however, suggests that we should
evaluate whether an intervention to reduce stereotype threat influences all student subgroups.
Self-Affirmation
Self-affirmation (Liu & Steele, 1986; C. M.
Steele, 1988; C. M. Steele & Liu, 1983) is one way
in which students may be able to cope with stereotype threat in a productive way. Closely related to
“compensatory self-inflation” (Greenberg &
Pyszczynski, 1985), self-affirmation helps individuals bolster other dimensions of their self-worth
to compensate for the harm done by stereotype
threat (Sherman & Cohen, 2006; C. M. Steele,
1988). In the absence of a means to repair their
self-image, students may respond to stereotype
threat in defensive and unproductive ways, such as
disidentification with academics (Appel &
Kronberger, 2012; Sherman & Cohen, 2006).
Values affirmation—in which individuals
focus on things that are important to them—is an
especially promising form of self-affirmation
that has been shown to have beneficial effects on
numerous outcomes in laboratory experiments,
mostly involving undergraduate students in the
United States (McQueen & Klein, 2006).2
Because self-worth is multidimensional (Crocker
& Wolfe, 2001), individuals can compensate in
one area—that is, values—for a deficit in
another—that is, group identity—and thereby
maintain a positive overall sense of themselves
(Sherman & Cohen, 2006). There are a number
of ways to engage in values affirmation, but
expressive writing is the most commonly used
approach, especially among large groups of students as one would find in a school setting
(Yeager & Walton, 2011).
24

One field-based trial of self-affirmation exercises, in particular, is of key policy and evaluative concern; because of its relatively brief and
simple administration yet remarkably positive
results, it has garnered a great deal of both positive attention and skepticism. In results published
in Science, Geoffrey Cohen and his colleagues
(Cohen et al., 2006; Cohen et al., 2009) reported
that brief self-affirmation tasks aimed at affirming students’ personal values reduced the Black–
White GPA gap by as much as 40%. Specifically,
having middle school students write a series of
brief essays affirming their personal values over
the course of the school year improved the performance of African American students in four
core academic subjects: science, social studies,
math, and English. The three classrooms in a
suburban northeastern middle school in which
the research took place were composed of
approximately half African American and half
European American students. The seventh-grade
students were placed at random into intervention
and comparison groups near the start of the
school year. Both groups were given structured
15-min writing assignments a total of 3 to 4 times
during the academic year. These assignments
primed the students to think about important
qualities and values; students selected three values (e.g., sports talent, family, sense of humor)
and explained in writing why they were personally important. Compared with control group students (who wrote about other non-self-affirming
topics, such as why values they considered unimportant might be important to others), the African
American students in the affirmation group had
substantially higher GPAs, both during the school
year in which the interventions were deployed
(Cohen et al., 2006) and 2 years later (Cohen
et al., 2009).
How might a relatively small and inexpensive
intervention lead to such substantial changes in
academic performance? As proximal, relatively
“quick wins” accumulate, the researchers note
that recursive processes acting like chain reactions then carry forward the initial effects of the
intervention (Cohen et al., 2009). As PurdieVaughns and her colleagues (2009) argued, a
small improvement early in the year due to the
intervention might, for example, give children a
little extra confidence, and this confidence might
lead to further gains in performance in a repeating

Self-Affirmation at Scale

cycle. Teachers may also play a role. Even though
they do not know the experimental condition to
which students were randomized, small early
improvements may cause teachers to see students
as more able and worthy of attention and mentoring, thus amplifying the effects of the invention
via teacher expectancy effects (Purdie-Vaughns
et al., 2009).
Indeed, the greatest impacts of self-affirmation
came in the final term of the school year, which
Cohen and his colleagues offer as evidence of a
beneficial recursive process for students exposed
to the self-affirmation intervention: “Findings
suggest that because initial psychological states
and performance determine later outcomes by
providing a baseline and initial trajectory for a
recursive process, apparently small but early alterations in trajectory can have long-term effects”
(Cohen et al., 2009, p. 400). By enhancing students’ feelings of personal worth, the authors surmised, the exercise changed their perception of
bias at school and shifted how they interpreted
their academic successes and failures. These steps
particularly protected African American students
who had been struggling in school. Instead of feeling discouraged and falling into a pattern of disengagement, it as though the psychologists gave
Black students an inoculation against the threat
presented by negative stereotypes.
This research—which was reviewed by the
What Works Clearinghouse (WWC) and deemed
consistent with WWC evidence standards
(WWC, 2010)—demonstrated that African
American students who completed the writing
exercises about their values increased their average seventh- and eighth-grade GPA by a quarter
of a letter grade (0.24 points), a change that was
statistically significant and equivalent to an
effect size of approximately d = 0.30. Among
low-achieving African American students, the
effect was somewhat larger, with an increase in
average seventh- and eighth-grade GPA of 0.41
points. In addition, the intervention reduced the
likelihood that low-achieving African American
students would be assigned to a remedial program or retained in grade (5% vs. 18%). The
intervention did not have a statistically significant effect on the academic outcomes of White
students.
More recently, Sherman et al. (2013) reported
on a similar long-term field experiment of

self-affirmation conducted with Latino and
White students. The authors reported findings
from two studies from two schools in which they
randomly assigned values-affirmation writing
exercises to White and Latino students and
treated GPA as the outcome of interest (by term
and cumulatively). The authors observed no
treatment effect for GPA among the White students, but affirmed Latino students had higher
GPAs than nonaffirmed, control Latino students.
In Study 1, the cumulative GPA of affirmed
Latino middle school students (Grades 6–8) was
0.22 points higher than nonaffirmed Latino students at the end of the first year, representing a
22% reduction in the initial White/Latino GPA
gap, a difference that persisted for the 3-year
duration of the study (Sherman et al., 2013). At
the end of the first year of Study 2, the cumulative GPA among affirmed Latino seventh-grade
students was 0.38 points higher than that of nonaffirmed Latino control students, which represents approximately a 30% reduction in the
White–Latino GPA gap (Sherman et al., 2013).
The direction and magnitude of the impacts of
self-affirmation found by Sherman and his colleagues (2013) among Latino students are similar
to those found by Cohen and his colleagues
(2006, 2009) among African American students.
Stereotype threat appears to influence both
African American and Latino students, and interventions to address stereotype threat appear to
benefit both African American and Latino students similarly (Cohen et al., 2006; Cohen et al.,
2009; Good et al., 2003; Sherman et al., 2013).
Scaling Up Self-Affirmation
Our districtwide sample includes both African
American and Latino students, and we have little
theoretical or empirical reason to believe that the
two groups will respond to self-affirmation significantly differently from one another, on average. Consequently, in our analyses, we contrast
two groups of students: those who are potentially
subject to stereotype threat and those who are not
potentially subject to stereotype threat. We deliberately use the word potentially because we recognize that these racial/ethnic classifications are
merely proxies for students who are suffering
from stereotype threat. Not all students who could
experience stereotype threat in fact do experience
25

Borman et al.

it. Stereotype threat includes a number of boundary conditions that we cannot identify in the field,
such as awareness of the stereotype (C. M. Steele
& Aronson, 1995) or identification with the
domain (Aronson et al., 1999). Laboratory experiments can screen participants on these conditions, but field experiments cannot do so as
readily. The students we identify as being potentially subject to stereotype threat—and therefore
potentially benefiting from self-affirmation—will
vary substantially in their susceptibility to stereotype threat and their responses to the self-affirmation treatment. We can, however, evaluate the
extent to which self-affirmation benefits, on average, a sample of students who are potentially
suffering from stereotype threat and evaluate
whether they benefit from being assigned selfaffirmation writing exercises in school. As a
result, our results offer a conservative estimate
of the impact of self-affirmation on students
who are subject to stereotype threat because,
presumably, the larger effects of self-affirmation
on threatened students may be diluted by the null
effects on nonthreatened students.
This estimate, however, offers a realistic
expectation of what a district with large achievement gaps might expect if it introduces these
activities to its curriculum. Recent evidence
from the NAEP suggests that the academic
achievement gaps between Whites and Blacks
(Vanneman et al., 2009) and Whites and
Hispanics (Hemphill et al., 2011) in Wisconsin—
where the experiment was conducted—are
among the largest in the United States. If the
results from this remarkably inexpensive and
relatively simple intervention can be replicated
and better understood, it could hold tremendous
potential for closing persistent achievement gaps
both in Wisconsin and in the United States.
Our overarching research question—Can
self-affirmation mitigate the effects of stereotype
threat on non-White students in a real-world
setting?—is applied to several standard measures of students’ academic performance. Three
measures of school success provide distinct
evidence concerning how self-affirmation may
affect both learning and test performance. As
our literature review suggested, stereotype
threat may operate through two distinct mechanisms: by increasing test anxiety and thus lowering the validity of test scores and by provoking
26

academic disengagement and thus reducing
actual learning. Our analyses of the cumulative
effects of self-affirmation on year-end GPA assess
the potential for self-affirmation to operate recursively—potentially affecting learning—as suggested by the work of Cohen et al. (2009), Sherman
et al. (2013), and Taylor and Walton (2011). In
separate analyses, we assess impacts on a fall standardized test given after a low dosage of treatment
and a spring standardized test after a higher dosage. Specifically, we ask (a) to what extent two
doses of the affirmation intervention affect reading and mathematics scores on a state standardized test; (b) the extent to which four doses affect
reading, language use, and mathematics scores on
a different standardized test; and (c) the extent to
which four doses affect the cumulative GPA of
seventh-grade students. We test two hypotheses
for each of these three outcome measures.
Hypothesis 1: Does self-affirmation impact
students who are not potentially subject to
stereotype threat?
Prior research generally finds no impact of
self-affirmation on these students (primarily
White; Cohen et al., 2006; Cohen et al., 2009;
Sherman et al., 2013), but the possibility of “stereotype lift” suggests that the impact of self-affirmation could be negative for White and Asian
students (Walton & Cohen, 2003). Our null
hypothesis is that there is no difference associated
with affirmation for students who are not potentially subject to stereotype threat. We evaluate this
hypothesis with the “self-affirmation” estimates in
the statistical models that interact an indicator of
students’ status as a potentially threatened racial/
ethnic minority with assignment to self-affirmation. A related question is whether self-affirmation
affects all students on average regardless of their
racial/ethnic background, which we evaluate in
models that do not include interaction terms.
Hypothesis 2: Does the impact of being
assigned to self-affirmation differ for students who are potentially subject to stereotype threat?
Prior research suggests that African American
and Latino students respond differently to selfaffirmation than White students (Cohen et al.,

Self-Affirmation at Scale

2006; Cohen et al., 2009; Sherman et al., 2013).
Our null hypothesis is that all students respond
equivalently to self-affirmation regardless of
their racial/ethnic background. We evaluate this
hypothesis with a statistical interaction term
between treatment condition and an indicator of
students’ status as a potentially threatened racial/
ethnic minority. We also ask a closely related
question: Is there a self-affirmation treatment
effect for the subgroup of students who are
potentially subject to stereotype threat? Prior
research indicates self-affirmation positively
affects the GPA of African American and Latino
students (Cohen et al., 2006; Cohen et al., 2009;
Sherman et al., 2013). Our null hypothesis is that
there is no impact of self-affirmation on African
American and Latino students. We evaluate this
hypothesis by using a postestimation strategy to
compute marginal effect estimates from our statistical interaction model, thereby providing estimates of the effects of self-affirmation for
students who are potentially subject to stereotype
threat.
Method
Madison Writing and Achievement Project
(MWAP)
To evaluate these hypotheses, we use data
from the MWAP, a multiyear, districtwide randomized field trial of self-affirmation writing
conducted in the Madison Metropolitan School
District (MMSD). The study involved the entire
seventh grade in 2011–2012, which consisted of
80 classrooms taught by more than 50 teachers in
11 middle schools. To our knowledge, MWAP is
the first evaluation of self-affirmation writing to
be conducted across an entire school district. The
design of the study is shown in Figure 1.
The intervention consisted of a sequence of
four writing exercises students completed in
school over the course of the school year.
Following Cohen and his colleagues (2006,
2009; Sherman et al., 2013), one half of the students was randomly assigned to complete a selfaffirmation writing exercise while the other half
was assigned to a similar, but nonaffirming control writing exercise. We implemented a randomized block design, in which the 11 schools served
as blocks, and randomization was conducted at
the student level within each of the blocks. We

randomized students after securing parental consent and student assent. The self-affirmation
assignments varied slightly over the course of the
year to maintain student interest. The first exercise took place as close to the beginning of the
school year as was feasible (Cook et al., 2012;
Critcher, Dunning, & Armor, 2010). The remaining exercises were intended to take place prior to
assessments: the Wisconsin Knowledge and
Concepts Exam (WKCE) in November and the
Measures of Academic Progress (MAP) in
February and May. Nonconsented students completed an expository writing exercise provided
by the research team so that all students were
writing at the same time.
The first two writing exercises were structured,
the third was open-ended, and the fourth exercise
was tailored to the student based on his or her
choices in the first or second exercise (see Sherman
et al., 2013). The structured exercises asked students to choose two or three items that are most
important to them from an 11-item list, and the
comparison students were offered an identical list
and asked to identify the two or three least important items and write about how they might be
important to someone else.3 Both structured exercises included follow-up questions to reinforce
their reflection. The open-ended exercise presented students with a paragraph summarizing the
kinds of things that can be important to people,
using examples from the structured exercise list.
Students in the affirmation condition were then
asked to describe something that is important to
them. Students in the comparison condition were
presented with a paragraph summarizing the kinds
of things students do in the morning before they
go to school and were asked to describe what they
did that day before school. The tailored exercise
presented an item that the student had chosen in
the first two structured exercises and asked the
student to reflect on it and describe how it is now
important to them later on in the school year. The
item we selected to present to each student in the
tailored exercise was identified as the selection
about which the student wrote most extensively in
the second exercise. Students in the comparison
condition wrote an expository essay describing
what they do after school.
Our methods were intended to replicate, as
closely as possible, the trainings and implementations conducted by Cohen and colleagues
27

Figure 1.  MWAP study design and data collection.
Note. MWAP = Madison Writing and Achievement Project; WKCE = Wisconsin Knowledge and Concepts Exam.

(Cohen et al., 2006, 2009). We worked with principals and teachers to develop final versions of
the prompts, with the intention of offering intervention materials that resembled those that they
would assign their students as normal instructional routine. The instructions and script provided to teachers were further intended to frame
the writing activities as typical classroom activities, and our trainings and materials urged teachers to present the exercises as such and avoid any
mention of the activity as an external research
project. MMSD has adopted social-emotional
standards, and schools and teachers may adopt
strategies to raise attention to concerns similar to
those addressed by self-affirmation, yet our anecdotal observations and continued interactions
with the participating schools and staff revealed
no other systematic efforts underway to address
stereotype threat.
At the beginning of the school year, administrators at each school (principal and/or learning
coordinator) decided which classrooms the intervention would be fielded in; seven schools
elected for English/language arts classrooms and
four chose homeroom classes. We provided brief
training sessions (no more than 1 hour) with the
corresponding teachers at each school. The training provided teachers with the instructions necessary to administer the exercises as intended
and provided them with a script and responses to
students’ frequently asked questions.
Teachers distributed the writing exercises to
students during the school day as part of normal
classroom activities, and each administration
took 15 to 20 minutes. Students were provided
28

with personalized copies of the exercises to maintain fidelity of the random assignment. Each exercise included an identical cover sheet to disguise
the condition to which students were assigned,
and all versions of the exercises were designed to
have a similar appearance. Students completed
the assignments quietly and independently; teachers collected completed exercises and eventually
returned them to the research staff without
reviewing student responses. Exchanges of materials were conducted via school administrators or,
in the few cases in which research staff interacted
directly with classroom teachers, when students
were not present. Classroom teachers were not
informed of the condition to which their students
were assigned or of the study’s hypotheses
(including any mention of stereotype threat).4
Data
All student demographic and outcome data
were provided to us by MMSD. We evaluate the
impact of self-affirmation on three outcomes,
each consistent with a different strain of stereotype threat theory. First, consistent with the original formulation of stereotype threat (C. M. Steele
& Aronson, 1995), the evaluative, high-stakes
nature of standardized tests may prove to be
especially threatening to students (C. M. Steele
& Aronson, 1995), which may curtail the performance of racial and ethnic minorities subject to
stereotype threat. If self-affirmation buffers students from the impact of stereotypes and allows
them to demonstrate their true abilities, this
effect should be apparent on the WKCE.5

Self-Affirmation at Scale

Second, we can evaluate the potential “recursive” nature of self-affirmation (Cohen et al.,
2009) by investigating impacts on students’ cumulative GPAs in seventh grade. GPA represents how
classroom teachers feel students are meeting their
expectations, and can reward not only knowledge
and skill but also classroom participation, homework completion, attendance, and behavior
(Coleman, 1997; Sizer, 1984). Grades, therefore,
reveal how well students negotiate “both the social
and pedagogical aspects” of a school (Schiller,
1999). MMSD provided student transcript data
from sixth and seventh grade; the transcripts
include each course the student was enrolled in
and the letter grade the student earned in each of
the four quarters of the school year. As shown in
Figure 1, the report cards are filed at the end of
each term, in November, February, April, and
June. Following MMSD protocol, we compute a
student’s GPA by translating the letter grade into a
score (e.g., A = 4, B = 3, etc.) and then creating a
weighted average based on the number of credits
earned per course and quarter.6
MMSD seventh graders also take the
Northwest Evaluation Association MAP, a computer adaptive test administered at multiple time
periods during the school year.7 In practice, teachers may use the information from these formative
assessments to help tailor instruction to individual
students or classrooms. Students take three MAP
tests (Reading, Language Usage, and
Mathematics) in the fall and spring, and one MAP
test (Reading) in the winter. Reading and
Mathematics are self-explanatory; Language
Usage covers writing and grammar. MAP scores
are produced using a Rasch measurement model,
which yields an equal-interval scale. The 2011–
2012 school year was the first year of MAP adoption in MMSD, and some students in our analytical
sample were randomized to self-affirmation after
their fall MAP tests. For these two reasons, we
use the spring 2012 MAP Reading, Language
Usage, and Mathematics scores as outcomes.
These scores inform both the original and recursive theories of stereotype threat; by the time of
the spring assessment, the students had completed
multiple self-affirmation exercises over the
course of the year, including a final one shortly
before the spring MAP testing. In addition, we
believe that to the extent that self-affirmation

buffers potentially stereotyped students and
allows them to exhibit their true abilities on the
earlier fall and winter formative assessments, that
teachers using the data for formative purposes
could develop more realistic insights into potentially stereotyped students’ academic capacities
and, as a result, hold higher expectations for the
students’ future performances in the classroom
and on later standardized tests.
The most important variable for this analysis is
an identifier of students who are potentially subject to stereotype threat, which we construct using
administrative race/ethnicity data. We do not
expect that all students will be affected by selfaffirmation equally. In fact, prior research in middle schools has found no impact of self-affirmation
on White students and substantial impacts on
GPA for Black (Cohen et al., 2006; Cohen et al.,
2009) and Latino students (Sherman et al., 2013).
Our sample includes students identified as White,
Asian, American Indian, African American,
Hispanic, Pacific Islander, and students who identified with multiple groups. We expect that White
and Asian American students are not threatened
by academic stereotypes (and could benefit from
stereotype lift) and that American Indian, African
American, Hispanic, and Pacific Islander students
may be subject to stereotype threat.8
We divide the sample into two groups: students potentially subject to stereotype threat
(American Indian, African American, Hispanic,
and Pacific Islander) and students not subject to
stereotype threat (White and Asian). Multiracial
students are assigned to one of the two groups
based on the racial/ethnic categories they identify. For example, multiracial students identified
as African American and White or Asian and
Hispanic are assigned to the group that is potentially vulnerable to stereotype threat, but multiracial students identified as White and Asian are
not.9 We also include indicators of student gender, free/reduced-price lunch status, limited
English proficiency status, and disability status
as statistical controls to improve the precision of
our analytical models.
Sample
The official count on the third Friday of
September 2011 tallied 1,706 seventh-grade

29

Borman et al.

students, all of whom were invited to participate
in the study. Student enrollment began during
student registration at each of the 11 middle
schools in August 2011 prior to the start of the
academic year. We obtained parental consent and
student assent for 1,048 students (61%) by the
end of October, prior to the administration of the
second of the writing exercises.10 These students
constitute the baseline for our attrition analyses.
The small number of students who enrolled in the
study after the second writing exercise are not
included in the analysis.
We conduct analyses on two samples, a GPA
sample and a test score sample. The GPA sample
includes 1,012 students with a GPA recorded in
the fourth and final term of sixth grade (preintervention) and at least the first three terms of GPA
data in seventh grade.11 These students constitute
97% of the consented sample of 1,048 and 59%
of the entire MMSD seventh-grade population of
1,706. The test score sample consists of 926 students with complete seventh-grade test scores
(WKCE Reading, WKCE Mathematics, and
spring MAP scores in Reading, Language Usage,
and Mathematics) as well as sixth-grade outcomes for WKCE Reading and Mathematics. All
students in both the GPA sample and test score
sample also had complete demographic information. The number of consented students omitted
due to missing data is relatively small and welldefined, namely, it is restricted to current MMSD
students who moved into the district after
November of their sixth-grade year and a small
number of students who did not take both tests in
seventh grade. Overall, missing data claimed 3%
of the consented students for the GPA analysis
and 12% of the students for the test score analysis. The rates of attrition due to missing data are
equivalent by experimental condition, as well as
by the experimental condition and potentially
threatened status, in both the GPA and test score
samples.12
Descriptive statistics for the GPA sample are
reported in Table 1 (an equivalent report for the
test score sample is shown in Table A1 in the
online appendix, available at http://epa.sagepub
.com/supplemental). The first column of Table 1
shows the overall sample means and, for the
prior measures of achievement, standard deviations. Fifty percent of the sample is female, 16%
has been identified as having limited proficiency
30

in English, 14% has been identified as requiring
services for some form of disability, and 43% of
the sample is eligible for free/reduced-price
lunch.13 Thirty-seven percent of the GPA sample
is composed of students from racial/ethnic
groups that could be subject to stereotype threat
(Black, Hispanic, American Indian, Pacific
Islander, or a Multiracial student identified as
belonging to one of these categories). The standard deviations of the sixth-grade achievement
test scores for the 926 students with available
measures are 54.45 in Reading and 56.49 in
Mathematics. Finally, the mean sixth-grade GPA
in the sample is 3.24, with a standard deviation
of 0.65.
As Table 1 also shows, the experiment has
good internal validity: The two experimental
groups are balanced on demographics and prior
achievement. The second and third columns
show the means for the experimental conditions
(self-affirmation vs. comparison) and the p values testing the differences between the experimental conditions. This information provides an
indication of the baseline equivalence of the two
groups and, thus, the internal validity of the
experiment. None of the differences were statistically significant (see Tables 1 and A1). The selfaffirmation group scored higher on the
sixth-grade standardized tests, but the differences
are not statistically significant and we use sixthgrade achievement as a control variable in our
statistical models to address any potential imbalance in prior achievement and to increase statistical precision. The two groups were comparable
with respect to sixth-grade GPA.
We also examine how similar the MWAP
sample is to the population of MMSD seventhgrade students to evaluate the external validity of
the sample. Demographic characteristics available for Grades 6 to 8 in MMSD suggest that the
MWAP sample has a higher proportion of White
students (55% vs. 44%) and a smaller proportion
of students identified as Black (18% vs. 23%)
and eligible for free/reduced-price lunch (43%
vs. 52%). With respect to prior achievement,
53% and 49% of the MWAP sample scored at an
“advanced” level on the Reading and Mathematics
WKCE, respectively, as compared with the districtwide means of 43% and 40%. A comparable
proportion of students scored at the “proficient”
level, with 34% of the MWAP sample and 36%

Table 1
Demographic and Prior Achievement Variables for Overall Sample and by Experimental Condition

Female
Limited English
proficiency
Special education
services
Free/reduced lunch
eligible
Potentially threatened
racial/ethnic group
Hispanic
American Indian
Asian
African American
Pacific Islander
White (non-Hispanic)
Multiracial
Grade 6 reading
 
Grade 6 math
 
Grade 6 GPA
 

Overall mean

Self-affirmation mean

Comparison mean

p value (T − C)

0.50
0.16

0.49
0.14

0.52
0.17

.23
.19

0.14

0.14

0.14

.85

0.43

0.43

0.43

.80

0.37

0.37

0.37

.94

0.17
0.04
0.11
0.20
0.00
0.57
0.08
511.75
(54.45)
526.21
(56.49)
3.24
(0.65)

0.16
0.03
0.12
0.21
0.00
0.57
0.08
514.00
(54.28)
528.66
(56.04)
3.23
(0.65)

0.18
0.05
0.10
0.18
0.00
0.57
0.07
509.45
(54.58)
523.71
(56.89)
3.25
(0.66)

.43
.18
.34
.13
.55
.88
.64
.20
 
.18
 
.54
 

Note. Standard deviations in parentheses. nGPA = 1,012 (513 [51%] assigned to self-affirmation writing); nREADING/MATH = 926
(468 [51%] assigned to self-affirmation writing). Race/ethnicity indicators are not mutually exclusive and sum to greater than
1.00. Binary variables tested with two-sample proportion test and scale variables tested with two-sample t test (H0: T − C = 0).
GPA = grade point average.

of the MMSD population achieving this performance level. A substantial proportion of the
MWAP sample scored at the “minimal” or
“basic” level in Reading and Mathematics, with
5% minimal in Reading, 12% minimal in
Mathematics, 8% basic in Reading, and 9% basic
in Mathematics. These rates were higher in
MMSD overall, with 8% minimal in Reading,
19% minimal in Mathematics, 13% basic in
Reading, and 11% basic in Mathematics. On the
whole, the MWAP sample is somewhat more
advantaged than the districtwide MMSD middle
school population, but it still includes substantial
numbers of poor students (as indicated by free or
reduced-price lunch status), students with disabilities, English-language learners, and students
at the low end of the achievement distribution.
As is shown in Table 2, membership in a
potentially threatened racial/ethnic group is

strongly associated with prior achievement. In
other words, there is strong evidence of an unconditional racial/ethnic achievement gap in the
MWAP sample. Potentially threatened students
lag behind Asian and White students on all measures of preintervention, sixth-grade academic
performance, including Reading and Mathematics
test scores, and GPA. Specifically, potentially
threatened groups score lower than Asian and
White students by 50 scale score points in
Reading, 52 points in Mathematics, and 0.66 GPA
points. The nonthreatened students have an average GPA of 3.5 (B+/A–) and the potentially
threatened students have an average GPA of 2.8
(B–). These unconditional gaps on measures of
prior academic performance are equivalent in size
to nearly one standard deviation.
Descriptive statistics for the seventh-grade
outcome variables are shown in Table 3. As
31

Table 2
Prior Achievement Gaps by Stereotype Threat Vulnerability

Sixth-grade GPA
n
Sixth-grade Reading
n
Sixth-grade Math
n

Potentially
threatened

Not potentially
threatened

2.82
374
479.29
328
492.41
328

3.48
638
529.55
598
544.75
598

Difference

Pooled standard
deviation

−0.66

(0.65)

−50.27

(54.45)

−52.34

(56.49)

t
−17.82
 
−14.97
 
−15.04
 

Note. Total nGPA = 1,012; nREADING/MATH = 926; pooled standard deviation from Table 1. GPA = grade point average.

Table 3
Student Achievement Outcomes

Seventh-grade GPA-cumulative
Seventh-grade Reading
Seventh-grade Math
Spring MAP Reading
Spring MAP Language Usage
Spring MAP Math

M

SD

Minimum

Maximum

3.13
527.22
540.53
221.68
220.22
230.62

0.75
57.29
48.21
15.90
14.19
19.25

0.46
310
330
145
154
153

4
780
671
261
256
308

Note. nGPA = 1,012; nREADING/MATH = 926. GPA = grade point average; MAP = Measures of Academic Progress.

shown in Figure 1, the WKCE data were collected in November of the seventh-grade year
and the GPA measures were collected at the end
of each term. Cumulative seventh-grade GPA is
shown along the top row, the WKCE scale scores
in Reading and Mathematics are shown next, followed by the spring MAP scores in Reading,
Language Usage, and Mathematics. A few features of these variables are worth noting. First,
the mean values of the scale scores in Reading
and Mathematics increased from sixth to seventh
grade, but the mean GPA in the sample decreased
from 3.24 in sixth grade (see Table 1) to 3.13 in
seventh grade.14 Data from each of the four terms
comprising cumulative GPA show a slight
decrease over the course of the year, from 3.20
and 3.22 in the first and second terms to 3.16 in
both the third and fourth terms. This decline in
mean GPA during middle school and during the
academic year is both concerning and consistent
with prior research (e.g., Anderman, 2003; Cook
et al., 2012; Sherman et al., 2013).
32

Analysis
To evaluate whether self-affirmation affected
student achievement differentially by student
racial/ethnic background, we estimated the following multilevel model in which assignment to
self-affirmation interacts with student membership in a racial/ethnic group that is potentially
subject to stereotype threat:

(

) (

Yij = α + β Affirmedij + γ Threatenedij

(

+ δ Affirmedij ×Threatenedij
+

∑ϕX

ij

)

)

+ u j + εij .

In this model, Yij represents the GPA or standardized test score of students within schools, α
represents the model intercept (the grand mean
for the reference group), β is the coefficient representing the impact of self-affirmation for the
reference (not potentially threatened) subgroup,
γ represents the average difference for the outcome associated with membership in a racial/
ethnic group potentially subject to stereotype

threat, δ represents the interaction between selfaffirmation and racial/ethnic group membership,
∑ϕX ij includes the set of additional covariates
in the model (i.e., prior achievement, gender,
free/reduced-price lunch (FRL) status, limited
English proficiency, and special education status), uj is the school-specific error, and εij is the
student-specific error term.
The coefficient δ tells us whether potentially
threatened students responded to self-affirmation
differently than majority students responded. The
coefficient γ for membership in a potentially
threatened group tells us whether there is an
achievement gap between majority and potentially threatened students net of the other covariates and absent the intervention. To determine
whether self-affirmation has an impact on potentially threatened students, we estimate marginal
effects of self-affirmation. We transform the
parameter estimates from the impact model to
estimate the average effect of self-affirmation
for the students who are potentially subject to
stereotype threat and the students who are not
subject to stereotype threat, at the average values
of each racial/ethnic group’s covariates.15 We
estimate these margins at the group means
because the preexisting differences on some of
the covariates—namely, prior achievement—are
large. Given that potentially threatened students
lag nonthreatened students by approximately one
standard deviation, there are few examples of
potentially threatened students with prior
achievement at the sample mean. The full results
from our statistical models are presented in the
online appendix (Tables A2–A4 in the online
appendix, available at http://epa.sagepub.com/
supplemental); we present the marginal effect
estimates and effect sizes in Table 4 and the GPA
results in Figure 2. We calculated effect sizes
using the overall standard deviations of the outcomes reported in Table 3.
Results
Our first set of research questions addressed
whether self-affirmation affected all students,
on average, as well as White and Asian students who were not potentially subject to stereotype threat. With one exception, the
academic outcomes of affirmed and nonaffirmed students overall and of affirmed and

Table 4
Estimated Interactions Between Assignment to SelfAffirmation and Student Membership in a Racial/
Ethnic Group That Is Potentially Subject to
Stereotype Threat

Cumulative seventhgrade GPA 
Fall Reading test
 
Fall Math test
 
Spring Reading test
 
Spring Math test
 
Spring Language
Usage test 

Estimates

d

0.082*
[0.008, 0.155]
−0.046
[−7.415, 7.323]
4.224*
[0.939, 7.510]
−0.140
[−2.933, 2.654]
1.512
[−0.603, 3.627]
0.417
[−1.546, 2.379]

0.11
 
0.00
 
0.09
 
0.01
 
0.08
 
0.04
 

Note. nGPA = 1,012; nTESTS = 926; multilevel models of students in 11 schools. 95% confidence intervals based on deltamethod standard errors in parentheses. GPA = grade point
average.
*p < .05.

nonaffirmed White and Asian students were
statistically indistinguishable (see Tables A2–
A4 in the online appendix, available at http://
epa.sagepub.com/supplemental). The single
exception was a positive and statistically significant impact estimate for all students on the
spring Language Usage test (1.113; 95% confidence interval [CI] = [0.214, 2.012]). This is as
we expected and is consistent with prior
research as the response of self-affirmation is
typically localized among students who are
vulnerable to stereotype threat.
Our second set of questions investigated
whether the impact of self-affirmation differed
for students who were and were not potentially
subject to stereotype threat and whether there
was evidence of a net impact among the potentially threatened subgroup. Table 4 summarizes
the interaction terms, δ, that test the differential
responses to treatment by racial/ethnic background; the full results are shown as Model 2 in
Tables A2 to A4 (in the online appendix, available at http://epa.sagepub.com/supplemental).
Table A5 (in the online appendix, available
at http://epa.sagepub.com/supplemental) reports
33

Figure 2.  GPA estimates by term, threat status, and experimental group.
Note. GPA = grade point average.

the conditional margins—estimated at the group
mean values of the covariates to recognize the
large differences in prior achievement between
the two groups—to evaluate the impact of selfaffirmation among the potentially threatened
subgroup.
GPA is the primary outcome examined and
reported in prior research (Cohen et al., 2006;
Cohen et al., 2009; Sherman et al., 2013).
Consistent with prior research, we find differential impacts of self-affirmation on cumulative
seventh-grade GPA. As shown in Table 4, the
estimated interaction between self-affirmation
and students’ potentially threatened racial/ethnic
background is 0.82 (95% CI = [0.008, 0.155]),
which corresponds to an effect size of 0.11. The
marginal effect—the estimated impact of selfaffirmation among the potentially threatened
subgroup—is also statistically significant and of
34

a similar magnitude (0.065; 95% CI = [0.001,
0.128]; see Table A5 in the online appendix,
available at http://epa.sagepub.com/supplemen
tal). Supplemental analyses show that—also
consistent with prior research—most of this
cumulative difference is manifested later in the
school year. Figure 2, which shows the estimated
margins for each of the four subgroups of interest, reveals the estimated marginal effect is largest in the final term of seventh grade (0.130;
95% CI = [0.039, 0.220]). As Figure 2 also
shows, this difference is produced by a decline
in GPA in the second half of the year, and especially in the fourth quarter, among students who
were potentially vulnerable to stereotype threat
and assigned to the control condition. If selfaffirmation benefited students who were potentially vulnerable to stereotype threat, it did so by
maintaining their GPA and heading off this

Self-Affirmation at Scale

decline. This is similar to the result noted by
Sherman and his colleagues: The apparent benefit of self-affirmation is that it prevents the
declines in performance that many students—
especially those subject to stereotype threat—
suffer (Sherman et al., 2013). Figure 2 also
starkly illustrates the large differences in school
performance across groups in the sample.
We extend the analysis of the potential effects
of self-affirmation on academic outcomes to
include standardized tests, both at the beginning
and the end of seventh grade. We find suggestive
evidence of impacts of self-affirmation for potentially threatened students on Mathematics standardized tests but not for the Reading or
Language Usage outcomes. We begin with the
state reading and mathematics tests, which students took in November 2011, shortly after the
second writing exercise. The estimated interaction effect for Reading test scores is essentially
zero (−0.046; 95% CI = [−7.415, 7.323]). For the
fall Mathematics test outcome, though, we find
that students identified as potentially subject to
stereotype threat responded differently to selfaffirmation; the estimated interaction is positive
and statistically significant (4.224; 95% CI =
[0.939, 7.510]). This interaction corresponds to
an effect size of 0.09. The estimated marginal
effect on the fall Mathematics standardized test is
smaller and not statistically significant, however
(2.948; 95% CI = [−0.043, 5.938]; d = 0.06). In
other words, we find a statistically significant
differential response to self-affirmation on fall
Mathematics achievement but marginal evidence
of a net impact of self-affirmation within the
potentially threatened subgroup.
We also evaluate the impacts of self-affirmation on the spring 2012 MAP test outcomes for
those students who may be vulnerable to stereotype threat. As with the fall Reading test, the estimated interaction effect for the spring Reading
outcome is close to 0 (−0.140; 95% CI = [−2.933,
2.654]). The estimated interaction effect for
Language Usage is also small and not statistically
significant (0.417; 95% CI = [−1.546, 2.379]).
The marginal effect estimate for Language
Usage—the combination of two estimates—is
positive but not statistically significant (1.386;
95% CI = [−0.209, 2.980]; d = 0.10). Recall that
there was evidence of a main effect for treatment
(1.113) for the entire sample on this outcome.

Finally, there is marginal evidence of a treatment
impact on spring MAP scores in Mathematics for
potentially threatened students. The estimated
interaction is 1.512 (95% CI = [−0.603, 3.627]; d
= 0.08) and the estimated marginal effect is similar
(1.578; 95% CI = [−0.128, 3.284]; d = 0.08).
Interpreting the Impacts
In addition to quantifying effects as standardized mean differences, or effect sizes, as reported
in the previous section, one can interpret the
impacts as a proportion of the preexisting unconditional achievement gap (see Cohen et al., 2006;
Cohen et al., 2009; Sherman et al., 2013) or relative to the residual or “unexplained” gap in
achievement by race/ethnicity. The unconditional
or “raw” achievement gap represents the accumulation of disadvantages that accrued to students over the course of their lives, including
early childhood influences, nutrition, poverty,
and so on. The “unexplained” gap adjusts for the
fact that students from different racial/ethnic
backgrounds have different circumstances and
experiences that produce different achievement
levels. Observable student characteristics and
their performance on preintervention measures
of academic performance account for most—but
not all—of the achievement differences we
observe in seventh grade. These differences in
achievement observed among the comparison
students constitute the “unexplained” gap and
may be due to social and psychological experiences that unfold during seventh grade.
To illustrate, the estimated interaction term
(0.082) and marginal effect (0.065) for the cumulative GPA outcome correspond to effect sizes of
0.11 and 0.09, respectively. As sixth graders, students who were potentially subject to stereotype
threat had GPAs that were 0.66 lower than those of
their peers (see Table 2); the marginal effect estimate of 0.065 is equivalent to 10% of this gap.
Finally, the residual achievement gap in seventhgrade cumulative GPA that is not explained by
demographic characteristics or a student’s sixthgrade WKCE Mathematics test score is 0.101 (see
Table A2 in the online appendix, available at
http://epa.sagepub.com/supplemental). This estimate demonstrates that stereotype-threat-vulnerable students who had been equal to their White
and Asian peers perform worse a year later. By
35

Borman et al.

this standard, self-affirmation reduced the “unexplained” achievement gap by 64% (0.065 / 0.101
= 0.64). Relative to the overall raw gap in achievement, the impact of self-affirmation is modest, but
it accounts for a substantial portion of the achievement gap that cannot be accounted for by demographic characteristics other than race/ethnicity
and prior sixth-grade achievement.
Our estimate of the net impact of self-affirmation on cumulative GPA, which is equivalent to a
0.065 advantage on seventh-grade GPA, is smaller
than the previously reported impacts, which range
from 0.22 (Sherman et al., 2013, Study 1) to 0.38
(Sherman et al., 2013, Study 2).16 The authors of the
prior research found larger unadjusted gaps in sixthgrade GPA (e.g., Sherman et al., 2013, observed a
GPA gap of 1.02), and reported that the impact of
self-affirmation corresponds to 22% to 38% of the
raw gap, which is substantially larger than the 10%
we found. It is common among social-psychological interventions to find evidence of larger treatment impacts on GPA as time goes on (e.g., see
Aronson, Fried, & Good, 2002; Wilson & Linville,
1982, 1985). Evidence from our study suggests a
similar result but, again, our end-of-year impact
estimate (d = 0.13) is smaller than similar estimates
from prior research, such as an effect size of d =
0.57 reported by Sherman et al. (2013).
The suggestive marginal effect estimates on
the Mathematics tests (2.948 and 1.578 in the
fall and spring, respectively) represent standardized effect sizes of 0.06 in the fall and 0.10 in the
spring. The fall math impact estimate represents
6% of the unconditional achievement gap on the
sixth-grade test (2.948 / 52.34 = 0.06) and 56%
of the “unexplained” achievement gap (2.948 /
5.311 = 0.56). Spring MAP scores are not available from the prior year, but the marginal effect
estimate represents 54% of the “unexplained”
achievement gap (1.578 / 2.927 = 0.54).
Discussion
In this article, we report on a randomized field
trial of self-affirmation writing conducted at
unprecedented scale. Self-affirmation did not
influence White and Asian students’ school outcomes, which confirmed our expectations and is
consistent with prior research. Students potentially vulnerable to stereotype threat respond differently to self-affirmation than White and Asian
36

students, though, and self-affirmation positively
affects the academic performance of students
who may be vulnerable to stereotype threat, particularly as measured by GPA. The magnitudes
of these impact estimates are smaller than those
found in earlier studies, but the direction is consistent with theory and prior research. We also
found some support for the hypothesis that selfaffirmation influences student academic performance over time.
The fact that we found smaller impacts than
previous research is not surprising. Scaling up
educational interventions and reform models is
difficult and often unsuccessful (Elias, Zins,
Graczyk, & Weissberg, 2003; Glennan, Bodilly,
Galegher, & Kerr, 2004). We have taken the steps
to take an important social-psychological intervention to scale across an entire school district—
the first such effort at scale-up. It is extremely
valuable to understand if the effects of the original small-scale field studies replicate when they
are scaled up to serve a large number of students,
classrooms, and schools. As Bryk, Gomez, and
Grunow (2011) contended, “[T]he history of
educational innovation is replete with stories that
show how innovations work in the hands of a
few, but lose effectiveness in the hands of the
many” (p. 130). Thus, the most basic evidence of
whether or not these interventions can produce
impacts when implemented at scale is a crucial
and fundamental question that was previously
without an answer.
Self-affirmation writing is arguably easier to
implement and replicate with fidelity than a comprehensive schoolwide reform model, but correct
implementation is still essential to its success
(Yeager & Walton, 2011). Prior field research was
conducted in one school at a time with a handful
of teachers; our current study was conducted in 11
schools with more than 50 teachers in 80 classrooms. It is not surprising that small-scale field
experiments conducted by the developers of these
materials yielded larger impacts than those found
in our study. School districts may expect impacts
on the order of what we report here if they adopted
self-affirmation as part of their curricula: modest
impacts on GPA for non-White and non-Asian
students, without harming the performances of
White and Asian students, along with the possibility of additional impacts on standardized tests
within the mathematics domain. This is not an

Self-Affirmation at Scale

estimate of self-affirmation or stereotype threat
under ideal conditions, but rather what one might
expect in a real-world setting at scale with minimal teacher training and curricular integration.
No one claims that stereotype threat accounts
for the entirety of the achievement gap (Sackett,
Hardison, & Cullen, 2004; C. M. Steele, 1997; C.
M. Steele & Aronson, 2004) or that self-affirmation can close it completely (Yeager & Walton,
2011), but self-affirmation may help narrow the
gap at little to no additional cost to districts as part
of an overall strategy to achieve equity. Our findings show that self-affirmation can substantially
narrow the residual achievement gap that cannot
be explained by demographic characteristics or
prior achievement, and this is the portion of the
achievement gap implicated by stereotype threat
(Cohen & Sherman, 2005; C. M. Steele &
Aronson, 1995). If implementing a series of brief
expressive writing exercises can covertly address
this gap by substituting for other in-class writing
activities, it would appear well worth it to do so.
We found suggestive evidence of an impact of
self-affirmation on mathematics tests but not on
reading and language tests. Self-affirmation writing does not plausibly develop mathematics ability, but there are two reasons why self-affirmation
might affect math achievement and not reading.
First, stereotyped students may not find a reading
test to be as threatening as a mathematics test.
The residual achievement gaps in reading are
smaller than in mathematics, and, in fact, we did
not find a statistically significant residual gap
along race/ethnicity for the fall reading test (see
Table Al in the online appendix, available at
http://epa.sagepub.com/supplemental). Perhaps
taking a mathematics test is more stressful for students, which compounds the self-monitoring and
other harmful processes that stereotype threat
induces in vulnerable students. Many laboratory
experiments, after all, use mathematics tests to
create an evaluative situation in which stereotype
threat can thrive. At least 25 of the 43 dependent
variables in the studies reviewed by Walton and
Cohen (2003) are mathematics tests. If mathematics tests are more threatening than reading tests
for seventh-grade students, then self-affirmation
is more likely to help students demonstrate their
true abilities in mathematics than in reading.
Second, there is some evidence from research
on summer learning (Cooper, Charlton, Valentine,

& Muhlenbruck, 2000) and teacher quality
(Aaronson, Barrow, & Sander, 2007) that mathematics performance is more responsive to
school inputs than reading, perhaps because students have alternative venues for learning to read
(e.g., the family). Affirmed students could be
more receptive to mathematics instruction and
therefore could be learning more mathematics. In
this fashion, self-affirmation may indirectly cultivate learning.
Although most education research has relied on
standardized achievement tests to measure intervention impacts, recent work suggests that grades
and attendance—not test scores—are the middlegrade factors most strongly connected with both
high school and college success (Allensworth,
Gwynne, Moore, & de la Torre, 2014). These
authors concluded that a one-point difference in
eighth-grade GPAs, which is similar to the selfaffirmation impact of seven-tenths of a point that
we observed for cumulative seventh-grade GPA,
corresponds to a 20 percentage point difference in
the likelihood of passing ninth-grade math. We
also find larger GPA impacts at the end of the year,
which Sherman and his colleagues (2013) cited as
evidence of a recursive process, or learning, as the
impact of self-affirmation builds over time.
However, a single year of data may not be sufficient to settle this question, and Cohen et al. (2009)
and Study 1 from Sherman et al. (2013) used multiple years of data. Recall that students were
assigned as many as four writing exercises, with
the final “tailored” exercise near the end of the
school year (see Figure 1). Although the early affirmations appear to be most important (Cook et al.,
2012; Critcher et al., 2010), the effects at the end of
the year could be evidence of a recursive process, a
“dosage” effect that depends on the accumulation
of the impacts of the exercises over the course of
the year, or the impact of each “booster” exercise
along the way. Although our exploratory analyses
revealed the largest quarterly GPA impact in the
final quarter of the year, further analyses of future
outcomes for these students across later grades will
offer stronger tests of the hypothesis that the impact
of self-affirmation grows steadily over time.
Conclusion
Our primary question was whether self-affirmation affects the academic performance of
37

Borman et al.

students who are identified as belonging to racial/
ethnic groups that may be subject to stereotype
threat. We find evidence of positive impacts of
self-affirmation for these students—particularly
on mathematics tests—that are consistent with but
smaller than those found in prior field research on
self-affirmation. Self-affirmation writing appears
to be a replicable and extremely cost-effective
strategy for reducing achievement gaps. Recent
syntheses of research on the impacts of more complex and costly curricular and instructional interventions on elementary and middle school students
have suggested that typical impacts on broadscope standardized achievement tests range from
an effect size of about d = .08 to d = .15 (Lipsey et
al., 2012). As another example, a meta-analysis of
the achievement impacts of 29 widely replicated
whole-school reform models suggests that typical
impacts from independently conducted evaluations using experimental or quasi-experimental
comparison groups yielded effect sizes of d = .09
(Borman, Hewes, Overman, & Brown, 2003).
Understood in this context, observed self-affirmation impacts for potentially threatened minority
students of d = .11 for cumulative GPA and d = .09
for fall Mathematics achievement are within the
range of effect sizes observed for other educational interventions. The delivery mechanism for
the self-affirmation treatment relies on several
sheets of paper on which the self-affirming writing prompt is provided to students, a brief teacher
training session to help teachers administer the
intervention, and the 15 to 20 min of class time
during which students engage in self-affirmation
writing. Although a comprehensive cost-effectiveness analysis is beyond the scope of this article, it
is clear that the impacts of self-affirmation can be
achieved at a small fraction of the cost of wholeschool reforms, which, more than 10 years
ago, Borman et al. (2003) estimated to cost
approximately US$86,000 during the first year of
implementation.
The impacts also account for a substantial
amount of the racial/ethnic achievement gap that
cannot be explained by demographics and prior
achievement, which is the portion of the achievement gap for which stereotype threat is believed
to be the culprit. Our results suggest that a nonzero proportion of the achievement gap in middle
school is explainable by seemingly subtle psychological factors that affect African American
38

and Latino students within their school climates.
Our intervention work further suggests that such
psychological factors appear to be malleable and
that we can effectively buffer students from stereotype threat. We find suggestive evidence that
self-affirmation functions “recursively” to influence learning but cannot rule out that cumulative
GPA impacts are a result of the sequence of exercises distributed over the course of the school
year. Perhaps more intensive efforts to reduce
racism and prejudice, by transforming schools to
make them places that are less identity-threatening
for young students of color, might reduce achievement gaps even more powerfully. Given how easily self-affirmation writing can be integrated into
everyday classroom practice, though, it appears
that self-affirmation through expressive writing
can be a viable strategy for narrowing achievement gaps between sterotype-threatened minority
students and their White and Asian peers.
Authors’ Note
The findings and conclusions are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the supporting agencies.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article.

Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: Research on this article was supported
by grants from the Institute of Education Sciences,
U.S. Department of Education (R305A110136 and
R305C050055) and Spencer Foundation (201500044).

Notes
1. We use the word “Latino” to refer to Latino/a
Americans and Hispanic Americans. We refer to students of “Hispanic” race/ethnicity when they are
identified as such in federal data (such as National
Assessment of Educational Progress [NAEP]) and in
the data we receive from the school district. We use
the words “White” and “European American” as well
as the words “Black” and “African American” interchangeably. We generally use the words “Latino,”
“African American,” and “White” in our own writing
to refer to different racial/ethnic classifications, but
when we refer to the work of others, we use the terms

Self-Affirmation at Scale
the original authors used (e.g., “Black/White achievement gap”). We recognize that all of these groups are
heterogeneous and that individual student experiences
vary substantially within these groups.
2. Another form of self-affirmation focuses on personal characteristics or attributes (e.g., “I am good at
basketball”) rather than values (e.g., “I like playing
basketball”); values affirmation is more widely used
(McQueen & Klein, 2006).
3. The list of items for the first exercise included
Enjoying Sports, Being Good at Art, Being Creative,
Being Independent, Living in the Moment (or Enjoying
Today), Belonging to a Social Group (such as your
community, racial group, or school club), Listening
to Music or Playing Music, Following Politics or
Government, Being with Friends or Family, Being
Religious, and Having a Sense of Humor. The second
exercise re-sorted the list and added Being Smart or
Getting Good Grades (see Cohen, Garcia, Apfel, &
Master, 2006; Sherman et al., 2013).
4. Classroom teachers were told that the study evaluated how expressive writing contributed to academic
learning.
5. Students take the Wisconsin Knowledge and
Concepts Exam (WKCE) in early November of each
year; Madison Metropolitan School District (MMSD)
provided us with each consented student’s scale score
on the WKCE in Reading and Mathematics in both
sixth and seventh grade. The scores follow a normal
distribution.
6. Academic courses that meet daily are given
a weight of 0.25 per quarter; elective courses are
included in the weighted grade point average (GPA),
but most electives meet less often (either fewer days
per week or fewer quarters per year). For example, an
elective such as Chorus that meets 2 days per week is
given a weight of 0.10 for the purpose of calculating
GPA. The GPA values have a minimum of 0.0 for a
student who failed every class and a maximum of 4.0
for a straight-A student. The distribution of GPA values is censored at 4.0. Our approach is consistent with
MMSD practice but differs from prior research (e.g.,
Cohen et al., 2006; Cohen, Purdie-Vaughns, Apfel,
& Brzustoski, 2009; Sherman et al., 2013), which
computes GPA for “core” subjects (math, science,
language arts, and social studies; see Sherman et al.,
2013, p. 597); we include grades from all classes and
provide greater weight to core subjects. Recalculating
the GPA to “core” subjects only does not substantively
change the results.
7. http://www.nwea.org/products-services/assessments/
map%C2%AE.
8. We empirically assessed the legitimacy of
our coding of students’ potentially threatened status by investigating reported eligibility for free/
reduced lunch and prior (preintervention) academic

achievement across each racial/ethnic group. In these
data, Asian students resemble White students academically and economically, whereas American Indian and
Pacific Islander students resemble Black and Hispanic
students.
9. We conducted a number of sensitivity analyses
to test this classification decision. We did not find
meaningful differences within the potentially threatened group (e.g., African Americans vs. Hispanic students). We also reclassified multiracial students by,
for instance, assigning students identified as African
American and White to the group that is not potentially
vulnerable to stereotype threat and found substantively
similar results. As one might expect, the magnitudes of
the impacts of self-affirmation for multiracial students
were between those of the potentially threatened and
not potentially threatened groups, which yielded larger
impact estimates for the potentially threatened group
when the multiracial students were reassigned. These
supplemental sensitivity analyses are available from
the authors on request.
10. A total of 988 students (58% of 1,706) were
enrolled prior to the first writing exercise and 60 students were enrolled between the first and second writing exercise.
11. Term 4 GPA is missing for 20 seventh graders;
the results without them are substantively and statistically similar.
12. In the GPA sample, the rate of attrition was 3%
in the self-affirmation group and 4% in the comparison group, χ2(1, N = 1048) = 0.06, p = .81. Among
the potentially threatened students, the rate of attrition
was 5% for those assigned to self-affirmation and 4%
for the comparison group, χ2(1, N = 390) = 0.46, p =
.50. In the test score sample, the rate of attrition was
12% in the self-affirmation group and 12% in the comparison group, χ2(1, N = 1048) = 0.02, p = .88. Among
the potentially threatened students, the rate of attrition
for the test score sample was 17% for those assigned
to self-affirmation and 15% for the comparison group,
χ2(1, N = 390) = 0.31, p = .58.
13. Students with “severe and profound” disabilities did not participate in the study. MMSD
practices “full inclusion,” in which all students are
served together in regular classrooms to the greatest extent possible. By virtue of delivering the writing exercises in classrooms during the school day,
accommodations were available to all students with
disabilities.
14. Recall that the test score samples included only
students with both sixth- and seventh-grade scores and
that the GPA sample included only students with GPAs
recorded in the last term of sixth grade and at least the
first three terms of seventh grade.
15. We conducted this analysis using the margins command in Stata Version 12. The command

39

Borman et al.
takes the derivative of the self-affirmation estimate
at fixed values of the other covariates in the model.
Postestimation of standard errors was conducted using
the delta method (Oehlert, 1992). See Greene (2012)
or Wooldridge (2010) for more information.
16. Cohen et al. (2006, Study 1 and 2 combined)
reported a cumulative GPA impact of 0.30.

References
Allensworth, E., Gwynne, J., Moore, P., & de la Torre,
M. (2014). Looking forward to high school and
college: Middle grade indicators of readiness in
Chicago Public Schools. Chicago, IL: Consortium
on Chicago School Research, University of
Chicago. Retrieved from https://ccsr.uchicago.edu/
publications/looking-forward-high-school-andcollege-middle-grade-indicators-readiness-chicago
Anderman, L. H. (2003). Academic and social perceptions as predictors of change in middle school students’ sense of school belonging. The Journal of
Experimental Education, 72, 5–22.
Appel, M., & Kronberger, N. (2012). Stereotypes and
the achievement gap: Stereotype threat prior to
test taking. Educational Psychology Review, 24,
609–635.
Aronson, J. (2002). Stereotype threat: Contending and
coping with unnerving expectations. In J. Aronson
(Ed.), Improving academic achievement (pp. 279–
301). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Aaronson, D., Barrow, L., & Sanderc, W. (2007).
Teachers and student achievement in the Chicago
public high schools. Journal of Labor Economics,
25, 95–135.
Aronson, J., Fried, C. B., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing
the effects of stereotype threat on African American
college students by shaping theories of intelligence. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
38, 113–125.
Aronson, J., Lustina, M. J., Good, C., Keough, K.,
Steele, C. M., & Brown, J. (1999). When white
men can’t do math: Necessary and sufficient factors in stereotype threat. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 35, 29–46.
Benson, J., & Borman, G. D. (2010). Family and
contextual socioeconomic effects across seasons:
When do they matter for the achievement growth
of young children? Teachers College Record, 112,
1338–1390.
Blascovich, J., Spencer, S. J., Quinn, D., & Steele, C.
(2001). African Americans and high blood pressure: The role of stereotype threat. Psychological
Science, 12, 225–229.
Borman, G. D., Hewes, G. M., Overman, L. T., &
Brown, S. (2003). Comprehensive school reform

40

and achievement: A meta-analysis. Review of
Educational Research, 73, 125–230.
Borman, G. D., Stringfield, S., & Rachuba, L. (2000).
Advancing minority high achievement: National
trends and promising programs and practices
(ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED
438 380). New York, NY: The College Board.
Bosson, J. K., Haymovitz, E. L., & Pinel, E. C. (2004).
When saying and doing diverge: The effects of
stereotype threat on self-reported versus nonverbal anxiety. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 40, 247–255.
Boucher, K. L., Rydell, R. J., Van Loo, K. J., & Rydell,
M. T. (2012). Reducing stereotype threat in order
to facilitate learning. European Journal of Social
Psychology, 42, 174–179.
Bryk, A. S., Gomez, L. M., & Grunow, A. (2011).
Getting ideas into action: Building networked
improvement communities in education. In M. T.
Hallinan (Ed.), Frontiers in sociology of education (pp. 127–162). Dordrecht, The Netherlands:
Springer.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., & Master, A.
(2006). Reducing the racial achievement gap: A
social-psychological intervention. Science, 313,
1307–1310.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Apfel,
N., & Brzustoski, P. (2009). Recursive processes in
self-affirmation: Intervening to close the minority
achievement gap. Science, 324, 400–403.
Cohen, G. L., & Sherman, D. K. (2005). Stereotype
threat and the social and scientific contexts of the
race achievement gap. American Psychologist, 60,
270–271.
Coleman, J. S. (1997). Output-driven schools:
Principles of design. In J. S. Coleman, B. Schneider,
S. Plank, K. S. Schiller, R. Shouse, H. Wong, &
S.-A. Lee (Eds.), Redesigning American education
(pp. 13–38). Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Cook, J. E., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., & Cohen,
G. L. (2012). Chronic threat and contingent belonging: Protective benefits of values affirmation on
identity development. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 102, 479–496.
Cooper, H. M., Charlton, K., Valentine, J. C., &
Muhlenbruck, L. (2000). Making the most of summer school: A meta-analytic and narrative review.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 65(1, Serial No. 260), 1–27.
Critcher, C. R., Dunning, D., & Armor, D. A. (2010).
When self-affirmations reduce defensiveness:
Timing is key. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 36, 947–959.
Crocker, J., & Wolfe, C. T. (2001). Contingencies of
self-worth. Psychological Review, 108, 593–623.

Self-Affirmation at Scale
Dee, T. S. (2011). Social identity and achievement
gaps: Evidence from an affirmation intervention.
Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness,
8, 149–68.
Downey, D. B., von Hippel, P. T., & Broh, B. A.
(2004). Are schools the great equalizer? Cognitive
inequality during the summer months and the
school year. American Sociological Review, 69,
613–635.
Elias, M. J., Zins, J. E., Graczyk, P. A., & Weissberg,
R. P. (2003). Implementation, sustainability,
and scaling up of social-emotional and academic
innovations in public schools. School Psychology
Review, 32, 303–319.
Fryer, R. G., & Levitt, S. D. (2004). Understanding
the black-white test score gap in the first two years
of school. Review of Economics and Statistics, 86,
447–464.
Glennan, T. K., Jr., Bodilly, S. J., Galegher, J. R., &
Kerr, K. A. (2004). Expanding the reach of education reforms: Perspectives from leaders in
the scale-up of educational interventions. Santa
Monica, CA: RAND.
Good, C., Aronson, J., & Inzlicht, M. (2003).
Improving adolescents’ standardized test performance: An intervention to reduce the effects of stereotype threat. Journal of Applied Developmental
Psychology, 24, 645–662.
Greenberg, J., & Pyszczynski, T. (1985).
Compensatory self-inflation: A response to the
threat to self-regard of public failure. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 273–280.
Greene, W. H. (2012). Econometric analysis. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Hemphill, F. C., Vanneman, A., & Rahman, T. (2011).
Achievement gaps: How Hispanic and White students in public schools perform in mathematics and
reading on the National Assessment of Educational
Progress (NCES 2011-459). Washington, DC:
National Center for Education Statistics, Institute
of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of
Education.
Jencks, C., & Phillips, M. (1998). The Black White test
score gap. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution
Press.
Kray, L. J., Galinsky, A. D., & Thompson, L. (2002).
Reversing the gender gap in negotiations: An exploration of stereotype regeneration. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 87,
386–410.
Lipsey, M. W., Puzio, K., Yun, C., Hebert, M. A.,
Steinka-Fry, K., Cole, M. W., . . . Busick, M. D.
(2012). Translating the statistical representation of the effects of education interventions into
more readily interpretable forms (NCSER 2013-

3000). Washington, DC: National Center for
Special Education Research, Institute of Education
Sciences, U.S. Department of Education.
Liu, T. J., & Steele, C. M. (1986). Attributional analysis as self-affirmation. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 51, 531–540.
Major, B., Spencer, S., Schmader, T., Wolfe, C., &
Crocker, J. (1998). Coping with negative stereotypes about intellectual performance: The role of
psychological disengagement. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 24, 34–50.
McQueen, A., & Klein, W. M. P. (2006). Experimental
manipulations of self-affirmation: A systematic
review. Self and Identity, 5, 289–354.
Nguyen, H. D., & Ryan, A. M. (2008). Does stereotype threat affect test performance of minorities and
women? A meta-analysis of experimental evidence.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 93, 1314–1334.
Oehlert, G. W. (1992). A note on the delta method.
The American Statistician, 46, 27–29.
Pronin, E., Steele, C. M., & Ross, L. (2004). Identity
bifurcation in response to stereotype threat:
Women and mathematics. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 40, 152–168.
Purdie-Vaughns, V., Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Sumner,
R., Cook, J. C., & Apfel, N. H. (2009, September
23). Improving minority academic performance:
How a values-affirmation intervention works.
Teachers College Record. Retrieved from http://
www.tcrecord.org/content.asp?contentid=15774
Reardon, S. F., & Galindo, C. (2009). The HispanicWhite achievement gap in math and reading in
the elementary grades. American Educational
Research Journal, 46, 853–891.
Sackett, P. R., Hardison, C. M., & Cullen, M. J. (2004).
On interpreting stereotype threat as accounting for
African American-White Differences on cognitive
tests. American Psychologist, 59, 7–13.
Scherbaum, C. A., Blanshetyn, V., Marshall-Wolp, E.,
McCue, E., & Strauss, R. (2011). Examining the
effects of stereotype threat on test-taking behaviors. Social Psychology of Education, 14, 361–375.
Schiller, K. S. (1999). Effects of feeder patterns on
students’ transition to high school. Sociology of
Education, 72, 216–233.
Schmader, T., Johns, M., & Forbes, C. (2008). An integrated process model of stereotype threat effects on
performance. Psychological Review, 115, 336–356.
Sherman, D. K., & Cohen, G. L. (2006). The psychology of self defense: Self affirmation theory.
In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental
social psychology (pp. 183–242). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Sherman, D. K., Hartson, K. A., Binning, K. R.,
Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., Taborsky-Barba,

41

Borman et al.
S., . . . Cohen, G. L. (2013). Deflecting the trajectory and changing the narrative: How self-affirmation affects academic performance and motivation
under identity threat. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 104, 591–618.
Shim, S. S., Ryan, A. M., & Anderson, C. J. (2008).
Achievement goals and achievement during early
adolescence: Examining time-varying predictor
and outcome variables in growth-curve analysis.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 100, 655–671.
Sizer, T. R. (1984). Horace’s compromise: The
dilemma of the American high school. Boston,
MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Smith, J. L. (2004). Understanding the process of stereotype threat: A review of mediational variables
and new performance goal directions. Educational
Psychology Review, 16(3), 177–206.
Steele, C. M. (1988). The psychology of self-affirmation: Sustaining the integrity of the self. In L.
Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social
psychology (Vol. 21, pp. 261–302). New York,
NY: Academic Press.
Steele, C. M. (1997). A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape intellectual identity and performance.
American Psychologist, 52, 613–629.
Steele, C. M., & Aronson, J. (1995). Stereotype threat
and the intellectual test performance of African
Americans. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 69, 797–811.
Steele, C. M., & Aronson, J. A. (2004). Stereotype
threat does not live by Steele and Aronson (1995)
alone. American Psychologist, 59, 47–48.
Steele, C. M., & Liu, T. J. (1983). Dissonance processes as self-affirmation. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 45, 5–19.
Steele, J., James, J. B., & Barnett, R. C. (2002).
Learning in a man’s world: Examining the perceptions of undergraduate women in male-dominated
academic areas. Psychology of Women Quarterly,
26, 46–50.
Stone, J., Lynch, C. I., Sjomeling, M., & Darley, J.
M. (1999). Stereotype threat effects on Black and
White athletic performance. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 77, 1213–1227.
Taylor, V. J., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Stereotype
threat undermines academic learning. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 37, 1055–1067.
Vanneman, A., Hamilton, L., Baldwin Anderson, J.,
& Rahman, T. (2009). Achievement gaps: How
black and white students in public schools perform in mathematics and reading on the National
Assessment of Educational Progress (NCES
2009-455). Washington, DC: National Center
for Education Statistics, Institute of Education
Sciences, U.S. Department of Education.

42

Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2003). Stereotype lift.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 39,
456–467.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2007). A question
of belonging: Race, social fit, and achievement.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92,
82–96.
Walton, G. M., & Spencer, S. J. (2009). Latent ability: Grades and test scores systematically underestimate the intellectual ability of negatively
stereotyped students. Psychological Science, 20,
1132–1139.
What Works Clearinghouse. (February, 2010). WWC
quick review of the article “recursive processes in
self-affirmation: Intervening to close the minority achievement gap.” Retrieved from http://
ies.ed.gov/ncee/wwc/pdf/quick_reviews/selfaf
firm_020910.pdf
Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. (1982). Improving
the academic performance of college freshmen:
Attribution theory revisited. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 42, 367–376.
Wooldridge, J. M. (2010). Econometric analysis of
cross section and panel data. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Socialpsychological interventions in education: They’re
not magic. Review of Educational Research, 81,
267–301.

Authors
Geoffrey D. Borman is a professor of education
policy and director of the Institute of Education
Sciences (IES)–funded Interdisciplinary Training
Program in predoctoral research at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison. His interests include randomized
field trials, educational inequality, and potential policy
responses to address inequalities in educational opportunities and outcomes.
Jeffrey Grigg is a postdoctoral fellow at the Johns
Hopkins University School of Education. His research
interests include student mobility and transitions, student engagement, and intergenerational inequality.
Paul Hanselman is a postdoctoral fellow with the
Irvine Network on Interventions in Development at the
University of California, Irvine. His research addresses
how educational inequalities develop in school and the
related impacts of specific policies and interventions,
with a particular focus on effect heterogeneity.
Manuscript received January 14, 2014
Revision received December 27, 2014
Accepted February 19, 2015

