Motivating voter turnout by invoking the self
Christopher J. Bryana,1, Gregory M. Waltona, Todd Rogersb, and Carol S. Dwecka
a

Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305; and bJohn F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138

Edited by Brian Skyrms, University of California, Irvine, CA, and approved June 22, 2011 (received for review March 1, 2011)

psychology

| intervention | ﬁeld experiment | language and thought

W

hy do people vote? Mass voting is essential to a wellfunctioning democracy, yet theorists have often pointed
out that, from the standpoint of individual self-interest, voting is
irrational (1–3). Just the probability of being killed in a car accident on the way to the polls far outweighs the likelihood that
the average American’s vote will inﬂuence the outcome of
most elections.
Previous research has shown that people have a strong desire
to see themselves as competent, morally appropriate, and worthy
of social approval (4–11). They also see voting as appropriate
and socially desirable (12, 13). Thus, being the kind of person
who votes may be seen as a way to build and maintain a positive
image of the self—to claim a desired and socially valued identity.
Accordingly, people may be more likely to vote when voting is
represented as an expression of self—as symbolic of a person’s
fundamental character—rather than as simply a behavior.
We tested this hypothesis in three randomized experiments. In
the ﬁrst, we investigated the reported interest in registering to
vote of people who were eligible but had not yet registered to
vote; in the second and third, we examined voter turnout as
assessed by ofﬁcial state records. In each experiment, participants completed one of two versions of a brief survey. In one
version, a short series of questions referred to voting using a selfrelevant noun (e.g., “How important is it to you to be a voter in
the upcoming election?”); in the other, questions that were
otherwise identical referred to voting using a verb (e.g., “How
important is it to you to vote in the upcoming election?”). This
manipulation draws on past research investigating the effects of
linguistic cues on social- and self-perception (14, 15). Noun
wording leads people to see attributes as more representative of
a person’s essential qualities. In one study, children thought
that a child described as “a carrot eater” liked carrots more than
a child who “eats carrots whenever she can” (14). In another
study, adults rated their own preferences as stronger and more
stable when induced to describe them with nouns (e.g., “I am
a Shakespeare-reader”) than with the related verbs (e.g., “I read
Shakespeare a lot”) (15).
In this past research, people were labeled in the here and now,
but in the present research, people were offered the opportunity
to claim an identity in the future. That is, using noun wording to
refer to a prospective behavior offers the possibility of claiming
or reclaiming a personal attribute by engaging in that behavior.
So we hypothesized that using a predicate noun (e.g., “to be
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1103343108

a voter”) as opposed to a verb (e.g., “to vote”) to refer to participation in an upcoming election would create a greater interest
in and likelihood of performing that behavior—registering to
vote and voting. If this hypothesis were conﬁrmed, it would be
evidence for the more general theoretical idea that simply
framing a future behavior as a way to claim a desired identity can
motivate that behavior.
Experiment 1
Participants in experiment 1 were people who were eligible to
vote in the 2008 presidential election in California but were not
registered to vote at the time of participation. After completing
the noun- or the verb-based survey, they were informed that, to
vote in the upcoming election, they would need to register and
were asked to indicate their level of interest in doing so.
As predicted, participants in the noun condition expressed
signiﬁcantly greater interest in registering to vote than participants in the verb condition. Because the distribution of reported
interest in registering to vote was negatively skewed (Z = −2.78,
P = 0.005), the variable was reﬂected and then square-root
transformed, which reduced skew to nonsigniﬁcance (Z = −1.76,
P = 0.078). A t test on the transformed variable yielded a significant condition difference [t(32) = 2.10, P = 0.044]. Analysis
of the untransformed variable also yields a signiﬁcant result
[(Mnoun = 4.44; Mverb = 3.39; 1 = “not at all interested,” 5 =
“extremely interested”), t(32) = 2.23, P = 0.033].
A signiﬁcant Levene’s test indicated that there was less variance in the noun condition than in the verb condition [F(1,32) =
6.02, P = 0.020]. This appeared to be the case because of
a ceiling effect in the noun condition, where 62.5% of participants were at the highest point on the scale (compared with
38.9% in the verb condition). Adjusting for this, the signiﬁcance
level of the condition effect strengthened slightly [t(29.40) =
2.15, P = 0.040]. In addition, a separate χ2 analysis, which does
not rely on the assumption of the equality of variance, found that
more participants indicated that they were “very” or “extremely”
interested in registering to vote (as opposed to “not at all,” “a
little,” or “somewhat” interested in registering to vote) in the
noun condition (87.5%) than in the verb condition (55.6%)
[χ 2(1, n = 34) = 4.16, P = 0.041].
Experiment 2
Experiment 2 tested the effect of the noun-vs.-verb manipulation
on voter turnout. Participants were registered to vote in California and had not already voted (e.g., by mail) in the 2008
presidential election. They were recruited for an “election survey” and completed the noun- or verb-based manipulation survey
the day before or the morning of the election. After completing
the manipulation survey, participants were thanked; this marked
the end of their active participation in the study.

Author contributions: C.J.B. and G.M.W. designed research; C.J.B. and T.R. performed
research; T.R. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; C.J.B. and G.M.W. analyzed data;
and C.J.B., G.M.W., and C.S.D. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
1

To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: cbryan@stanford.edu.

This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1103343108/-/DCSupplemental.

PNAS | August 2, 2011 | vol. 108 | no. 31 | 12653–12656

PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES

Three randomized experiments found that subtle linguistic cues
have the power to increase voting and related behavior. The
phrasing of survey items was varied to frame voting either as the
enactment of a personal identity (e.g., “being a voter”) or as simply a behavior (e.g., “voting”). As predicted, the personal-identity
phrasing signiﬁcantly increased interest in registering to vote (experiment 1) and, in two statewide elections in the United States,
voter turnout as assessed by ofﬁcial state records (experiments
2 and 3). These results provide evidence that people are continually managing their self-concepts, seeking to assume or afﬁrm
valued personal identities. The results further demonstrate how
this process can be channeled to motivate important socially
relevant behavior.

After the election, we used ofﬁcial records from the State of
California (13, 16, 17, 18) to determine whether each participant
had or had not voted in the election. We also used US Census
data (19) to estimate the premanipulation probability that each
participant would vote on the basis of their age, gender, and level
of education. This variable, which was a signiﬁcant predictor of
turnout [Δχ2(1, n = 88) = 8.23, P = 0.004] and did not differ
between conditions [t(86) = 0.59, not signiﬁcant (ns)], served as
a covariate. Logistic regression tested the effect of the noun-vs.verb manipulation on voting. As predicted, participants in the
noun condition voted at a signiﬁcantly higher rate (95.5%) than
participants in the verb condition (81.8%) [Δχ2(1, n = 88) =
5.55, P = 0.018] (Fig. 1A).*
In addition to the condition difference, the overall turnout rate
in our sample merits consideration. The turnout rate in the verb
condition of 81.8%, although not meaningfully higher than the
statewide turnout rate of 79.4% among registered voters in this
election, was higher than would be expected given the demographic makeup of the sample. Using US Census data on
turnout rates in this election by age, gender, and level of education
(19), the expected premanipulation turnout rate of participants in
our sample was 63.9% (95% conﬁdence interval: 61.9–66.0%).
We suggest two possible reasons why the turnout rate, even in
the verb condition, was higher than this expected baseline rate.
First, people who choose to participate in a survey related to an
upcoming election—or even those who have the time and inclination to participate in any survey shortly before an election—
may be more likely to vote than the general population. Second,
some research suggests that merely responding to a pre-election
survey can increase voter turnout (16, 17, 20, 21; but see ref. 18).
These ﬁndings highlight the rigorous nature of the control condition in the present research, which used questions that were
nearly identical to those in the treatment condition. In any case,
the critical ﬁnding from experiment 2 is that a subtle change in
the phrasing of survey items, which cast voting as a reﬂection
of the kind of person one is rather than as merely a behavior,
signiﬁcantly increased voter turnout.
Experiment 3
Is the inﬂuence of noun-vs.-verb wording speciﬁc to the type of
people who took part in experiments 1 and 2, or would it occur
more broadly? The participants in experiments 1 and 2 were
relatively young (Mage = 22.8 y, range = 18–70). A manipulation
like the present one, which relies on the malleability of the selfconcept, might be more effective at inﬂuencing young adults,
whose self-concepts may be less well deﬁned than those of older
people (22). Experiment 3 tested the effect of the noun-vs.-verb
manipulation in a larger and more diverse sample (Mage = 54.4 y,
range = 21–83). Participants were registered to vote in New
Jersey and had not already voted (e.g., by mail) in the 2009 New
Jersey gubernatorial election. They were recruited from a randomly sampled and nationally representative panel administered
by a professional survey research ﬁrm. The participant sample
did not differ from the representative statewide sample with
respect to most demographic characteristics, and those differences that did exist were small (see Methods for details). Unlike
experiment 2, participants were not aware, at the time they
agreed to participate, that the experiment was related to the
election. They completed the noun- or verb-based manipulation
survey the day before or the morning of the election.

*The design and sample size of experiment 2 do not allow reliable tests of moderation by
demographic variables. The dependent variable was dichotomous, and one of the possible outcomes (not voting) was relatively rare. As a result, breaking the sample down by
more than one dimension to test for moderation creates the possibility of empty cells.
Moderation tests were therefore conducted with the larger sample in experiment 3.

12654 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1103343108

Fig. 1. Percentage voter turnout in the noun and verb conditions in
experiments 2 and 3. (A) Experiment 2: California registered voters, 2008 US
presidential election. (B) Experiment 3: New Jersey registered voters, 2009
New Jersey gubernatorial election.

As in experiment 2, after the election we used ofﬁcial state
records to determine whether or not each participant had voted.
Census data needed to estimate participants’ premanipulation
probability of voting were not available for this off-year election.
However, even without this covariate, the noun-vs.-verb manipulation again had a signiﬁcant effect on voter turnout [Δχ2(1,
n = 214) = 4.91, P = 0.027]. Participants in the noun condition
voted at a higher rate (89.9%) than participants in the verb
condition (79.0%; Fig. 1B). This effect was not signiﬁcantly
moderated by age, gender, ethnicity (white vs. non-white), level
of education, household income, political orientation, or interest
in politics and public affairs (all Ps > 0.22).†
As was the case in experiment 2, the turnout rate in both conditions in experiment 3 was higher than the expected baseline—in
the New Jersey election, the statewide turnout rate among registered voters was 47%. As we noted above, this may be because
people who have the time and inclination to complete any survey
shortly before an election might be more likely to vote than the
general population and/or because merely completing a preelection survey can increase turnout (16, 17, 20, 21). Indeed,
future research could explore the relative importance of these
explanations by including a baseline condition in which participants do not complete any survey. Again, however, the critical
ﬁnding is that a small change in wording that framed voting as
an expression of self rather than as simply a behavior increased
voter turnout—in this experiment by 10.9 percentage points.
Discussion
This research shows that people’s desire to shape their own
identities can be harnessed to motivate behavior. That is, using
noun-based wording to frame socially valued future behavior
allows individuals, by performing the behavior, to assume the
identity of a worthy person.
Although the wording manipulation in these studies was subtle
and rigorously controlled, the effects observed in experiments 2
and 3 are among the largest experimental effects ever observed
on objectively measured voter turnout. In discussing the magnitude of this effect, we focus on experiment 3, which used a larger
and more demographically diverse sample, and not on experiment 2 where the effect was, if anything, larger but the sample
†

To maximize statistical power for these analyses, we pooled data from experiments 2
and 3 when the same demographic variables were assessed in both studies (i.e., age,
gender, and ethnicity). Results of these tests did not differ when we used only the
sample in experiment 3.

Bryan et al.

Methods
Experiment 1. Participants and design. Participants were recruited via advertisements on a social networking website and invited to complete a brief
survey about the 2008 presidential election in exchange for an entry in
a drawing to win $100. A screening questionnaire identiﬁed participants
who met a priori speciﬁed eligibility criteria: participants who (i) were eligible to vote in this election, (ii) had not already registered to vote, and (iii)
were native English speakers. Thirty-four participants met these criteria (21
women and 13 men; Mage = 19.9 y; SD = 1.79). Eligible participants were
randomly assigned to either the noun condition or the verb condition.
Manipulation. The manipulation was embedded in a 10-item survey. The
content of each question was identical in the two conditions; the only difference was the speciﬁc wording used to refer to the act of voting—verbbased wording in one condition and noun-based wording in the other [e.g.,
“How important is it to you to (vote/be a voter) in the upcoming election?”,
“How clear are your thoughts and feelings about (voting/being a voter) in
the upcoming election?”; see SI Methods for the full list of items]. Participants responded to each question on a ﬁve-point scale with verbal labels
appropriate to the content of the question.
Participants’ responses to a composite of all 10 manipulation items did
not differ between conditions [t(32) = 0.92, ns] nor did their responses to 9
of the 10 individual items (all Ps > 0.20; see SI Methods for details).
Finally, participants were informed that, to vote in the upcoming election,
they would need to register to vote. The key outcome was participants’ selfreported interest in registering to vote. They were asked: “Right now, how
interested are you in registering to vote in the upcoming election?” (1 =
“not at all interested,” 5 = “extremely interested”). There were no outliers
on the dependent variable; all scores fell within 1.96 SDs of the mean.

Bryan et al.

Experiment 2. Participants and design. Participants were recruited on the afternoon of November 3 or early on the morning of November 4, 2008 (i.e.,
Election Day) through advertisements on the same social networking website
used in experiment 1 and through an advertisement distributed to members
of a university-administered online participant pool. Advertisements described the experiment as an “election survey.” A screening questionnaire
identiﬁed participants who met eligibility criteria similar to those used in
experiment 1: participants who (i) were registered to vote in California, (ii)
had not already voted (e.g., by mail) in the election, and (iii) were native
English speakers. A total of 133 participants met these criteria and were
randomly assigned to either the noun or the verb condition. Demographic
data provided by participants (name, county of residence, and date of birth)
were compared with California voter turnout records to determine whether
each participant had voted or not (see Procedure for additional details).
State records had matches for 92 of these participants. Additional analyses
tested for outliers (23) on the basis of participants’ condition assignment and
their premanipulation likelihood of voting (Premanipulation likelihood of
voting). Four participants were excluded because their residual scores based
on these data were outliers (i.e., standardized residuals >2.58, the level associated with a two-tailed α of 0.01). The remaining 88 participants (56
women and 32 men; Mage = 23.7 y; SD = 5.9) make up the ﬁnal sample.
Procedure. The procedure was identical to that of experiment 1 except that (i)
the manipulation questions referred to “tomorrow’s election” instead of
“the upcoming election” and (ii) instead of being asked about their interest
in registering to vote, participants were asked to provide the demographic
data needed to ﬁnd their listings in state voting records. After the election,
a copy of California’s voter history ﬁle was obtained from the ofﬁce of the
California Secretary of State. The data included the ﬁrst name, last name,
county of residence, and voting history of all of California’s registered voters. A research assistant, who was blind to condition, searched for each of
the 133 eligible participants in the state data. A listing in the state ﬁle was
considered to match a study participant if it had the same ﬁrst name, last
name, date of birth, and county of residence provided by the participant.
Cases in which a participant’s last name, date of birth, and county of residence matched but the ﬁrst name a participant provided was similar but not
identical to the ﬁrst name listed in the state ﬁle (e.g., “Eddie” or “E.” instead
of “Edward”) were considered to be matches. The match rate did not differ
between conditions [χ2 (1, n = 92) = 0.59, ns]. Participants’ responses to
a composite of all 10 manipulation items did not differ between conditions
[t(86) = 0.64, ns] nor did responses to any individual item (all Ps > 0.10).
Premanipulation likelihood of voting. After the election, we obtained data from
the US Census on self-reported voter turnout among registered voters in the
2008 presidential election by age, gender, and level of education. We used
these data to determine the baseline (or premanipulation) expected likelihood that each participant would vote. As noted, expected turnout rates did
not differ between conditions [t(86) = 0.59, ns], and this variable was used as
a covariate in the main analysis. It was a signiﬁcant predictor of turnout
[Δχ2(1, n = 88) = 8.23, P = 0.004].
Experiment 3. Participants and design. Participants were members of a randomly sampled and nationally representative panel administered by the
professional survey research ﬁrm Knowledge Networks. Only panel members
who lived in New Jersey and were registered to vote in that state at the time
of the study were invited to participate. All participants took part in the study
on the afternoon of November 2 or early the morning of November 3, 2009
(i.e., Election Day). In contrast to experiments 1 and 2, the invitation to panel
members to participate in experiment 3 included no mention of the upcoming election. This ruled out any bias that might arise from limiting the
sample to people who were unusually interested in the election. A total of
350 panel members completed the study. A screening questionnaire identiﬁed participants who met the same criteria used in experiment 2. A total of
293 participants met those criteria. Of these, 214 (129 women, 85 men) were
matched in ofﬁcial New Jersey voter turnout records (see Procedure for
additional details). Whereas the people sampled in experiments 1 and 2
were on average relatively young (Mage = 22.6 y, SD = 5.4, range = 18–70),
the people sampled in experiment 3 were on average middle-aged (Mage =
54.4 y, SD = 13.9, range = 21–83). The demographic makeup of the sample
was similar to that of the rest of Knowledge Networks’ randomly sampled
and representative statewide panel. That is, the sample did not differ from
the panel with respect to most demographic variables (i.e., gender, marital
status, employment status, household size, housing type, home ownership
status, or internet access; all Ps > 0.17). The sample did, however, differ
somewhat in terms of its racial/ethnic breakdown (sample: 86.4% white,
7.9% black, 1.4% non-Hispanic other, 3.3% Hispanic, and 0.9% multiracial;
rest of the statewide panel: 77.1% white, 7.4% black, 6.4% non-Hispanic

PNAS | August 2, 2011 | vol. 108 | no. 31 | 12655

PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES

was smaller and less diverse. Experiment 3 found an increase in
turnout in the noun condition of 10.9 percentage points, a 13.7%
boost in turnout over the verb condition. It is fascinating to
consider whether this effect would remain as strong if delivered
at the population level. Although there might be important factors that could decrease or increase the strength of the effect in
different populations, a large-scale intervention that produced
an increase in voter turnout even close to the size observed here
would have major effects on democratic participation, and possibly on election outcomes. For example, if the losing side in every
congressional and gubernatorial race in 2010 had increased turnout among its supporters by just 5%, 23 House races, 3 Senate
races, and 8 governor’s races would have turned out differently.
Because voting is a private action, people who vote may receive little or no recognition from others for doing so. This may
help to explain why many people do not vote. The present research suggests a way to ameliorate this problem. By highlighting
the implications of voting for one’s self-concept, the use of noun
wording may offer an alternative incentive to vote: positive selfregard. Indeed, many behaviors that policy-makers seek to encourage are similarly private, including environmental behaviors
such as energy conservation and recycling. Such behaviors may
be ideal candidates for research extending the present results.
Although participants responded strongly to this subtle language manipulation, they did not do so in a rote or mindless
fashion. The effect we observed depends on the fact that voting is
something most people feel that they should do. The noun
wording, we contend, simply ascribed symbolic signiﬁcance to
this behavior, suggesting it had implications for the kind of
person one is. Therefore, we do not believe that a manipulation
of this sort would induce people to engage in behavior in which
they feel they should not engage. In fact, we would expect the
opposite effect for behavior people see as undesirable (e.g.,
“cheating” vs. “being a cheater”; “quitting” vs. “being a quitter”).
More broadly, these experiments provide evidence that the selfconcept is a continual work-in-progress. In part because of this,
the self can play a key role in shaping socially relevant behavior.
This desire to see oneself as good, competent, and worthy of
approval can be channeled, even through subtle means, to motivate behavior with important social and political consequences.

other, 7.1% Hispanic, and 2.0% multiracial) [χ2(4, n = 809) = 14.29, P = 0.006].
The panel was also marginally more educated [Msample = 11.37, Mpanel =
11.14, where 11 = an associate degree and 12 = a bachelor’s degree; t(807) =
1.84, P = 0.066], had a marginally higher average income [Msample = 14.36,
Mpanel = 13.85, where 13 = $60,000–$74,999, 14 = $75,000–$84,999, and
15 = $85,000–$99,999; t(807) = 1.74, P = 0.082], and was marginally older
[Msample = 54.42 y, Mpanel = 52.27 y; t(807) = 1.86, P = 0.063] than the rest of
the panel. The effect of condition, however, did not interact with any of
these demographic variables.
Because US Census Bureau data needed to estimate the premanipulation
probability that each participant would vote were not available in this offyear election, residual scores for individual participants were based solely on
their condition assignments. As a consequence, an outlier analysis similar to
the one conducted in experiment 2 identiﬁed every nonvoting participant in
the noun condition as an outlier. Excluding these participants would inappropriately inﬂate the size of the observed effect; thus all participants were
retained in the analysis.
Demographic measures. To test for moderation by demographic variables, we
obtained measures of participants’ age, ethnicity, gender, level of education, household income, political orientation, and interest in politics and
public affairs. Political orientation was measured with a composite of participants’ self-reported party preference and liberal–conservative ideological orientation, both on seven-point scales (1 = strong Republican/
extremely conservative; 7 = strong Democrat/extremely liberal). The two
items were correlated (r = 0.54, P < 0.0005). Interest in politics and public
affairs was measured on a four-point scale (1 = “not at all interested”; 4 =
“very interested”).
Procedure. The procedure was the same as the one in experiment 2 with three
exceptions. First, the manipulation items referred to “tomorrow’s election”
only until 11:59 PM on November 2; from midnight on November 3 until the
close of recruitment, the items referred to “today’s election.” Second, minor

changes were made to the wording of several manipulation items (SI
Methods). Third, participants were not asked to provide demographic data
at the time they completed the manipulation survey because Knowledge
Networks already had the information needed to match panel members to
state voting records. After the election, a copy of New Jersey’s voter history
ﬁle was obtained from the ofﬁce of the New Jersey Secretary of State. As in
California, the data included the ﬁrst name, last name, county of residence,
and voting history of all of New Jersey’s registered voters. Because Knowledge Networks is obligated to protect the identities of its panel members,
we provided the state ﬁle to them and a member of their staff, who was
blind to both the study’s hypotheses and to the participants’ condition assignment, searched for each of the 293 eligible participants in the state ﬁle.
As in experiment 2, a listing in the state ﬁle was considered to match a study
participant if it had the same ﬁrst name, last name, date of birth, and county
of residence provided by the participant. Also as in experiment 2, cases in
which a participant’s last name, date of birth, and county of residence
matched but the ﬁrst name that the participant provided was similar but not
identical to the ﬁrst name listed in the state ﬁle were considered to be
matches. The match rate again did not differ between conditions [χ 2(1, n =
293) = 0.19, ns].
Responses to a composite of all 10 manipulation items did not differ
between conditions [t(212) = 0.76, ns] nor did responses to 8 of the 10 individual items (all Ps > 0.10; see SI Methods for details).

1. Downs A (1957) An Economic Theory of Democracy (Harper & Row, New York).
2. Rogers T, Fox CR, Gerber AS The Behavioral Foundations of Policy, ed Shaﬁr E (Russell
Sage, New York).
3. Tullock G (1968) Towards a Mathematics of Politics (University of Michigan Press, Ann
Arbor).
4. Dunning D (2002) Motivated Social Perception: The Ontario Symposium, eds Fein S,
Spencer S (Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ).
5. Cohen GL, Garcia J, Apfel N, Master A (2006) Reducing the racial achievement gap: A
social-psychological intervention. Science 313:1307–1310.
6. Higgins ET (1987) Self-discrepancy: A theory relating self and affect. Psychol Rev 94:
319–340.
7. Markus H, Nurius P (1986) Possible selves. Am Psychol 41:954–969.
8. Monin B, Miller DT (2001) Moral credentials and the expression of prejudice. J Pers Soc
Psychol 81:33–43.
9. Oyserman D (2009) Identity-based motivation: Implications for action-readiness,
procedural-readiness and consumer behavior. J Consum Psychol 19:250–260.
10. Sherman DK, Cohen GL (2006) The psychology of self-defense: Self-afﬁrmation theory. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, ed Zanna MP (Academic Press, San
Diego), pp 183–242.
11. Steele CM (1988) The psychology of self-afﬁrmation: Sustaining the integrity of the
self. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, ed Zanna MP (Academic Press, New
York), pp 261–302.
12. Blais A (2000) To Vote or Not to Vote: The Merits and Limits of Rational Choice Theory
(University of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh).

13. Gerber AS, Green DP, Larimer CW (2008) Social pressure and voter turnout: Evidence
from a large-scale ﬁeld experiment. Am Polit Sci Rev 102:33–48.
14. Gelman SA, Heyman GD (1999) Carrot-eaters and creature-believers: The effects
of lexicalization on children’s inferences about social categories. Psychol Sci 10:
489–493.
15. Walton GM, Banaji MR (2004) Being what you say: The effect of essentialist linguistic
labels on preferences. Soc Cogn 22:193–213.
16. Greenwald AG, Carnot CG, Beach R, Young B (1987) Increasing voting behavior by
asking people if they expect to vote. J Appl Psychol 2:315–318.
17. Nickerson DW, Rogers T (2010) Do you have a voting plan?: Implementation intentions, voter turnout, and organic plan making. Psychol Sci 21:194–199.
18. Smith JK, Gerber AS, Orlich A (2003) Self-prophecy effects and voter turnout: An
experimental replication. Polit Psychol 24:593–604.
19. US Census Bureau (2008) Voting and registration in the election of November 2008,
Current Population Survey, (available at http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/socdemo/
voting/publications/p20/2008/tables.html).
20. Granberg D, Holmberg S (1992) The Hawthorne effect in election studies: The impact
of survey participation on voting. Br J Polit Sci 22:240–247.
21. Yalch RF (1976) Pre-election interview effects on voter turnout. Public Opin Q 40:
331–336.
22. Sears DO (1986) College sophomores in the laboratory: Inﬂuences of a narrow
data base on social psychology’s view of human nature. J Pers Soc Psychol 51:
515–530.
23. Tabachnick BG, Fidell LS (2007) Using Multivariate Statistics (Pearson, Boston).

12656 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1103343108

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank L. Boroditsky, H. Clark, A. Gerber, D. Green,
J. Krosnick, H. Markus, B. Monin, L. Ross, D. Yeager, and two anonymous
reviewers for input and L. Handal-Kalifa, D. Kermer, D. Miller, J. Ternovski,
and K. Wang for assistance. Funding for experiment 3 was provided by Grant
0818839 (to C.J.B., G.M.W., and T.R.) awarded by Time-Sharing Experiments
in the Social Sciences, National Science Foundation.

Bryan et al.

