PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

ANNUAL
REVIEWS

31 October 2013

13:5

Further

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

Click here for quick links to
Annual Reviews content online,
including:
• Other articles in this volume
• Top cited articles
• Top downloaded articles
• Our comprehensive search

The Psychology of Change:
Self-Afﬁrmation and Social
Psychological Intervention
Geoffrey L. Cohen1 and David K. Sherman2
1

Graduate School of Education, Department of Psychology, and (by courtesy) Graduate School
of Business, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305; email: glc@stanford.edu

2

Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, University of California, Santa Barbara,
California 93106; email: david.sherman@psych.ucsb.edu

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014. 65:333–71

Keywords

The Annual Review of Psychology is online at
http://psych.annualreviews.org

health, intervention, relationships, self-afﬁrmation, stereotype threat

This article’s doi:
10.1146/annurev-psych-010213-115137

Abstract

c 2014 by Annual Reviews.
Copyright 
All rights reserved

Watch a video lecture online

People have a basic need to maintain the integrity of the self, a global sense
of personal adequacy. Events that threaten self-integrity arouse stress and
self-protective defenses that can hamper performance and growth. However,
an intervention known as self-afﬁrmation can curb these negative outcomes.
Self-afﬁrmation interventions typically have people write about core personal values. The interventions bring about a more expansive view of the
self and its resources, weakening the implications of a threat for personal integrity. Timely afﬁrmations have been shown to improve education, health,
and relationship outcomes, with beneﬁts that sometimes persist for months
and years. Like other interventions and experiences, self-afﬁrmations can
have lasting beneﬁts when they touch off a cycle of adaptive potential, a
positive feedback loop between the self-system and the social system that
propagates adaptive outcomes over time. The present review highlights both
connections with other disciplines and lessons for a social psychological understanding of intervention and change.

333

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Contents

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Pervasive Psychology of Self-Defense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Self-Afﬁrmation Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
What Are Self-Afﬁrmations? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Understanding the Effects of Self-Afﬁrmation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cycles of Adaptive Potential: How Social Psychological Processes Such
as Self-Afﬁrmation Propagate Through Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
AFFIRMATION INTERVENTIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Health . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Intergroup Conﬂict and Interpersonal Relationships . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IMPLICATIONS, QUALIFICATIONS, AND QUESTIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lessons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Moderators and Boundary Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Connections With Other Research Areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
CONCLUSION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

334
335
336
337
339
340
342
342
347
352
354
354
358
360
362

INTRODUCTION

Self-integrity: the
perception of oneself
as morally and
adaptively adequate

334

In the 1940s, despite war shortages in ﬁner meats and produce, many American homemakers
refused to purchase inferior but more abundant foods even when pressured with patriotic appeals.
But when Kurt Lewin (1997/1948) brought homemakers together in small groups to talk about
obstacles to serving the recommended foods—thus creating a new group norm around the desired
behavior—their purchase patterns changed. In the U.S. Civil Rights era, prejudice was widespread,
and opposition to equal rights proved tenacious in many quarters. But when Milton Rokeach (1973)
threatened Americans’ conception of themselves as compassionate—with a brief insinuation that
they valued their own freedom more than the freedom of others—their support for civil rights
strengthened in a lasting way.
Today many social problems afﬂict society—inequalities in education, health, and economic
outcomes; political polarization; and intergroup conﬂict. But these social problems share a psychological commonality with the historical cases described above. The commonality is the notion
that barriers and catalysts to change can be identiﬁed and that social psychological interventions
can bring about long-term improvement.
This review has two purposes. First it looks at threats to, and afﬁrmations of, the self as barriers
and catalysts to change. Threats and afﬁrmations arise from the self ’s fundamental motive: to be
morally and adaptively adequate, good and efﬁcacious. How people maintain the integrity of the
self, especially when it comes under threat, forms the focus of self-afﬁrmation theory (Steele 1988;
see also Aronson et al. 1999, Sherman & Cohen 2006). We provide an overview of self-afﬁrmation
theory and review research in three areas where the theory has yielded impactful self-afﬁrmation
interventions: education, health, and interpersonal and intergroup relationships.
A second purpose of this review is to address questions related to the psychology of change
raised by self-afﬁrmation research. Increasingly, social psychological research demonstrates the
potential for brief interventions to have lasting benefits (Cohen & Garcia 2008, Garcia & Cohen,
2012, Walton & Cohen 2011, Wilson 2011, Yeager & Walton 2011). These interventions help
people to adapt to long-term challenges. For example, a series of 10-minute self-affirming
Cohen

·

Sherman

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

exercises, which prompt people to write about core personal values, raised minority student
achievement in public schools, with effects that persisted for years (Cohen et al. 2006, 2009;
Sherman et al. 2013). How is this possible? How and when do social psychological interventions
such as self-afﬁrmation spark lasting positive change? An impactful intervention acts like almost
any formative experience. It works not in isolation but rather like a turning point in a story, an
event that sets in motion accumulating consequences (Elder 1998). Timely interventions can
channel people into what we refer to as a cycle of adaptive potential. This is a series of
reciprocally reinforcing interactions between the self-system and a social system, such as a school,
that propagates adaptive outcomes over time (cf. Elder 1974, Wilson 2011). The self acts; the
social system reacts; and the cycle repeats in a feedback loop (Caspi & Moffitt 1995). We discuss
lessons for intervention and for a social psychological understanding of change.

The Pervasive Psychology of Self-Defense

Cycle of adaptive
potential: a positive
feedback loop between
the self-system and the
social system that
propagates adaptive
outcomes over time
Psychological threat:
the perception of
environmental
challenge to one’s
self-integrity

Key to understanding the effects of afﬁrmation is psychological threat, the perception of an environmental challenge to the adequacy of the self. Whether people see their environment as
threatening or safe marks a dichotomy that runs through research not only on self-afﬁrmation but
also on attachment, stress, and coping (see Worthman et al. 2010). Psychological threat represents
an inner alarm that arouses vigilance and the motive to reafﬁrm the self (Steele 1988). Although
psychological threat can sometimes trigger positive change (Rokeach 1973, Stone et al. 1994), it
can also impede adaptive coping. People may focus on the short-term goal of self-defense, often
at the cost of long-term learning. Like a distracting alarm, psychological threat can also consume
mental resources that could otherwise be marshaled for better performance and problem solving.
Thus, psychological threat can raise a barrier to adaptive change.
Major life events, such as losing one’s job or receiving a medical diagnosis, can obviously give
rise to psychological threat. But the self-integrity motive is so strong that mundane events can
threaten the self as well and instigate defensive responses to protect it (Sherman & Cohen 2006).
When people make trivial choices, such as between two similarly appealing music albums, they tend
to defensively rationalize their selection (Steele et al. 1993). When partisans encounter evidence
that challenges their political views, they tend to reﬂexively refute it (Cohen et al. 2007). When
sports fans see their favorite team suffer a defeat, they experience it partly as their own and increase
their consumption of unhealthy comfort foods (Cornil & Chandon 2013; see also Sherman & Kim
2005). When people confront petty insults, they sometimes turn to violence and even homicide to
reassert an image of personal strength and honor in the minds of others (Cohen et al. 1996; see also
Baumeister et al. 1996). Although the objective stakes of many of these situations seem low, the
subjective stakes for the self can be high. That everyday events can bring about feelings of threat
and trigger extreme responses attests to the power and pervasiveness of the self-integrity motive.
Greenwald (1980) likened the self to a totalitarian regime that suppresses and distorts information to project an image of itself as good, powerful, and stable. However, unlike a totalitarian
regime, people can be self-critical. They sometimes denigrate themselves more than outside observers do and believe that others judge them more harshly than they actually do (e.g., Savitsky
et al. 2001). People can feel guilty for events they have little control over (Doosje et al. 2006). Although they can spin idealized fantasies of their abilities, they can also give accurate self-appraisals
at moments of truth (Armor & Sackett 2006). Storyteller rather than totalitarian regime seems
an apt metaphor for the self. The self has a powerful need to see itself as having integrity, but
it must do so within the constraints of reality (Adler 2012, Kunda 1990, Pennebaker & Chung
2011, Wilson 2011). The goal is not to appraise every threat in a self-ﬂattering way but rather to
maintain an overarching narrative of the self ’s adequacy. A healthy narrative gives people enough
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

335

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

optimism to “stay in the game” in the face of the daily onslaught of threats, slights, challenges,
aggravations, and setbacks.
Successful social psychological interventions help individuals access this narrative process
through two avenues (see also Wilson 2011). One avenue is to encourage people to appraise
a difﬁcult circumstance in a hopeful and nondefensive way that, in turn, sustains the perceived
adequacy of the self. Helping trauma victims make sense of their experiences promotes health
(Pennebaker & Chung 2011); helping students to interpret mistakes as an opportunity for
growth rather than evidence of incompetence improves their academic performance (Dweck 2008,
Walton & Cohen 2011, Wilson & Linville 1982, Yeager et al. 2014); and helping parents to see
their infants’ cries in a more sympathetic and less defensive light reduces abuse (Bugental et al.
2002). A second avenue for intervention focuses on changing not people’s appraisal of a speciﬁc
challenge but their appraisal of themselves. The present review addresses this second avenue and
the theory that it proceeds from, self-afﬁrmation theory.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

Self-Affirmation Theory
The postulate that people are motivated to maintain self-integrity rests at the center of selfafﬁrmation theory (Steele 1988; see also Sherman & Cohen 2006). Self-integrity is a sense of
global efﬁcacy, an image of oneself as able to control important adaptive and moral outcomes in
one’s life. Threats to this image evoke psychological threat (see Steele 1988, Sherman & Cohen
2006). Three points about this motive merit emphasis.
First, the motive is to maintain a global narrative of oneself as a moral and adaptive actor (“I am
a good person”), not a speciﬁc self-concept (e.g., “I am a good student”) (cf. Aronson 1969). With
time, people may commit themselves to a particular self-deﬁnition (e.g., parent, teacher). However,
the self can draw on a variety of roles and identities to maintain its perceived integrity. Such
ﬂexibility can be adaptive. People can ﬂexibly deﬁne success in a way that puts their idiosyncratic
strengths in a positive light, establishing a reliable but realistic basis for self-integrity (Dunning
2005). The ﬂexibility of the self-system can also promote adaptation, especially in dynamic social
systems. Lower animals have relatively simple goals that they try to meet. A mouse unable to
forage for food would be a failure. But humans have a unique ability to adapt to a vast range of
circumstances. For children and adults, the ﬂexibility of the self-system may foster adaptation to
the wide array of challenges they face across cultures and over the lifespan (Worthman et al. 2010).
Second, the motive for self-integrity is not to be superior or excellent, but to be “good enough,”
as the term “adequate” implies—to be competent enough in a constellation of domains to feel that
one is a good person, moral and adaptive. An implication for intervention is that, to afﬁrm the
self, an event need foster only a sense of adequacy in a personally valued domain, not a perception
of overall excellence.
Third, the motive for self-integrity is not to esteem or praise oneself but rather to act in
ways worthy of esteem or praise. Having people praise themselves (e.g., “I am lovable”) tends
to backﬁre among those who seem to need the praise most, low-self-esteem individuals, in part
because these “afﬁrmations” lack credibility (Wood et al. 2009). People want not simply praise but
to be praiseworthy, not simply admiration but to be admirable, according to the values of their
group or culture (Smith 1759/2011; see also Leary 2005). An implication for intervention is that
rewards and praise are secondary to opportunities for people to manifest their integrity through
meaningful acts, thoughts, and feelings.
Although the ﬂexibility of the self-system can be adaptive, it can also prove costly when people
cannot ﬁnd constructive avenues to achieve self-integrity. The self may then seek out alternative
domains in which to invest itself. A disadvantaged student may want to succeed in school but,
336

Cohen

·

Sherman

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

distrustful that society will reward his or her efforts, ﬁnd other niches to exert control and gain
respect; this is one explanation for the draw of gang membership and violent behavior (Matsuda
et al. 2013). However, the ﬂexibility of the self-system can also be harnessed for positive ends.
People can import into a threatened domain the sense of personal integrity that they feel in another.
Thus they can sustain a global sense of adequacy while adaptively confronting a speciﬁc threat.
For a wide range of challenges, this is what self-afﬁrmation interventions enable people to do.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

What Are Self-Affirmations?
A self-afﬁrmation is an act that demonstrates one’s adequacy (Steele 1988; see also G.L. Cohen &
J. Garcia, manuscript in preparation). Although big accomplishments such as winning a sports contest can obviously afﬁrm one’s sense of adequacy, small acts can do so as well. Examples of events
that although small from the perspective of an outsider can be subjectively “big” (Yeager & Walton
2011) include a stressed employee who cares for his children or merely reﬂects on the personal importance of his family; an ill resident of a nursing home who enacts a small measure of control over
daily visitations (Schulz 1976); and a lonely patient who, receiving a personal note from her doctor,
realizes that others care for her (Carter et al. 2013). Even small inputs into the self-system can have
large effects, because a healthy self-system is motivated to maintain integrity and generate afﬁrming meanings (Steele 1988; see also Sherman & Cohen 2006). Many events in a given day are seen
as relevant to the self in some way and this enables people to continually refresh their sense of adequacy. But there are times when sources of self-afﬁrmation may be few, or threats to the self may run
especially high. Times of high need can be identiﬁed, making possible well-timed self-afﬁrmation
interventions. Stressful transitions and choice points, for example, mark such timely moments.
Self-afﬁrmations given at these times can help people navigate difficulties and set them on a better
path. Their conﬁdence in their ability to overcome future difficulties may grow and thus buttress
coping and resilience for the next adversity, in a self-reinforcing narrative (Cohen et al. 2009).

Self-affirmation: an
act that manifests one’s
adequacy and thus
afﬁrms one’s sense of
global self-integrity
Values affirmation
intervention: an
activity that provides
the opportunity to
assert the importance
of core values, often
through writing
exercises

Self-afﬁrmations bring about a more expansive view of the self and its resources. They can
encompass many everyday activities. Spending time with friends, participating in a volunteer
group, or attending religious services anchor a sense of adequacy in a higher purpose. Activities
that can seem like distractions can also function as self-afﬁrmations. Shopping for status goods
(Sivanathan & Pettit 2010) or updating one’s Facebook page (Toma & Hancock 2013) afford
culturally prescribed ways to enact competence and adequacy. For people who value science,
simply donning a white lab coat can be self-afﬁrming (see Steele 1988).
Although many inductions of self-afﬁrmation exist, the most studied experimental manipulation
has people write about core personal values (McQueen & Klein 2006; cf. Napper et al. 2009).
Personal values are the internalized standards used to evaluate the self (Rokeach 1973). People
ﬁrst review a list of values and then choose one or a few values most important to them. The list
typically excludes values relevant to a domain of threat in order to broaden people’s focus beyond it.
To buffer people against threatening health information, health and rationality might be excluded
from the list. Among patients with chronic illness, values related to family might be avoided
insofar as they remind patients of the burden they worry they place on relatives (see Ogedegbe
et al. 2012). People then write a brief essay about why the selected value or values are important
to them and a time when they were important. Thus, a key aspect of the afﬁrmation intervention
is that its content is self-generated and tailored to tap into each person’s particular valued identity
(Sherman 2013). Often people write about their relationships with friends and family, but they
also frequently write about religion, humor, and kindness (Reed & Aspinwall 1998).
Table 1 provides excerpts from afﬁrmation essays written by adolescents and adults in research studies. As the examples illustrate, completing a values afﬁrmation is not typically an act
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

337

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Table 1 Excerpts from affirmation essays
Middle school participants
Dance is important to me, because it is my passion, my life. My second home is the dance studio, my second family is my dance
team. My family and friends are so important to me, even more than dance. My family, I can’t live without them. My friends, I am
my real self around them (and my sister). I can be silly, goofy, and weird and they don’t care, they accept me for who I am. . . . And
for being creative, I LOVE being creative in dance. When I’m dancing or making a dance it takes me to another place.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

Being creative is important to me all the time, because I can use things different kinds of ways and look at things differently. For
example, if I can combine the color of the clothes I’ll wear or make different kinds of use for the things I have. . . . Being with my
family is what makes me happy because only your family understands you better than anyone and you can be yourself no matter
what and they would never criticize you. With my friends it’s not always the same we can ﬁght sometimes or cry but it’s what
friendships are for so you should enjoy the moment and be happy with them.
If I didn’t have my family, I [wouldn’t] be raised right and if I didn’t have my friends I would be a boring person. If I didn’t have my
religion, I wouldn’t know what to do, I would be lost.
Music is important to me because it gives me a way to express myself when I’m mad, happy, or sad. I also think family and friends
are important because everything, like money, fame, happiness mean nothing if you don’t have loved ones to share it with. My
friends and family are important because I love them to death and they make me who I am. I also think religious values are very
important because if you don’t know what you believe in anybody can tell you anything and you’ll believe it.
Politics is another really important thing to me because I love politics and I some day want to become a corporate lawyer and to
later become the ﬁrst black president.
College participants
How can one get by without friendship or family? I know I couldn’t, I need that support, at times it can feel like the only thing I
have that’s real. At other times I don’t need it, but love and comfort from relationships is something that is always nice. . . . I was
stuck in Keystone this winter and had no [way] of getting back home, I felt helpless . . . I didn’t know what to do, so I called a
friend and they drove 2 hours out of their way to come help me out, without even thinking twice, without that friend I would of
had one bad night. Not the end of the world no, but when in need I fall back on my support, friends and family, without that
support I would never stop falling.
My relationship with my family is very important to me because it is my parents and brother who helped push me to be who I am
today. Without them, I probably wouldn’t have the patience and motivation to have applied for this university and be successful
here. Whenever I have a problem, it is my family I can go to to help me through it. My friends are also very important. If I didn’t
have the strong loving relationship with my friends from home, I wouldn’t be who I am today. My new friends that I have made
[here] are also a big part in my life because they make me smile every day.
My religious values are the foundation of my life; they guided me, helped me, and strengthened me in every aspect of my life. I have
always had a strong faith which has taught me to love others and led me to be a better person. I’ve found that I enjoy life to a
greater extent, worry less, and smile more than my friends who don’t have religious values. I believe this is because my faith has
taught me to be grateful for everything I have, to trust that everything will be ﬁne, and to enjoy every day as if it were the last.
For me the sense of humor of someone is the most important thing. Every time someone makes me laugh it gives me comfort and
happiness. I think having a good sense of humor is the best quality that a person can have. It does not matter if a person is good
looking or not if they can make others laugh. Every time I meet someone I care if they have a good sense of humor or if they are
funny. That is why most of my friends are always laughing, because we all like to make jokes and laugh together. I even think that
laughing, making jokes and having a good sense of humor is what keeps us together as friends. Furthermore, our sense of humor is
what makes us unique as a group of friends.

of self-aggrandizement (consistent with Crocker et al. 2008, Shnabel et al. 2013). Rather, it is a
psychological time-out (Lyubomirsky & Della Porta 2010): a moment to pull back and regain
perspective on what really matters. As one college student wrote, “How can one get by without
friendship or family? I know I couldn’t, I need that support, at times it can feel like the only thing
I have that’s real.” Although the physical act of writing this essay is momentary, it can bring to
mind a lifelong source of strength. As Table 1 also illustrates, people often afﬁrm themselves by
writing about their connections to other people and to purposes and projects outside themselves
338

Cohen

·

Sherman

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

(Shnabel et al. 2013; see also Crocker et al. 2008). Against this broadened conception of the self
in the world, a particular threat that confronts a person feels less dire.

Understanding the Effects of Self-Affirmation

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

Before focusing on self-afﬁrmation interventions in education, health, and interpersonal and intergroup relations, we summarize how afﬁrmations affect psychology to create a moment of potential
change. Then we discuss how and when that change persists.
The psychology of self-affirmation. First, afﬁrmations remind people of psychosocial resources
beyond a particular threat and thus broaden their perspective beyond it (Sherman & Hartson
2011). Under normal circumstances, people tend to narrow their attention on an immediate
threat (e.g., the possibility of failure), a response that promotes swift self-protection and, in the
face of acute dangers, survival (e.g., the ﬁght-or-ﬂight response) (see Pratto & John 1991, Tugade
& Fredrickson 2004). But when self-afﬁrmed, people can see the many ordinary stressors of daily
life in the context of the big picture (Schmeichel & Vohs 2009, Wakslak & Trope 2009). A speciﬁc
threat and its implications for the self thus command less vigilance. Nonafﬁrmed participants saw
a psychologically threatening stimulus—a live but securely caged tarantula—as physically closer
to them than it actually was, but self-afﬁrmed participants estimated its distance accurately, as
though the afﬁrmation psychologically distanced the threat from the self (Harber et al. 2011).
Second, because a threat is seen in the context of an expansive view of the self, it has less impact
on psychological well-being (Cohen et al. 2009, Cook et al. 2012, Sherman et al. 2013). Among
self-afﬁrmed minority students in a ﬁeld experiment, a low classroom grade exerted less inﬂuence
on their long-term sense of belonging in school than it did for their nonafﬁrmed peers (Cook
et al. 2012). Likewise, when college students were self-afﬁrmed, their attention was less absorbed
by ruminative thoughts about past failure (Koole et al. 1999).
Third, afﬁrmations foster an approach orientation to threat rather than avoidance. If a threat
is seen as important and addressable (Vohs et al. 2013), afﬁrmations make it less likely that people
will shrink away from the threat or deny its importance to themselves. Self-afﬁrmed participants in
one study asserted that the threatening domain was more important to them than did nonafﬁrmed
participants (Cohen et al. 2007, study 1; see also Koole et al. 1999). People can thus better deal with
the threat in a constructive way, rather than spend mental energy on avoidance, suppression, and
rationalization (see Koole et al. 1999, Taylor & Walton 2011). For example, self-afﬁrmed participants were less likely to shun threatening health information that could beneﬁt them (e.g., Klein
& Harris 2009, van Koningsbruggen et al. 2009; see also Taylor & Walton 2011). Self-afﬁrmed
participants also showed greater attention to their errors on a cognitive task, as indexed by errorrelated negativity, a neural signal of the brain’s error-detection system (Legault et al. 2012). This
pattern suggests greater engagement among afﬁrmed individuals in learning from their mistakes.
Afﬁrmations lift psychological barriers to change through two routes: the buffering or lessening
of psychological threat and the curtailing of defensive adaptations to it.
Buffering against threat. Self-afﬁrmations can reassure people that they have integrity and that
life, on balance, is okay in spite of an adversity before them. Social relationships appear to have this
kind of power. When people were put in a stressful situation, such as receiving mild electric shocks,
those who felt they had social support in their lives, or those who simply had the chance to see a
picture of a loved one, experienced less fear, threat, and pain (e.g., Master et al. 2009; see also
Cacioppo & Patrick 2008). Likewise, when people were put under intense social evaluation—giving
an impromptu speech in front of a judgmental audience—those who had reﬂected on an important
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

339

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

personal value no longer displayed an elevation in the stress hormone cortisol (Creswell et al.
2005). Neither social support nor values afﬁrmation eliminated the stressor. Rather they placed it
in a larger context of “things that truly matter for my adequacy.” Less encumbered by
psychological threat, self-afﬁrmed people can better marshal their cognitive resources to meet the
demands of the task at hand, for example, solving more creative problems under pressure (Creswell
et al. 2013) or exerting self-control in a depleting situation (Schmeichel & Vohs 2009).

Reducing defensiveness. Self-afﬁrmations also reduce defensive responses, adaptations to
protect the self from threat (for a review, see Sherman & Cohen 2006). These include the self’s
strategies of spin control, such as denying responsibility for failure and taking selective credit for
success. Defensive responses also include various other adaptations, such as denigrating others to
afﬁrm the self, and engaging in denial, rumination, and even heavy drinking and other chemically
induced escapes (Steele et al. 1981) that help people to cope with threats to self. Such defensive
adaptations serve as a psychological immune system (Gilbert et al. 1998). Although these defenses
protect self-integrity in the short term, they can undermine growth and prove self-defeating in
the long term. One way that self-afﬁrmations promote change is by curbing defensive reactions.
Studies show that defensive denial, bias, and distortion in one domain are lessened by afﬁrmations
of self-integrity in another. For example, self-afﬁrmed individuals were more open to a scientiﬁc
report linking their behavior to cancer risk (Sherman et al. 2000).
In summary, afﬁrmations help people to maintain a narrative of personal adequacy in threatening circumstances. They thus buffer individuals against threat and reduce defensive responses to it.
The effect is catalytic. Forces that would otherwise be suppressed by psychological threat—such
as cognitive aptitude or persuasive evidence—are unleashed.

Cycles of Adaptive Potential: How Social Psychological Processes Such
as Self-Affirmation Propagate Through Time

Defensive
adaptations:
adaptations aimed at
protecting
self-integrity by
reducing psychological
threat or its effects,
including cognitive
adaptations (e.g., selfserving biases) and
behavioral adaptations
(e.g.,
self-handicapping,
alcohol consumption)

340

The review so far has described the psychology of the afﬁrming moment. But several of the
intervention studies to be discussed ﬁnd that the effects of self-afﬁrming writing activities can
persist, for instance improving the grades of at-risk minority students years later (Cohen et al.
2009, Sherman et al. 2013). In fact, social psychology has established that brief interventions can
have large and long-term effects when they address key psychological processes, as pioneered in the
studies of Lewin and Rokeach described in the introductory section of this review (for reviews, see
Ross & Nisbett 2011, Wilson 2011). In some cases, the effects of the intervention even grow. Time
does not necessarily weaken the inﬂuence of the past, but can, it seems, preserve and strengthen it.
A key feature of these interventions is that their effectiveness depends on the point in the process
in which they are introduced. For example, if teachers are led to expect certain incoming students
in their classroom to bloom intellectually, they elicit stronger performance from those students
(Rosenthal 1994). But the effects of this “high expectations” intervention disappear if it is delivered
only a short time after teachers have met their students and begun to form their own impressions
of them (for a meta-analysis, see Raudenbush 1984).
Like any formative experience, a successful intervention is not an isolated event but rather a
turning point in a process (see Elder 1998). When well-timed and well-situated, it touches off
a series of reciprocally reinforcing interactions between the self-system and the social system
(see Figure 1). A positive feedback loop between these two powerful systems can drive adaptive
outcomes over time. We refer to this as a cycle of adaptive potential, because it increases the actor’s
potential to achieve adaptive outcomes. The cycle can take over and propagate adaptive outcomes
Cohen

·

Sherman

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Self
system

a

b
Adaptive
outcomes

f

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

c

e

d
Social
system

Figure 1
Cycle of adaptive potential, a positive feedback loop between the self-system and the social system that
promotes adaptive outcomes over time. Examples of paths include Path a: as a result of being self-afﬁrmed,
the person (e.g., athlete, student) achieves more adaptive outcomes (e.g., better performance); Path b: as a
result of performing better, the person feels more self-afﬁrmed; Path c: because the person performs better,
others (e.g., coaches, teachers) expect more of him/her; Path d: expecting more, others in the social system
draw out better performance from the person; Path e: others in the social system afﬁrm the person’s self
through positive feedback, rewards, etc.; Path f: the person alters the social system through paths other than
adaptive outcomes (e.g., by seeking opportunities for practice or by selecting challenging courses).

long after the intervention has receded in time and memory (Caspi & Mofﬁtt 1995, Walton &
Cohen 2011, Wilson 2011).
Three principles explain how and when processes propel themselves through time in cycles
of adaptive potential (Cohen et al. 2012, Garcia & Cohen 2012, Yeager & Walton 2011). First,
because of recursion, the output of a process such as self-afﬁrmation can cycle back as its input, thus
perpetuating itself (Cohen et al. 2009, Wilson & Linville 1982). Better performance may afﬁrm
the self, leading to still better performance, further afﬁrming the self, and so on, as improvement
maintains or even builds on itself. Second, because of interaction, the output of a process can
interact with other processes in the environment. For example, if self-afﬁrmed students perform
better, they may ﬁnd themselves held to higher expectations by their teachers or placed in a
higher track, which could raise their performance further and open new opportunities. An early
advantage can thus channel people into subsequent experiences that perpetuate and broaden the
advantage. For long-term effects to occur, a process need not recur, as in recursion, but can instead
feed into altogether different processes. Indeed, many social environments abound with change
processes (G.L. Cohen & J. Garcia, manuscript in preparation). For instance, schools and cultures
produce massive change, as when they transform a kindergartner into an educated, civilized adult.
An intervention need not create new processes but may simply interface with these existing ones.
Effects then reverberate through the interconnected forces in a social system (Caspi et al. 1987;
Caspi & Mofﬁtt 1995; Elder 1974, 1998; Lewin 1997/1948; Wilson 2011). Because of recursion
and interaction, the beneﬁts of an intervention can maintain themselves through the progressive
accumulation of their own consequences (see Caspi et al. 1987).
Third, because of subjective construal, an intervention can trigger an enduring shift in
perception (Sherman et al. 2013; see also Ross & Nisbett 2011, Wilson 2011). Even if the
objective environment remains constant, the subjective experience of it may change. For example,
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

Recursive process:
a process in which the
output feeds back as an
input
Interactive process:
a process in which the
output serves as an
input to an altogether
different process in a
system
Subjective construal:
the actor’s subjective
perception; even if the
objective environment
remains constant, the
subjective experience
of it can be changed
through intervention

341

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Latino American middle school children who afﬁrmed core values saw instances of racial threat
as unrelated to their likelihood of success in school (Sherman et al. 2013). When afﬁrmed, people
tend to narrate adversity as an isolated event rather than an indictment of their adequacy (Cohen
et al. 2009). Approach, rather than avoidance, becomes more likely, as does problem solving over
giving up. As these personal styles take hold, individuals may construe themselves as the kind of
person who can overcome difﬁculties, an identity that can then guide their behavior (cf. Freedman
& Fraser 1966). Their narrative of personal adequacy may strengthen, which may bolster coping
with the next adversity, further strengthening the narrative, in a repeating cycle. An intervention
may thus have lasting effects by changing the way people ﬁlter information about themselves and
their environment.
To illustrate these principles, consider the parable of the professional hockey player. Given
the many inﬂuences on a child’s likelihood of becoming a professional hockey player, it seems
surprising that birth date has a sizable impact (Gladwell 2008; for a recent comprehensive test,
see Addona & Yates 2010). Children with a birthday that falls soon after the cut-off date for
entry into this age-based sport have an advantage. As the oldest in their cohort, they tend to be
bigger and more adept than other children, and they may stand out as more talented as a result.
Their environment may be more afﬁrming; they may score more, be given more opportunities
to practice, and be recruited to higher-caliber teams. These experiences afﬁrm the children and
strengthen their self-conﬁdence, love for the sport, and identity as a hockey player, which can fuel
their desire to practice and improve, evoking further afﬁrmation and opportunity, in a repeating
interactive cycle (Figure 1). Analogous to afﬁrmation interventions, a birthdate is not the sole
cause of children’s athletic fate. It is a trigger for a series of iterative interactions between the child
and a powerful system of athletic socialization that allocates more resources to higher performers.
The parable of the professional hockey player illustrates how recursion, interaction, and subjective
construal can turn a variable with no intrinsic causal power into a life-altering inﬂuence by putting
a person on a cycle of adaptive potential.
Like a fortuitous event, even a brief intervention can have a lasting impact if it is appropriately
situated and timed. It can then trigger a positive cycle or interrupt a negative one (Wilson &
Linville 1982). Indeed, the three domains where afﬁrmation has had lasting beneﬁt—education,
health, and relationships—are ones where problems emerge from a slow-moving accumulation of
costs. Each domain abounds with recursive, interactive processes that carry forward the inﬂuence
of timely experiences, both for ill and for good.
The inﬂuence of recursion, interaction, and subjective construal, and the afﬁrmation interventions that tap into these processes, were tested using randomized experiments, many in ﬁeld
settings such as schools and health care centers. The interventions did not eliminate the problems under study and, of course, were not expected to do so. But they did lead to positive and in
some cases lasting changes in academic performance, health, and the quality of interpersonal and
intergroup relations.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

AFFIRMATION INTERVENTIONS
Education
Students want to think positively of themselves. But the daily stressors of school—tests, grades,
peer relations—can threaten their sense of personal adequacy. School can be especially threatening
for members of historically marginalized groups such as African Americans and Latino Americans
(Steele 2010). They may worry that they could be seen through the lens of a negative stereotype
rather than accorded respect and judged on their merits. Such vigilance is understandable and
342

Cohen

·

Sherman

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

even adaptive given the current and historical signiﬁcance of race in America (Steele 2010,
Walton & Cohen 2011). Race, gender, immigration status, and other group memberships can
thus give rise to a repeated threat for entire groups in academic and work settings. As hundreds
of studies have shown, social identity threat—awareness that one could be devalued on the basis
of one’s group—can be stressful and undermine learning and performance (Inzlicht & Schmader
2011, Steele 2010, Steele et al. 2002). Even if an African American and a white student work in
the same classroom and receive similar instruction, their subjective experience may differ. For the
African American student, the prospect of being stereotyped as intellectually limited can render
the classroom more threatening.
Policy changes and education reform that eliminate this “threat in the air” are of paramount
importance (Steele 2010). Even partial closure of the achievement gap would make a large difference in the lives of many children and their families. Promisingly, lab studies demonstrate that
afﬁrmations can improve the performance of students working under the specter of a negative
stereotype (Martens et al. 2006, Shapiro et al. 2012, Taylor & Walton 2011).
But in contrast to the lab, in real-world academic and work settings, social identity threat is not
acute but chronic (Cohen & Garcia 2008, Garcia & Cohen 2012, Yeager & Walton 2011). It recurs
in a multitude of daily experiences, such as learning new material, taking a test, getting help, and
making friends. Imagine an African American student who enters middle school with trepidation,
uncertain of whether he belongs and will be accepted by peers and teachers. He wants to achieve
academically. But, in the ﬁrst week of school, he is called on by his teacher for his perspective
as a “black student.” Aware of being stereotyped, the student may feel that his fears have been
conﬁrmed, and he may learn less and perform worse on the next exam. The student’s sense of
threat may then increase, harming performance further, in a recursive process that strengthens
with time. Increasingly subtle events may trigger perceived threat, with more mental energy spent
on vigilance rather than learning. If teachers fail to grasp the invisible forces at work, they may
see the student as limited, give him less support, and hold him to a lower standard. These could
exacerbate threat and undermine performance further.
However, a moment of validation at a threatening transition could improve a trajectory (Cohen
et al. 2009, Yeager & Walton 2011). If an afﬁrmed student performed better early in an academic
transition, this could trigger a cascade of positive effects—greater self-conﬁdence in the student,
higher expectations from the teacher—all of which could further afﬁrm the student, relax vigilance,
and beneﬁt performance, in a cycle of adaptive potential. Or, more modestly, a downward cycle
might be slowed or averted.
Educational interventions. The ﬁrst set of randomized ﬁeld experiments tested the effectiveness
of values afﬁrmation in lifting the achievement of African Americans (Cohen et al. 2006, 2009)
and Latino Americans (Sherman et al. 2013; for additional published replications, see Bowen et al.
2012, Harackiewicz et al. 2014, Miyake et al. 2010, Woolf et al. 2009). The research took place
at three middle schools with students in early adolescence, a key transition marked by feelings of
inadequacy and a quest for identity. Too many adolescents take a wrong turn and ﬁnd themselves
ensnared in negative trajectories with lifelong consequences (Eccles et al. 1991, Mofﬁtt et al.
2011). The schools were racially mixed such that roughly half the students were minority, that
is, African American or Latino American depending on the school, and roughly half were white.
Although the schools were located in middle-class neighborhoods, most minority students at
one site came from socioeconomically disadvantaged families (Sherman et al. 2013, study 1), an
important population given the widening socioeconomic gap in achievement (Reardon 2011).
Critically, in the experiments featured here, the academic environments provided material and
human resources to help students succeed, and indeed some had undertaken initiatives to advance
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

343

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

4.0

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

Grade point average

3.5

3.0
White (affirmation)
White (control)
Latino American (affirmation)
Latino American (control)

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

Preintervention

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Time point

Figure 2
Performance across the school year as a function of ethnicity and afﬁrmation condition, with means and
error terms adjusted for baseline covariates and grade level. Middle school students completed a series of
writing exercises related to either their most important value in the afﬁrmation condition or an unimportant
value/neutral topic in the control condition. Abbreviation: Q, quarter. Adapted from Sherman et al. (2013),
study 1.

the learning of underrepresented students. Thus, the social system was “ready” to respond and
reinforce better student performance once it occurred.
Each student was randomly assigned to complete either values afﬁrmation exercises or control
exercises [for methodological details, see Cohen et al. 2006, 2009 (supplementary materials);
Sherman et al. 2013]. These were distributed by teachers as regular in-class assignments two to
ﬁve times over the year. Each took roughly 10 minutes to complete (see Table 1 for sample essays).
Although students likely expected teachers to read their essays, teachers knew neither students’
condition assignments nor the content of their essays. Because early outcomes matter more in a
recursive process, the interventions were given early in the year, typically the fourth week of school.
In most cases the exercises occurred right before an in-class exam so that their psychological effects
could be immediately channeled into better performance rather than decay before they could affect
a key outcome. Because novel rather than repetitive experiences have more emotional impact
(Lyubomirsky & Della Porta 2010), the nature of the exercises was varied throughout the year.
Students’ ofﬁcial grades were tracked for the next one to three years. The values afﬁrmation
intervention signiﬁcantly improved the grade point average (GPA) of the identity-threatened
groups, African American students in one school (Cohen et al. 2006, 2009) and Latino American
students in two others (Sherman et al. 2013), in their core courses (English, math, social studies,
and science). For instance, the afﬁrmation halved the percentage of African American students who
received a D or F in the ﬁrst term of the course in which the intervention was given (Cohen et al.
2006). Because the intervention beneﬁted ethnic minority students but not white students, it closed
the achievement gap. The closure corresponded to roughly 30% for Latino and African American
students at two school sites (Cohen et al. 2009; Sherman et al. 2013, study 2) and 22% for economically disadvantaged Latino American students at another (see Figure 2) (Sherman et al. 2013,
study 1).
344

Cohen

·

Sherman

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

The intervention’s effects persisted and improved students’ trajectory through the rest of middle
school. Two years later, afﬁrmed African Americans and Latino Americans continued to earn
higher GPAs than their nonafﬁrmed peers (Cohen et al. 2009, Sherman et al. 2013). At one site
where high school records were available, the intervention effect persisted into a third year, when
most students progressed into high school (Sherman et al. 2013, study 1). Students appeared to
carry the beneﬁts with them into a new environment.
The afﬁrmation did not boost GPA but rather slowed its decline. The downward trend common
among middle school students (Eccles et al. 1991) proved less steep among afﬁrmed minorities. As
a result, the performance trajectories of afﬁrmed and nonafﬁrmed students tended to diverge with
time (see Figure 2). This pattern is consistent with the notion that the intervention interrupted a
recursive cycle in which threat and poor performance fed on one another and worsened outcomes
over time. Also suggestive of a recursive process, the most threatened subgroup, those who would
be most undermined by threat and its accumulating consequences, derived the greatest lasting beneﬁt from afﬁrmation. For example, among African American students, those who at baseline had a
history of poor performance and felt most unsure of their belonging at school showed almost a full
grade point beneﬁt in GPA (Cook et al. 2012, study 1). These were the students whose academic potential was most inhibited by psychological threat. Put differently, the intervention beneﬁt was not
diffuse but concentrated among the most threatened, and sometimes hardest to reach, subgroup.
Would values afﬁrmation help close the social-class achievement gap (Reardon 2011)? A randomized ﬁeld experiment that disentangled the effect of student social class from the effect of
student race found that it could (Harackiewicz et al. 2014). It focused on ﬁrst-generation college
students, over 90% of whom were white. These students came from families where neither parent
had received a four-year college degree, a proxy for low socioeconomic status. Students with poor
socioeconomic backgrounds can face extra stress in college because of ﬁnancial worries and a sense
of not fully belonging on campus (Stephens et al. 2012). For these students, two in-class values
afﬁrmations improved their grades in an introductory biology course. The intervention cut the
achievement gap between them and their more ﬁnancially advantaged peers in the course by
50%. Remarkably, ﬁrst-generation students also proved more likely to enroll in the second course
in the biology sequence if they had been in the afﬁrmation condition (86% did so) rather than in
the control condition (66% did so). In another study with low-income middle school students,
the standard afﬁrmation did not affect students’ initial grades, but it did prevent a drop in grades
over the course of the year (Bowen et al. 2012).
Values afﬁrmation has also helped another group of students who contend with social identity
threat: female college students enrolled in introductory physics, a gateway science course (Miyake
et al. 2010). Women who had been randomly assigned to complete values afﬁrmation exercises in
their class performed better on their course exams and earned higher grades than did those who
completed control exercises. Once again, the greatest beneﬁt accrued to the most threatened subgroup: in this context, women who wondered relatively more if gender stereotypes about science
ability might be true1 . Together, the results of these ﬁeld experiments suggest that afﬁrmation removed a barrier that prevented the full expression of students’ potential (Walton & Spencer 2009).

1

Another afﬁrmation intervention with an ethnically heterogeneous sample of medical students in England found mixed effects,
improving the performance of all students on their clinical evaluations and undermining the performance of white students
on a written examination (Woolf et al. 2009). However, at least two issues limit interpretability. First, it was unclear whether
identity threat contributed to the performance of the ethnic minority sample, a heterogeneous group consisting primarily
of Asian Indian, Pakistani, and Bangladeshi participants. Second, procedural changes made the afﬁrmation evaluative in
nature. Students’ instructors evaluated their essays as “suitable” or “not suitable” for submission to each student’s portfolio
of learning. A few essays were singled out to be discussed in students’ tutorials. Beyond unblinding instructors to students’
condition assignment, the evaluative and public nature of the activity may have compromised its ability to be afﬁrming.
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

345

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Self-afﬁrmation processes bear not only on underperformance but also on bullying and aggression. Young adolescents completed either afﬁrmation or control tasks in school, with outcomes
measured several weeks or months after the intervention (Thomaes et al. 2009). Afﬁrmation
lessened the extent to which students with grandiose self-views, a risk factor for aggression,
reacted to threat (i.e., a drop in their self-esteem) by hitting, name calling, rumor spreading,
or committing other antisocial acts as assessed by their classmates. In another ﬁeld experiment,
self-afﬁrmation increased prosocial behavior among students with a history of antisocial behavior,
as assessed by their teachers (Thomaes et al. 2012). In summary, psychological threat contributes
not only to underperformance but also to bullying and aggression, important problems that have
proved difﬁcult to change. And timely self-afﬁrmations can help remedy them.
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

Understanding the longevity of affirmation effects. How do afﬁrmation intervention effects
persist over long periods of time, as they did in these studies? Recursion, interaction, and subjective
construal can channel people into a cycle of adaptive potential.
Feeling afﬁrmed, a student may perform better on the next classroom test, and performing
better, the student may feel more afﬁrmed, in a recursive process that lifts the student’s trajectory
and eventually becomes a continual source of self-afﬁrmation. In one series of studies, much of
the effect of afﬁrmation on second-year grades was mediated by its effect on ﬁrst-year grades,
suggesting that early strong performance begot later strong performance (Cohen et al. 2009,
Harackiewicz et al. 2014). Also consistent with a recursive process was the ﬁnding that randomized
“afﬁrmation boosters” in the second year did not increase the afﬁrmation’s beneﬁt. The processes
that the intervention set in motion in the ﬁrst year sufﬁced to explain its continuing effect in the
second year (Cohen et al. 2009).
A cycle of adaptive potential is, by deﬁnition, interactive. Academic institutions teem with
processes that recognize, reinforce, and provide resources for student success. By interacting with
these processes, an intervention can trigger consequences that have causal power unto themselves.
For example, a student who excels early in the year may be seen by teachers as having greater potential. The positive effects of high teacher expectancies on student performance (Rosenthal 1994)
may then take hold and propel the intervention effect through time (see Yeager & Walton 2011).
Indeed, fewer minority students were placed in their school’s remedial track or retained in grade
in the afﬁrmation condition (3%) than in the control condition (9%); afﬁrmed minorities also took
more advanced math courses (Cohen et al. 2009). When self-afﬁrmed minority students performed
better, the system reacted by categorically reshaping their academic experience. Deﬂection from
failure channels such as remediation and entry into success channels such as advanced placement
courses can shape students’ academic trajectory (Grubb 2009, Steele 2010). The consequences of
the intervention can thus break free of their origin and propagate change through time.
Beyond recursion and interaction, subjective construal can fuel a cycle of adaptive potential.
Feeling afﬁrmed and achieving more, students may become more hopeful. They may narrate adversity in a more optimistic light. Consistent with this, several ﬁndings suggest that self-afﬁrmed
minorities were more likely to see adversity as an isolated event rather than a threat to self (see
Cook et al. 2012; Sherman et al. 2013, study 2). Among nonafﬁrmed minority students, a poor
grade or a stressful day predicted a lower sense of belonging in school and a higher sense of racial
threat (see Cook et al. 2012, Sherman et al. 2013). Each adversity seemed to raise anew the question of whether they belonged (Walton & Cohen 2011). Indeed, over two years, minority students
saw their sense of belonging in school fall, as if successive adversities reinforced the narrative that
they did not fit in (Cook et al. 2012). Likewise, among nonafﬁrmed ﬁrst-generation college students, uncertainty about whether they “had the right background” for their course grew over the
semester (Harackiewicz et al. 2014). But for self-afﬁrmed students, these effects vanished. They did
346

Cohen

·

Sherman

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

not question their belonging. Self-afﬁrmed minority students also displayed lower cognitive accessibility of the racial stereotype, suggesting that they were less likely to ﬁlter classroom experience
through the lens of race (Cohen et al. 2006). To the extent that they were less vigilant to racial cues,
they may have had more mental resources for performance and learning (Taylor & Walton 2011).
Although the intervention was brief, its effects were repeatedly relived in subjective experience.
In summary, afﬁrmation interventions can trigger a series of reciprocally reinforcing interactions between the self-system and the social system that foster students’ adaptive potential over
time.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

Health
Most people want to think of themselves as healthy, so it can be threatening to confront evidence
that challenges that assessment. Illness, frailty, and the prospect of death represent some of the
most powerful challenges to adaptive adequacy (see Greenberg et al. 1997). Health-related
threats can take many forms: evidence that one’s diet puts one at risk for heart disease, a screening
that reveals a vulnerability to cancer. Even a visit to the doctor’s ofﬁce can be stressful (Havranek
et al. 2012). The effect can run in the reverse direction too. Prolonged stress can have serious
health costs that bring a person to the doctor’s ofﬁce (Sapolsky 2004, Sterling 2004, Taylor 2010).
Self-afﬁrmation interventions will not cure serious illness, but they can catalyze the impact of
other positive health-related forces, such as health information, postoperative care regimens, and
a person’s goal to live a healthful life.
Like education outcomes, health outcomes are also driven by recursive, interactive processes.
For example, stress and illness can exacerbate one another in a vicious cycle (Sapolsky 2004).
Failure to achieve a health goal may lead people to give up prematurely, worsening health (see
Logel & Cohen 2012, Vohs et al. 2013). Because these processes depend on continual feedback
loops, timely interventions could break a negative cycle and perhaps spark a positive one.
Research in this area uses the two routes of afﬁrmation inﬂuence. One route uses afﬁrmation
to reduce defensive rejection of threatening health information, the other to buffer people against
the effects of stress.

Reducing defensiveness. For many diseases, simple preventive steps, such as smoking cessation
or diet change, would save a profound number of lives if practiced on a large scale.
But imagine a middle-aged man whose doctor tells him that his diet puts him at risk for heart
disease and diabetes. Rather than admit to his dietary misdeeds, he may deploy defensive biases that
shield the self from blame but also block change (Sherman & Cohen 2006). He might denigrate
the evidence of a link between fat intake and heart disease or assure himself that drugs will undo
the damage. Rationalizing the threat away, he persists in his behavior. Persisting in his behavior,
he embraces his rationalization more, increasing resistance to change.
However, timely self-afﬁrmation can open people up to threatening health information. With
their self-integrity less on trial, self-afﬁrmed individuals can better confront threatening information and evaluate it in a manner less tethered to their needs for self-integrity (Klein et al. 2011).
This effect has been conﬁrmed in many studies (for reviews, see Harris & Epton 2009, 2010;
Sherman & Hartson 2011).
Afﬁrmation has increased openness to information about the life-threatening habit of smoking.
Tobacco-related illness in the United States causes more deaths than HIV, car accidents, alcohol
and illegal drug use, suicides, and murders combined (CDC 2012). One study presented smokers
with graphic antismoking cigarette advertisements (Harris et al. 2007). Relative to participants
in a control condition, participants who ﬁrst completed a self-afﬁrmation—listing their desirable
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

347

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

qualities—saw the advertisements as more distressing, expressed greater conﬁdence in their ability
to stop smoking, and had a stronger motivation to quit. This effect on motivation persisted one
week later.
When afﬁrmed, people are also more likely to take the ﬁrst steps toward positive behavioral
change. Another study focused on smokers low in socioeconomic status, the demographic group
with the highest rate of smoking (Armitage et al. 2008). Among afﬁrmed participants, 59% took
leaﬂets about how to quit smoking, compared with only 37% of nonafﬁrmed participants. In yet
another study, people at risk for diabetes defensively rejected information about their health risk.
They declined the opportunity for a diabetes screening test, even though taking the test presumably would have helped them to acquire medical advice that could improve their health and
perhaps even prolong their lives (van Koningsbruggen & Das 2009). However, providing them
with the opportunity to reﬂect on important values before reviewing the information decreased
their denigration of the health message and increased their likelihood of agreeing to take a screening test (see also Howell & Shepperd 2012). Other small behavioral wins from self-afﬁrmation
have been documented, such as increases in the number of college students purchasing condoms
after watching an AIDS education video (Sherman et al. 2000).
Two insights emerge from this research. First, afﬁrmation enables more balanced information
processing. Without the self on trial, people are better able to evaluate evidence on its merits
(Correll et al. 2004, Klein et al. 2011). Thus, afﬁrmation does not produce change by itself but
enables change to occur if evidence warrants it. Second, echoing the ﬁndings in education, afﬁrmation promotes change among people under consistent psychological threat—people whose
behavior puts them at risk for a health condition and who thus have cause to feel that their selfintegrity is under threat (e.g., Grifﬁn & Harris 2011, Harris & Napper 2005, van Koningsbruggen
& Das 2009; cf. Klein & Harris 2009).
Although three null ﬁndings have been published (Dillard et al. 2005, Fry & Prentice-Dunn
2005, Zhao et al. 2012)2 , on the whole the research paints a picture of the afﬁrmed mind as an open
mind (Correll et al. 2004). Whether the moment of openness then prompts enduring changes in
behavior, however, hinges on other factors.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

Overcoming barriers to long-term behavior change. The effects of afﬁrmation on attitude
and motivation tend to persist, even one month later (Harris et al. 2007, Harris & Napper 2005).
But long-term effects on behavior have been mixed (Harris & Epton 2010). In one positive study,
drinkers at a bar completed a brief afﬁrmation—selecting and copying an afﬁrming statement
that incorporated an implementation intention for how to deal with threat (e.g., by prompting
participants to write “If I feel threatened or anxious, then I will think about the things I value about
myself ”)—while others completed a standard afﬁrmation, reﬂecting on acts of kindness (Armitage
et al. 2011). All participants then read a message that summarized the medical risks of alcohol
consumption. Relative to a control condition, both afﬁrmations reduced consumption of alcohol,
as assessed by self-reports on a validated measure one month later. Between the two time points,
the percentage of participants drinking within healthful government-recommended levels jumped

2
In two of these null reports, the authors raise questions about whether their manipulations successfully instantiated afﬁrmation
because of either a novel afﬁrmation method (Dillard et al. 2005) or failed manipulation checks for the majority of participants
(Fry & Prentice-Dunn 2005). In two of the reports (Dillard et al. 2005, Zhao et al. 2012), the null result may be due to
low statistical power, as the key comparisons, though not statistically signiﬁcant, were in the predicted direction such that
afﬁrmation led to more openness to threatening health messages among those for whom the message was most relevant.
By chance alone, periodic null effects would occur in a large set of studies. It is also possible that the effects of afﬁrmation
depend on hidden moderators not assessed in these studies. For example, in Grifﬁn & Harris (2011), afﬁrmation effects were
moderated by trait defensiveness.

348

Cohen

·

Sherman

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

by an average of 32 percentage points in the afﬁrmation conditions, more than double the change
observed in the control condition.
However, in some studies, afﬁrmed participants fail to make the behavioral changes that they
predict they will (Harris et al. 2007, Harris & Napper 2005, Reed & Aspinwall 1998; for a review,
see Harris & Epton 2010). Indeed, changes in attitude and motivation seldom sufﬁce for long-term
behavioral change (Lewin 1997/1948, Ross & Nisbett 2011). For many health-risk behaviors such
as smoking, many people want to stop but are unable to do so (CDC 2012).
Behavior change not only has value in its own right but also helps to trigger changes in selfconstrual that carry forward intervention effects. Once people act in a healthful way, they may
see themselves as a person who cares about health and then behave in ways congruent with that
identity (Freedman & Fraser 1966). To achieve long-term beneﬁts with an afﬁrmation, it may be
essential to ensure early behavioral wins. These wins also help to convince people that behavior
change is possible, a key condition for afﬁrmation-induced change to occur (see Vohs et al. 2013).
Two strategies to promote long-term behavior change, and spur a cycle of adaptive potential,
have received suggestive support. One encourages people to form realistic, concrete plans for how
to implement their new health-related goals in speciﬁc situations (Gollwitzer & Sheeran 2006).
One study had college students review a report about the need to eat fruits and vegetables (Epton
& Harris 2008). The report provided easy-to-implement steps to incorporate these foods into
their diets (e.g., “Add extra vegetables to your pizza”). Although speculative, this may have been
a critical aspect of the intervention. When self-afﬁrmed, participants ate more portions of fruits
and vegetables over the following week, as assessed by a validated daily diary instrument.
A second strategy to promote long-term behavior change reinstates afﬁrmation at the
choice point, when the risk behavior occurs. Because afﬁrmations help people postpone shortterm gratiﬁcations for the sake of long-term goals (Schmeichel & Vohs 2009), and reduce
stress that people might otherwise manage by drinking and smoking (Steele et al. 1981),
it may be important to time afﬁrmations to moments of greatest vulnerability (O. Fotuhi,
S. Spencer, G.T. Fong, & M.P. Zanna, manuscript in preparation). For example, incorporating a speciﬁc implementation intention into the afﬁrmation may be effective (“If I feel tempted to
drink alcohol, then I will think about the things I value about myself ”) (cf. Armitage et al. 2011).
Two recent unpublished studies used a recurring physical cue to keep the self-afﬁrming value
salient after participants left the laboratory: a bracelet given to participants, inscribed with the
words, “Remember the values” (O. Fotuhi, S. Spencer, G.T. Fong, & M.P. Zanna, manuscript in
preparation), and a key chain with a secret compartment that contained a slip of paper on which
participants had written a phrase related to their most important value (G.M. Walton, C. Logel,
J.M. Peach, S.J. Spencer, M.P. Zanna, manuscript under review). Another technique has people
write about a value they share with a close other who supports their health goal (O. Fotuhi, S.
Spencer, G.T. Fong, & M.P. Zanna, manuscript in preparation). By mentally pairing a value with
their health goal in this way, smokers may be more likely to call to mind their value when they are
tempted to smoke. Interventions that used these tactics to increase the adhesiveness of a single
afﬁrmation yielded long-term improvements in smoking cessation (O. Fotuhi, S. Spencer, G.T.
Fong, & M.P. Zanna, manuscript in preparation) and GPA (G.M. Walton, C. Logel, J.M. Peach,
S.J. Spencer, M.P. Zanna, manuscript under review).
Buffering against stress. Stress, especially when chronic, can threaten the integrity of the self
(Keough & Markus 1998). Indeed, stress often arises from events that call into question people’s
sense of adaptive adequacy, their perceived ability to meet the demands on them (see Sherman
& Cohen 2006). Given this, values afﬁrmations may help buffer people against stress by allowing
them to anchor their sense of adequacy in another domain where it is less subject to question.
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

349

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Physiological evidence of the stress-buffering effect of afﬁrmation was found among college
undergraduates facing a real-world stressor—the midterm exam that they had singled out as most
stressful (Sherman et al. 2009; see also Creswell et al. 2005). Students in the treatment condition
completed two values afﬁrmations before this midterm exam, whereas students in the control
condition completed neutral writing exercises. By the morning of their midterm, nonafﬁrmed
students showed a marked increase in epinephrine, as measured by urinary catecholamines, hormones involved in the ﬁght-or-ﬂight response. Afﬁrmed students did not show an increase in
epinephrine. Once again, the stress-reduction effect of the intervention was concentrated among
the most threatened: students worried about being disliked and seen as unintelligent.
Stress can harm health, especially when it is prolonged (Sapolsky 2004, Sterling 2004, Taylor
2010). Chronic stressors at sensitive periods can keep the stress system on alert for threat even
years later, a risk factor for cardiovascular disease (see Miller et al. 2009). This vigilance can create
a self-fulﬁlling prophecy wherein the expectation of threat readies people to perceive it, thereby
reinforcing the expectation of threat in a recursive loop that imposes an increasingly heavy toll on
health (Miller et al. 2009). Vigilance may help explain why various afﬂictions—poor sleep, obesity,
hypertension, heart disease—cluster among distressed populations (Sterling 2004; see also Walton
& Cohen 2011).
Interventions can promote health if they target the psychological “ringleader,” perceived
threat (see Cacioppo & Patrick 2008). The most effective way to do so is to change the social
environment—classrooms, work, home, society—so that it better provides everyday opportunities to manifest adequacy, such as through meaningful work and civic engagement (Sterling 2004).
But short of this, timely interventions that assuage threat at sensitive periods can help.
One study focused on women with early-stage (stage I and II) breast cancer (Creswell et al.
2007, a reanalysis of Stanton et al. 2002). The original study found that expressive writing, in
which patients reﬂected on their thoughts and feelings about their experience with breast cancer,
reduced self-reported illness symptoms at a three-month follow-up, relative to writing about facts
about cancer and treatment (for a review of expressive writing interventions, see Pennebaker &
Chung 2011). Content analyses suggested that the active ingredient in women’s essays was the act of
afﬁrming the self. Patients who afﬁrmed important values, such as relationships or religion, or who
reﬂected on valued personal qualities beneﬁted most. Consistent with the stress-buffering effects
of self-afﬁrmation, self-afﬁrming writing was associated with less subjective distress immediately
after the writing exercises. By helping patients to see themselves as people with adaptive adequacy
in spite of their illness, or even because of their ability to cope with it, the writing exercise seemed
to lessen the stress of chronic illness and thus improved long-term health. People beneﬁted from
the expressive writing not so much because it led them to reappraise their cancer but because it
helped them to reappraise themselves. As a cancer survivor said when reﬂecting on this research,
“This process of self-afﬁrmation allowed me to ﬁnd the strength and sense of self to keep getting
back up” (Norris 2008).
The role of self-afﬁrmation as a buffer against stress and illness is highlighted in a study
that used a novel “meaning-making afﬁrmation” (see Keough & Markus 1998). It encouraged
participants to extract a value-relevant meaning from their daily experience. College students
completed self-afﬁrming writing exercises every other day on ten occasions during their winter
break. Participants wrote about their day’s experiences and put them into perspective with respect
to their most important value. They thus assigned a self-afﬁrming meaning to what they might
otherwise construe as a hassle or stressor. For instance, they might see driving a sibling to work as
an expression of the value they place on family. Relative to a writing control group, self-afﬁrmed
students reported less stress and better health, as assessed by a composite measure of illness, physical symptoms, and health center visits. As evidence that the exercises helped students to integrate

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

350

Cohen

·

Sherman

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

stressors into a self-afﬁrming narrative, those who beneﬁted most were students who reported
the greatest number of daily hassles that implicated their self-worth (Keough & Markus 1998).
The stress-buffering effects of self-afﬁrmation can improve objective health outcomes by interrupting negative cycles (Logel & Cohen 2012). Stress can undermine self-control, which can
increase the likelihood that one will fail to meet health-related goals, which can increase stress
further, in a repeating cycle. One study recruited women concerned with their weight. Consistent with the effects of stress on self-control, preoccupation with one’s weight predicts distress,
poor eating, lack of exercise, and—ironically—weight gain (Haines et al. 2007, Logel & Cohen
2012). More generally, psychological threat can increase appetite for sugary and high-fat comfort
foods (see Cornil & Chandon 2013, Sterling 2004). Before being weighed and having their height
and waistline measured, participants completed a standard values afﬁrmation or control exercise
(Logel & Cohen 2012). Approximately 2.5 months later, afﬁrmed participants had lost more weight
than nonafﬁrmed participants. They also had lower body mass index (BMI) and a smaller waist
circumference, a health factor independent of BMI. Afﬁrmation produced these effects, the authors speculated, because it buffered women against weight-related stress and thus helped them to
tap into psychological resources to meet their weight-related goals (see also Schmeichel & Vohs
2009). Consistent with this speculation, afﬁrmation both improved women’s working memory
performance—needed to maintain focus on long-term goals—and strengthened the association
between better memory and weight loss. Once people begin to achieve important health goals,
they may feel more afﬁrmed and receive more afﬁrming feedback from others, each of which could
reinforce the change and carry it forward through time.
Field experiments on patients with chronic health conditions. The February 2012 issue of
Archives of Internal Medicine featured a series of large randomized trials that found beneﬁts of an
afﬁrmation-informed intervention for at-risk individuals on a medical regimen. Medical treatment
poses many stressors, such as pain, aversive medical procedures, and separation from loved ones.
Severe or prolonged stress can interfere with treatment and recovery (Kiecolt-Glaser et al. 1998).
In the studies, all patients received a standard behavioral intervention to promote recovery
from their health problem. Patients in the treatment condition were also encouraged to reﬂect
on core values and proud moments whenever they encountered situations that made it difﬁcult to
follow their medical regimen, and to remind themselves of small and often value-relevant events
that made them feel good, such as a beautiful sunset. In one study, afﬁrmation increased prescribed
medication use among hypertensive African Americans, from 36% to 42% at a 12-month followup (Ogedegbe et al. 2012). Another study focused on patients who had undergone an intervention
for a heart condition, for whom physical exercise marks a key step in recovery (Peterson et al.
2012). The percentage of patients who achieved the recommended level of physical activity rose
from 37% in the control condition to 55% in the afﬁrmation condition. In a third study on
young asthma patients, afﬁrmation had a null effect on physical activity, although a positive effect
emerged among young patients who had had a serious medical episode that required hospitalization
or intensive care and who thus presumably faced the greatest psychological threat (Mancuso et al.
2012).
In these studies, the intervention also contained a positive mood component (e.g., patients
received happiness-inducing gifts in the mail), so it is unclear whether afﬁrmation or positive
mood drove the effects. However, a randomized double-blind ﬁeld experiment tested whether a
pure afﬁrmation intervention could reduce patients’ stress in their interactions with their health
care provider and thus promote better patient-physician communication (Havranek et al. 2012).
Poor communication between patients and their physicians contributes to patient nonadherence
to prescribed care, a major health problem (Zolnierek & DiMatteo 2009). Approximately half of
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

351

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

patients fail to adhere to their doctor’s regimens for treatment or for prevention of illness (Sabaté
2003). Moreover, because accurate diagnosis hinges on patients’ ability to talk candidly about their
condition, it is essential to ﬁnd ways to promote better communication between patients and their
physicians.
Communication tends to be less open and more strained when the patient and physician have
different racial backgrounds, for instance, when a minority patient meets with a white doctor. Such
race discordances predict poorer patient-physician communication, a cause of racial disparities
in compliance and health care (see Havranek et al. 2012). Although many factors contribute
to this problem, Havranek and colleagues (2012) speculated that social identity threat played
a role. Minority patients may worry that their doctor could stereotype them as uninformed or
unintelligent, a concern that may be fueled by the cold, awkward, or rushed demeanor of their
doctor. The patient’s unease and the doctor’s demeanor may reciprocally reinforce one another,
increasing tension and distrust. But perhaps a values afﬁrmation at the beginning of this interaction
might put the patient at ease. The patient might then feel more empowered to take control of the
interaction, and the quality of the exchange might improve.
African American patients with a clinical diagnosis of hypertension participated in the study.
Most were socioeconomically disadvantaged. Patients were randomly assigned to complete either
a standard values afﬁrmation task or a control task at their health care clinic immediately prior
to their appointment with a white health care provider. Patients remained unaware of the rationale for the activity, and health care providers remained unaware of the condition assignments
of their patients. Each meeting between patient and provider was audiotaped. As assessed by an
established coding protocol, the communications between the patient and the provider proved
superior among afﬁrmed patients than among nonafﬁrmed patients. Afﬁrmed patients gave and
requested more information about their medical condition. Their interactions evinced greater
attentiveness, warmth, and respect, and less depression and distress. Indeed, the aspects of the exchange that afﬁrmation improved are predictive of patients’ adherence to their doctors’ prescribed
care (see Havranek et al. 2012).
As in other domains, afﬁrmation acts as a catalyst in the health domain. It allows people to
take advantage of the opportunities for improvement available in a medical regimen or persuasive
information, and to deal more adaptively with stress. Many of the health-based afﬁrmations also
seem to encourage a habit of self-afﬁrming in challenging circumstances, which may help explain
the longevity of their effects. If success occurs at a timely moment, it can set in motion a cycle of
adaptive potential that beneﬁts long-term health.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

Intergroup Conflict and Interpersonal Relationships
People want to have rewarding relationships, and most want to resolve disagreements equitably. But these motives are sometimes compromised by the competing motive to maintain
self-integrity. Because our social worth affects our sense of self-worth (Leary 2005), people may
be especially sensitive to perceived threats in their relationships. This vulnerability can cause
a harmful defensive style. Afﬁrmation interventions can ease this defensiveness and put the
relationship on a better course. Indeed, afﬁrmations have been shown to lessen defensive behavior
in interpersonal and intergroup encounters and to promote trust, compromise, and closeness (see
also Crocker et al. 2008).
Conflict. When people are afﬁrmed in valued domains unrelated to a dispute, they are more open
to otherwise identity-threatening political information and less intransigent in negotiations (for
a review, see Cohen 2012). Among people in Israel and Bosnia, historically conﬂict-ridden areas,
352

Cohen

·

Sherman

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

self-afﬁrmed participants were more likely to acknowledge wrongdoings inﬂicted by their group
on the other side and to support reparations to those harmed (Čehajić-Clancy et al. 2011). After
viewing presidential debates on the eve of the 2008 election, afﬁrmed Democrats and Republicans
were less partisan in their evaluations of Barack Obama’s debate performance, and 10 days after
the election, previously afﬁrmed Republicans thought that President Obama would govern in a
more balanced and objective fashion (Binning et al. 2010). Arab American men were able to induce
prejudiced people to consider their perspective of being unfairly treated in the wake of 9/11 when
they ﬁrst asked them self-afﬁrming questions, such as, “When were you really creative?” (Stone
et al. 2011). Afﬁrmation—induced in this case by the target of prejudice and not a third-party
experimenter or interventionist—increased openness to a stigmatized other.
In negotiation, afﬁrmation can lessen the escalation of commitment often observed as partisans’
identity becomes bound to the positions they advocate (Sivanathan et al. 2008). When afﬁrmed,
people are less likely to derogate concessions offered by adversaries in a negotiation (Ward et al.
2011). In a negotiation over abortion rights, participants whose commitment to their political
views had been made salient proved responsive to afﬁrmation. When afﬁrmed, they made more
compromises in a negotiation over abortion legislation, and they left the negotiation with stronger
trust of the advocate on the other side of the issue (Cohen et al. 2007). Afﬁrmation seems to provide
reassurance that a social or political identity, one that would otherwise ﬁx people’s evaluations and
negotiation positions, is but one of many valued identities. In conﬂicts where downward spirals of
accusation and counteraccusation can descend into aggression (Kennedy & Pronin 2008), the
improved trust and open-mindedness brought about by afﬁrmation holds promise for improved
relations.
Relationships. Relationships are so recursive and dynamic, and so intertwined with our sense of
self and well-being, that self-afﬁrmation interventions could make a difference in relational matters.
One of the strongest predictors of marital distress is defensiveness (Gottman 2011). In arguments,
unhappy couples often sink into a mire of reciprocal retaliation. Each person’s defensiveness evokes
a response in kind from the other, a downward spiral of tit-for-tat that is not only mathematically
predictable, consistent with a recursive cycle, but also predictive of early divorce. By contrast,
happy couples seem to escape these recursive cycles by parrying with a surprising moment of
afﬁrmation—a disarming compliment, an assurance of regard, a bit of shared humor. Indeed,
this pattern of disarming afﬁrmation proved among the strongest predictors of marital stability
and happiness (Gottman 2011). Such afﬁrming gestures seem especially beneﬁcial for people who
feel insecure in their relationships (Overall et al. 2013). Observational studies thus suggest that
reducing threat can lessen defensiveness and help couples resolve disagreements constructively
(see also Murray et al. 2006).
But can one experimentally introduce such a turning point in a relationship? Although the
body of research is not yet as voluminous as in education and health, studies suggest that the
answer is yes. In one study, a standard afﬁrmation reduced the defensive distancing strategies that
low-self-esteem people in long-term relationships use to regulate the risk of losing the affection
of their partner ( Jaremka et al. 2011). After a standard relationship threat induction—thinking
about personal traits they wanted to keep secret from their partner—afﬁrmed low-self-esteem participants proved less prone to derogate their partner and to contemplate relationship-sabotaging
behaviors such as starting arguments. Relational insecurity can also lead people to adopt a distant
but self-protective social demeanor, which can evoke rejection from others, deepening insecurity,
in a “self-fulﬁlling prophecy of social rejection” (Stinson et al. 2011, p. 1145). This negative spiral
can be interrupted, and a positive trajectory fostered, through values afﬁrmation. When afﬁrmed,
relationally insecure participants not only felt more conﬁdent in the regard of their family and
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

353

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

romantic partners, but also behaved with greater ease and positivity in an interaction with a stranger
several weeks later (Stinson et al. 2011).
Small positive shifts in how people construe their relationships can accumulate into enduring
changes in the narratives people craft about themselves and their relationships. These in turn can
promote warmer relationships, provide further afﬁrmation, and trigger a cycle of adaptive potential
that could have far-reaching effects on trust, well-being, and health (Cacioppo & Patrick 2008).
More modestly, such shifts may enable couples to break free of downward cycles. Such recursive
possibilities received support in a series of studies that tested a novel intervention (Marigold et al.
2007, 2010; see also Finkel et al. 2013). It aimed to encourage low-self-esteem participants to
draw self-afﬁrming meanings that, ordinarily, seem to elude them. College students in romantic
relationships were instructed to think of a time when their partner complimented them and, in a
subtly presumptive prompt, “explain why your partner admired you . . . what it meant to you and its
signiﬁcance for your relationship.” Relative to various control conditions, including one that asked
participants only to recall the compliment, the intervention led low-self-esteem participants to feel
more secure both in their relationship and about themselves. They were more conﬁdent in their
partner’s affection for them, more optimistic about the future of their relationship, and expressed
a more positive sense of personal worth. The intervention’s effect on relationship security and
quality persisted two weeks later. It also seemed to trigger a shift in the actual quality of participants’
relationships. At the end of two weeks, afﬁrmed participants reported that their partners had acted
more supportively and less critically toward them (Marigold et al. 2007). There was also some
evidence that their partners, in turn, saw them as less harsh and critical (Marigold et al. 2010).
The role of self-afﬁrmation processes in negotiations between real-world stakeholders and
among people in long-term, committed relationships will, we hope, prove an exciting area of
future research.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

IMPLICATIONS, QUALIFICATIONS, AND QUESTIONS
Values afﬁrmations can improve grades for students in a lasting way, open people up to threatening health information, reduce sympathetic nervous system activation during stressors, lead
overweight people to lose weight, increase patients’ compliance with treatment regimens, and
improve intergroup and interpersonal relations. Its versatility reﬂects the pervasiveness of psychological threat in social life. That brief writing exercises could have wide-ranging and long-term
beneﬁts may seem nonintuitive. But it is plausible when seen in context. For a person who feels
threatened, such as a minority student worried about the transition to middle school, an early
moment to manifest personal adequacy in the classroom can provide a psychological foothold. In
the context of a powerful social system such as school, designed to reinforce positive change, an
afﬁrmation can nudge a motivated but underperforming student away from failure in a lasting way.
Below we highlight the main ideas and implications of afﬁrmation and its utility as a centerpiece
in intervention.

Lessons
The self is both a barrier and a catalyst to social change. People want to learn, grow, be
healthy, and have rewarding relationships, but psychological threat can impede their ability to do
so. By helping people to situate threats into a narrative of global adequacy, affirmations turn down
the inner alarm of psychological threat. They thus lessen stress and self-protective defenses. Less
encumbered, people can make better use of the resources for performance and growth in their
social environment, in their relationships, and in themselves. Self-affirmation processes also
354

Cohen

·

Sherman

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

suggest when environmental stressors harm long-term health—when they threaten self-integrity
—and how interventions can lessen their cumulative costs (Keough & Markus 1998, Logel &
Cohen 2012, Miller et al. 2009).

Social psychological processes such as self-affirmation can propagate over time. The effects
of self-afﬁrmation interventions can persist for a long time. For example, effects on academic grades
and health outcomes have endured months and years after the commencement of the intervention
(e.g., Cohen et al. 2009, Harackiewicz et al. 2014, Logel & Cohen 2012, Miyake et al. 2010,
Ogedegbe et al. 2012, Sherman et al. 2013). Social psychological interventions such as afﬁrmation
can channel people onto a cycle of adaptive potential (Figure 1). A positive feedback loop between
the self-system and the social system carries the intervention’s effects through time to improve the
actor’s adaptive outcomes. More modestly, such interventions can interrupt a failure trajectory
(Wilson & Linville 1982).
Any experience can have persistent effects if it hitches a person to processes that propel
outcomes through time. Three principles explain how and when this occurs. Because of subjective
construal, an experience or intervention can bring about a lasting shift in perception. Self-afﬁrmed
individuals narrate adversity in a manner that better maintains the adequacy of the self and helps
them to adaptively engage with threats; this narrative can build on itself over time (Cohen et al.
2009, Cook et al. 2012, Sherman et al. 2013, Wilson 2011). For intervention effects to last, they
may need to bring about a long-term shift in subjective construal, the beliefs and schemas that
ﬁlter experience: an optimistic outlook, openness to challenge, and a self-construal as a person
who belongs and can succeed in new settings (for a discussion, see Ross & Nisbett 2011). Without
cultivating a lasting shift in the way people construe themselves or their social world, an intervention’s impact may fade after it ends, as people slide back to their old habits, seek the familiar, and
avoid challenges that would promote their continued growth (Caspi & Mofﬁtt 1995). For example,
Schulz & Hanusa (1978) found strong initial health beneﬁts of an intervention that increased
elderly nursing home residents’ sense of control over their lives. But after the intervention ended,
its beneﬁts vanished and treated residents’ health worsened. Residents may have come to construe
their greater control as temporary and dependent on an external agent rather than based in their
own agency. Other examples of disappointing interventions include the Cambridge-Somerville
youth program (McCord 1978; see Ross & Nisbett 2011), which provided substantial material and
social resources to at-risk juveniles. Such resources may be necessary for change to occur, but not
sufﬁcient.
Because of recursion, a process such as self-afﬁrmation can feed off its own consequences
(Cohen et al. 2009, Wilson 2011). Self-afﬁrmed individuals may achieve better outcomes, which
in turn can reafﬁrm them and promote better outcomes, in a cycle that sustains itself. Because
of the interaction between the person and the social environment, different processes can feed
off one another’s effects. Achieving better outcomes, self-afﬁrmed individuals may evoke positive
responses from teachers or friends, which in turn may evoke even better outcomes from them.
Their social world may change, and a new current of processes may then propel their advantage.
Afﬁrmed students may be placed in more demanding courses (see Cohen et al. 2009) and come to
befriend peers who set a norm for higher achievement (cf. Alwin et al. 1991). Not only may they be
shaped by their environment, but they may shape it; with fewer underperformers in a classroom,
the teacher might be better able to teach and reach more children. To paraphrase Caspi & Mofﬁtt
(1995), the person acts; other variables react; and the person reacts back in iterative interactions—a
cycle illustrated in the parable of the professional hockey player described previously.
An understanding of the interdependencies in a system can improve intervention. For instance, in one study variation, teachers were permitted to read their students’ afﬁrmation essays
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

355

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

(Bowen et al. 2012). Relative to a standard afﬁrmation and a control condition, teacher awareness
increased student grades. Teachers who read the essays may have felt more connected to their
students and treated them more attentively, thus fueling the recursive processes initiated by the
afﬁrmation in the student. An intervention need not introduce new processes but can instead act
as a triggering mechanism for existing ones.
Because of subjective construal, recursion, and interaction, the beneﬁts of an intervention can
carry forward through time and can accumulate. They can also widen in scope if they foster assets
that promote wide-ranging advantages (Masten & Cicchetti 2010). For example, an intervention
that bolstered students’ sense of belonging beneﬁted not only their grades but also their selfreported well-being and health three years later (Walton & Cohen 2011). But not all intervention
effects persist. And the system can respond in ways that undo intervention effects, if, for example, a
teacher raises the curve in response to improved grades (see Garcia & Cohen 2012, Heckman et al.
1998). To make an intervention effect stick, it is necessary to understand the key processes at work
in the system. When an intervention occurs at the right time and place and to the persons who
need it, what would otherwise be a transient happenstance, such as writing about an important
value, becomes a turning point.
Three methodological lessons follow from the importance of time, recursion, and interaction
(see Bronfenbrenner 1977, Lewin 1943). First, experimentally manipulated interventions can
reveal much about the recursive and interactive processes at work in a system (Lewin 1997/1948).
The long-term effects of an afﬁrmation on middle school minority students underscored the
recursive, interactive processes that turn early performance outcomes in school into enduring
advantages and disadvantages (Cohen et al. 2009, Sherman et al. 2013). Second, because recursive
processes take time to develop, a full understanding of them requires longitudinal research, not
just the freeze-frame of a short-term measure (Lewin 1943; e.g., Obradović et al. 2010). A single
assessment would have failed to capture the downward trend in performance and belonging
of middle school minority students and how these constructs ﬂuctuate together for them. A
wide-angle temporal lens also pinpoints the time and place a problem emerges and thus when and
with whom to intervene (e.g., Cook et al. 2011). Longitudinal research is also important because the
effect of an intervention may take time to occur (Pennebaker & Chung 2011, Schulz & Hanusa
1978) or persist longer than expected (Green & Shachar 2000). Third, because a process interacts
with the system in which it occurs, ﬁeld studies provide a necessary supplement to lab studies.
This is not simply because ﬁeld studies can test the robustness of a process, its signal in the noise
of the real world. It is because social systems contain variables that interact with the process and
affect its manifestation (Paluck 2009). For example, a school may transform a psychological effect
into a structural reality—as when self-afﬁrmed children earn higher grades and are then admitted
into more advanced courses (Cohen et al. 2009). “Rigor is not reductionism” sums up these
methodological implications.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

New trajectories can transform the psychology of the actor. Over time the cumulative advantages of an intervention or formative experience can transform the actor. For instance, months
after the intervention had commenced, afﬁrmed minority students had a more robust identity as a
person who belongs in school and were resilient to ongoing threats (Cohen et al. 2009, Cook et al.
2012, Sherman et al. 2013; see also Walton & Cohen 2011). Afﬁrmed students experienced many
of the same stressors and slights as others but without the detrimental impact that nonafﬁrmed
students experienced. Their experiences throughout the school year made the afﬁrmed and
nonafﬁrmed increasingly dissimilar, as their felt belonging in school diverged with time (Cook
et al. 2012). Because afﬁrmed students lived in a subjectively less threatening world, they may have
been more emboldened to seize opportunities to transform their circumstances. Self-afﬁrmed
children took more advanced courses in math, which suggests that they put themselves on a
356

Cohen

·

Sherman

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

positive trajectory (Cohen et al. 2009; see also Yeager & Walton 2011). That agents can initiate
their own trajectories, and transform themselves in the process, seems key to understanding how
and when early inﬂuences lead to divergent outcomes. For example, people place themselves
in social environments—friendships, marriages, jobs—that can reinforce their beliefs, values,
and identity for a lifetime (Alwin et al. 1991, Caspi & Mofﬁtt 1995). A continuity between
humans and lower animals is suggested by a study with genetically identical mice in which small
early differences in roaming activity became self-reinforcing, compounding over time into large
differences in behavior and brain structure (Freund et al. 2013). Cumulative consequences of small
initial differences, whether due to chance, personality, or an intervention, can transform the actor.
Timing matters. A major determinant of the effectiveness of an intervention is timeliness. Any
resource can provide a bridge to better outcomes if timed to key transitions and choice points (Elder
1998; see also Bronfenbrenner 1977). The importance of timeliness is evident even at the small
temporal scale of the laboratory study. Afﬁrmations reduced defensiveness when they occurred
either before the presentation of threatening information or soon after. But once participants had
engaged in defensive rationalization, the afﬁrmation could not undo it (Critcher et al. 2010; see
also Briñol et al. 2007). In some respects, a social psychological intervention is like an engineered
coincidence. It places in close proximity three events that otherwise might seldom co-occur: a
positive inﬂuence, a challenge, and an immediate chance to change. A smoker is afﬁrmed, receives
threatening health information, then has the opportunity to assert a commitment to quit.
Over large time scales, early outcomes matter more because their consequences can compound
(Cohen et al. 2009, Sherman et al. 2013, Wilson 2011). Not only can early effects magnify in
recursive loops, but a small effect can add up into a large one if it repeatedly recurs. Just as small
but consistent advantages in baseball batting averages compound into large differences in success
over a season or career, a small but consistent advantage in student test performance will compound
into a sizable increase in cumulative GPA (Abelson 1985, Cohen et al. 2006). In a ﬁeld experiment,
afﬁrmation beneﬁted minority students’ classroom grades more if it took place in the ﬁrst week
of school, before any drop in performance and its ensuing psychological toll, than if it took place
at the standard time a few weeks later (Cook et al. 2012). Strikingly, the effect of early timing
on ﬁrst-term class grades equaled the effect of the presence versus absence of the intervention in
previous research (Cohen et al. 2006). The beginning of a process, like the beginning of a story,
sets the stage for what follows and marks an ideal time to intervene.
Interventions such as afﬁrmation may also have larger beneﬁts if timed to the onset of key
developmental transitions. Adolescence, the ascension to college, and entry into gateway courses
represent sensitive periods that are often threatening, unpredictable, and stressful—an opportune
circumstance for an afﬁrmation. People are often impressionable at such transitions, and their
experiences in them can ﬁx the starting point of a recursive process (see Alwin et al. 1991, Elder
1998). As life-course theorists have noted, the outcome of an early life transition can give rise to
a chain of advantages or disadvantages that shapes the outcomes of later transitions (Elder 1998).
Finally, early experiences anchor people’s expectations for threat or safety in an environment
(Miller et al. 2009, Worthman et al. 2010). Once formed, such foundational beliefs can ﬁlter
subsequent experience and prove difﬁcult to undo (cf. Ross & Nisbett 2011). When African
Americans performed poorly early in the school year, they suffered a drop in their sense of academic
belonging and did not recoup it even if their grades later improved (Cook et al. 2012). Afﬁrmed
African Americans, however, were buffered against the effects of early adversity. Transitions thus
represent both points of vulnerability and windows of opportunity (Anderson 2003). It is easier to
control a process in its germinal stages. But once a process has accumulated its full consequences,
it may have a momentum that is hard to halt.
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

357

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Interventions are more impactful if they take into account the psychological landscape of
social problems. Social problems have a psychological side that, if not addressed, will limit the
effectiveness of reforms. Improvements in school curriculum may produce little gain if students
ﬁnd the classroom threatening rather than safe. Health campaigns may yield disappointing results
if they arouse defensiveness. A sound peace proposal could meet with rejection if adversaries stake
their identity on prevailing over the other side. To the extent that ﬁnancial distress can imprint
on children a view of the world as threatening and requiring vigilance, interventions later in life
may need to assure them that their school or work environment is a safe place where they belong
and good things eventually happen (Chen & Miller 2012, Harackiewicz et al. 2014).
Not only can psychological threat suppress the beneﬁts of structural reforms and institutions.
It can also hide the successful impacts that they have already achieved. When social psychological
interventions raise the performance of minority undergraduates, this suggests that the collegiate
programs that promoted their recruitment and retention were successful, as the performance of
students begins to reﬂect their acquired aptitude (Steele 2010, Walton & Spencer 2009). Together,
structural reforms and psychological interventions can synergize each other’s effects and reduce
the gap between where people are and what they can achieve in a variety of domains (Garcia &
Cohen 2012, Yeager & Walton 2011).

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

Moderators and Boundary Conditions
Social psychological interventions like afﬁrmation are not panaceas but catalysts (Yeager & Walton
2011). Afﬁrmation lifts a barrier, psychological threat, that would otherwise block the impact
of positive forces in the person or the situation. Indeed, in all the problem domains discussed,
psychological threat stands in tension with hidden positive forces, such as the desire and ability
to learn, to be healthy, and to have rewarding relationships. By tipping the balance of forces,
afﬁrmation unleashes “previously unrealized behavioral potentials,” especially for those on the
cusp of change (Bronfenbrenner 1977, p. 528). The forces in tension are key. As with almost any
intervention, the effectiveness of afﬁrmation thus depends on prior conditions or moderators.
Resources for growth. For afﬁrmation to afford beneﬁts, there must be forces to impel improvement once psychological threat is lifted. Afﬁrmation will afford little beneﬁt if the motivation and
ability to improve are absent. Without resources for growth, afﬁrmation may even trigger disengagement (see Vohs & Schmeichel 2013). These resources may either reside latent in the person
(e.g., cognitive ability inhibited by stress) or be scaffolded by the environment (e.g., information
about health risk behavior). Intervention “cocktails” that combine afﬁrmation with programs to
boost motivation and skills may thus yield the greatest beneﬁt. In a sense, the effect of afﬁrmation
reveals less about its intrinsic power and more about the potentials untapped in a person or an
environment. Likewise, beneﬁts will tend to persist more in contexts that reinforce the change.
Without an attentive teacher, a partner in peace, or an interested romantic partner, an initial improvement will be like a spark without kindling. Conversely, even a small improvement can sum
into large consequences if the environment repeatedly reinforces the desired behavior, as many
institutions are designed to do. To use an evolutionary analogy, a small increase in the length of
a ﬁnch’s beak may seem trivial, but it is not if it enables the ﬁnch to eat more seeds.
Situational- and individual-based differences in psychological threat. For afﬁrmations to
yield beneﬁt, psychological threat must be a signiﬁcant impediment to improvement. In the
absence of threat, afﬁrmation has different effects. It may increase self-conﬁdence and resistance to change (Briñol et al. 2007). In contexts where psychological threat contributes little to
358

Cohen

·

Sherman

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

outcomes relative to other factors such as a dysfunctional school or neighborhood violence, little
beneﬁt of the standard afﬁrmation would be expected. Moreover, most studies focus on domains
where self-protective responses are harmful (e.g., resisting health information) and afﬁrmation
thus prompts a more adaptive response. But sometimes threat and defensiveness foster adaptive
outcomes (e.g., Rokeach 1973, Stone et al. 1994). In such cases afﬁrmation should lead to negative
effects. When the salient identity was being an open-minded negotiator, afﬁrmation led people to
be more closed-minded (Cohen et al. 2007). Afﬁrmation is a tool to unleash potentials suppressed
by threat, positive or negative.
At the dispositional level, people who are under threat beneﬁt most from afﬁrmation. One of
the best ways to make predictions about the effect of afﬁrmation is to identify whether a threat
response occurs at baseline. People with low self-esteem and those who feel insecure in their relationships seem at particular risk. So do people who experience social identity threat in a setting
(Steele 2010). But dispositional moderators may vary by context. Low-self-esteem participants
act more defensive in some contexts ( Jaremka et al. 2011), whereas high-self-esteem people act
more defensive in others (Landau & Greenberg 2006; see also Aronson 1969). Another key source
of individual differences in responsiveness to afﬁrmation is the ability to generate self-afﬁrming
meanings spontaneously (see Pietersma & Dijkstra 2012). High-self-esteem people seem to do this
more readily in romantic relationships and thus beneﬁt less from afﬁrmation (Marigold et al. 2007).
More generally, the ability to create afﬁrming events, reminders, or meanings seems to contribute
to well-being and health. For instance, among adolescents burdened with household responsibilities, those who saw themselves as fulﬁlling valued social roles such as “good son or daughter” had
lower levels of C-reactive protein and other markers of cardiovascular risk (Fuligni et al. 2009).
Types of values and affirmations. Because afﬁrmations work, in part, by putting a threat in
the context of the big picture, afﬁrmations that focus people on narrow self-centered values (e.g.,
power, status) or on sources of integrity conditional on meeting external standards (e.g., approval)
tend to be less effective than afﬁrmations that focus people on values that transcend themselves
(e.g., compassion, service to others) or on less conditional sources of integrity (e.g., being loved)
(Burson et al. 2012, Schimel et al. 2004). Indeed, many afﬁrmation essays focus on unconditional
sources of integrity, often from social relationships (Crocker et al. 2008, Shnabel et al. 2013). As
one middle school student wrote, “I can’t live without [my family]. My friends, I am my real self
around them . . . I can be silly . . . and they don’t care, they accept me for who I am” (Table 1).
Although speculative, one reason for the effectiveness of afﬁrmation interventions is that people
may seldom spontaneously afﬁrm themselves in this way at moments of threat. Instead they may
adopt a tunnel-vision focus on the threat and lose sight of what really matters. They may try to
afﬁrm themselves in the same domain as the threat, which can increase defensiveness (Blanton
et al. 1997, Sivanathan et al. 2008), or seek afﬁrmation in extrinsic areas such as ﬁnancial success
and status rather than in the intrinsic sources of integrity cultivated by values afﬁrmations (Schimel
et al. 2004; see also Nickerson et al. 2003).
Awareness of self-affirmation processes. As with many interventions, subtlety may be important to the effectiveness of afﬁrmation (Sherman et al. 2009; see also Robinson 2010, Yeager &
Walton 2011). For example, students are unaware that the “writing exercises” that teachers provide
them are intended to reduce stress and social identity threat. If they were aware of the purpose,
they might see the afﬁrmation as a means to an end, robbing it of its intrinsic appeal. Unlike many
interventions, afﬁrmation is also “wise” in the sense that it does not suggest to the beneﬁciaries
that they are being singled out as in need of help, a message that can be threatening (Cohen et al.
1999, Steele 2010, Yeager et al. 2014). Indeed, when participants are told that the afﬁrmation is
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

359

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

expected to beneﬁt them, or simply led to see a connection between it and the outcome measure,
its impact decreases (Sherman et al. 2009, Silverman et al. 2012). However, the beneﬁts of selfafﬁrmation can be restored even when people are aware of its expected impact if they are given a
choice about whether to afﬁrm or not (Silverman et al. 2012). When given a choice, people may
construe the writing exercise not as a threatening act of control or stigmatization but rather as a
tool to achieve agency over their well-being.
Afﬁrmation interventions are not only subtle but also indirect. People often afﬁrm themselves
on values remote from the threatening domain rather than directly relevant to it. As self-afﬁrmation
theory suggests, a threat derives its power from the challenge it poses to global self-integrity (Steele
1988). For this reason, interventions need not resolve a speciﬁc threat to remedy its effects. People
can ﬁnd anchorage for self-integrity in domains beyond the threat. In a variety of areas, in fact,
indirect approaches to a behavioral or psychological problem seem to work as well as, and sometimes even better than, frontal assaults on it. From increasing happiness to reducing loneliness and
depression, from preventing teen pregnancy and academic failure to reducing childhood obesity,
many successful interventions do not directly confront the problem. Instead, they bring people together around positive, value-relevant activities such as meditation, extracurricular activities, and
volunteer work (Creswell et al. 2012, Lyubomirsky & Della Porta 2010, Robinson 2010, Schreier
et al. 2013, Wilson 2011). Although these activities do not directly address the difﬁculty, they help
to remedy it nonetheless.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

Connections With Other Research Areas
Resilience. One connection concerns the adaptive systems that foster human resilience. The outcomes in self-afﬁrmation research overlap with the outcomes in resiliency research—stress reactivity, information processing, and self-regulation. The core areas typically afﬁrmed—relationships,
family, and spiritual and religious values—dovetail with the hot spots for intervention in resilience
research (Masten & Obradović 2006). Afﬁrmation also promotes adaptive processes that resemble
the strategies of the resilient. These include constructively orienting to errors (Legault et al. 2012),
regulating negative emotions while maintaining a focus on big-picture goals (Creswell et al. 2005,
Schmeichel & Vohs 2009), which is similar to a “shift-and-persist” strategy that characterizes
people resilient to early adversity (Chen & Miller 2012), and marshaling cognitive reappraisal
processes, in which higher cortical regions of the brain are recruited to downregulate threat and
fear (see Ochsner et al. 2002). With time, these adaptive tendencies may give rise to interpersonal
assets, as suggested by research on the resilient. With negative emotions kept at bay, the resilient
tend to be good-natured rather than ill-tempered and defensive. This can help them retain the
support of family, friends, and coworkers through the lifespan (Caspi & Mofﬁtt 1995,
Lyubomirsky & Della Porta 2010) and attract the interest of a role model (Chen & Miller 2012).
Psychological assets beget social assets.
In a study of men and women resilient to the stresses of the Great Depression, Elder (1974) saw
in them an “adaptive, competent self” (p. 249). Rather than being preoccupied with “matters of
self-defense,” “inclined to withdraw in adverse situations, and defensive,” the resilient had
acquired assets that echo the effects of self-afﬁrmation (Elder 1974, pp. 247, 249): a sense of
“personal worth . . . inner security” (p. 11), “an active coping orientation to the environment,” an
ability to control stress, a “capacity for sustaining effort and relationships, even in the face of
obstacles,” “ﬂexibility in the ability to learn and grow from mistakes,” “the resilience to rise above
setbacks,” and a faith in their ability to adapt adequately to changing circumstances (p. 247). By
meeting adversity, these individuals became better prepared for new challenges, in a cycle of
adaptive potential (Elder 1974).
360

Cohen

·

Sherman

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Social ties. Research on self-afﬁrmation and research on social ties can inform each other. Some
of the effects of self-afﬁrmation may arise from the protective effects of subjective connectedness
(Cacioppo & Patrick 2008, Taylor 2007). Much “self ” afﬁrmation seems to be “social” afﬁrmation.
Most people choose to afﬁrm themselves in the domain of relationships (e.g., Creswell et al. 2007).
They seem better buffered when they write about why their values make them closer to others (e.g.,
“I feel part of a team when I play music with my band”) (Shnabel et al. 2013) and focus on their
positive feelings for others (Crocker et al. 2008). At ﬁrst glance, the social aspect of afﬁrmation
seems contrary to a motive for self-integrity. However, the self draws its integrity from the social
world (Leary 2005). As Solomon Asch (1954) wrote, “The ego is not dedicated solely to its own
enhancement . . . [but] needs and wants to be concerned with its surroundings, to bind itself to
others, and to work with them” (p. 320).
Social ties may derive some of their beneﬁt from self-afﬁrmation processes. For example, social
support beneﬁts mental health not only because it helps people to manage stressors (Taylor 2007)
but also because it provides opportunities to participate in pleasurable, value-laden activities and
conversations, as when two music students talk about their favorite band (Lakey & Orehek 2011).
Though they do not remedy a speciﬁc stressor, these acts may bolster people’s sense of global
adequacy and thus their well-being and resiliency. In one intriguing study, writers lived longer if
their autobiographies referred to a greater number of positive social roles (e.g., mother, neighbor,
colleague) (Pressman & Cohen 2007). From a self-afﬁrmation perspective, reference to a broader
range of social roles in one’s life story reﬂects a broader pool of afﬁrmational resources to draw
on in difﬁcult times.
Links to other interventions. Afﬁrmation may be an invisible component of successful interventions and practices in a variety of disciplines. Some forms of behavioral activation therapy,
effective in treating depression, have patients articulate their values and set concrete behavioral
goals for living them out (e.g., for the value of good parenting, a goal might be “taking a walk
with my daughter once a week”), breaking ruminative cycles (Lejuez et al. 2001). In motivational
interviewing, a clinical intervention to change health behavior, counselors encourage clients to
afﬁrm their self-identiﬁed goals and values (Ehret et al. 2014). Effective well-being interventions
have people participate in value-relevant activities such as practicing random acts of kindness
(Lyubomirsky & Della Porta 2010). The positive impact of volunteer work on adolescents’ health
and school achievement may arise from the chance it gives teenagers to craft an identity based
on constructive social values (Schreier et al. 2013; see also Allen & Philliber 2001, Wilson 2011).
Likewise, expressive writing interventions (Pennebaker & Chung 2011) and narratives of personal
agency (Adler 2012) can help people salvage from hardship a sense of purpose and global adequacy.
Imaginary acts of self-transformation can bolster a sense of adequacy and thus help people to cope
with challenging circumstances. For example, among preschool children, wearing a Superman
cape tripled the number who sacriﬁced a short-term pleasure for the sake of obtaining a more
prized reward later (Karniol et al. 2011, study 1). By cognitively transforming into Superman, children could envision themselves as a competent agent, able to manage a difﬁcult situation, and they
could thus perform in a way that better achieved their goal. Finally, the motive for self-integrity
can be channeled into socially constructive behavior. In one intervention, ofﬁcial voter turnout
increased with a short pre-election survey that presented the act of voting as an afﬁrmation of identity (e.g., “How important is it to you to be a voter in tomorrow’s election?”) rather than an isolated
behavior (e.g., “How important is it to you to vote in tomorrow’s election?”) (Bryan et al. 2011).
More generally, afﬁrmation is not simply a paper-and-pencil manipulation but rather an act
that manifests one’s adequacy. The theoretical principles behind afﬁrmation, not any speciﬁc
practice, is what we hope people take from this review and use to guide efforts at purposeful
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

361

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

change. These principles seem harnessed in a variety of success stories. Anecdotally, teachers
report that having underprivileged children write about their troubles and relate them to larger
social values improves their engagement with school (Freedom Writ. & Gruwell 1999). Similarly,
expert tutors, among the most effective of educational “interventions,” often begin the tutoring
session by asking students about their hobbies, friends, and families. The tutors tune in to students’
emotional state, and they provide subtle but well-timed gestures of encouragement that interrupt
downward spirals of demoralization and establish a psychological safety zone that helps children
confront challenges (Lepper & Woolverton 2001). Likewise, many effective doctors see their
patients as whole people with goals and lives, not bodies with disease (Verghese et al. 2011). Indeed,
one psychiatric intervention reduced the number of suicide reattempts simply by sending former
patients timely postcards inquiring into their well-being (see Carter et al. 2013). To an outsider,
such practices can seem insigniﬁcant at best and inefﬁcient at worst. But from the perspective of
people under threat, a self-afﬁrming act can be a timely sign of their adequacy in the wider world.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

CONCLUSION
Self-afﬁrmation theory began with the question of how people cope with threats to the self (Steele
1988). It has spurred a more general account of the change process: how and when people adapt
adequately to threatening circumstances, how interventions can foster this adaptation, and when
these new adaptations stick. A developmentally informed social psychology addresses these topics
and speaks to the problem of stability and change. Although social psychology has long demonstrated the malleability of human behavior (Ross & Nisbett 2011), other traditions have shown
the striking continuity of personality over time (e.g., Caspi et al. 1987, Caspi & Mofﬁtt 1995). For
example, the ﬁnding that children’s performance on laboratory self-control tasks can be boosted
by situational intervention (e.g., Karniol et al. 2011) seems to clash with the ﬁnding that childhood
variation on such self-control measures predicts health, wealth, employment, and crime decades
later (Mofﬁtt et al. 2011). The contradiction resolves itself when we realize that “persistent doesn’t
equal permanent” (Sapolsky 2010, p. xxvi). Persistent can be fragile. Outcomes that seem set in
stone may in fact be the repeating output of dynamic processes. At timely moments the processes
can be redirected to prompt lasting adaptive change (Wilson 2011).
In Raymond Carver’s story, A Small, Good Thing, a baker gives delicious cinnamon rolls to a
couple whose child has just died (Carver 1989). The baker says to the stricken couple, “Eating is
a small, good thing in a time like this.” Of course, his gift to them is not so small after all, in part
because it is given at precisely the right moment. A little help with a ﬁnancial aid form for college,
some health advice from a friend, a word of encouragement from a mentor, a conversation with
a stranger, and other seemingly random events can change a life and even the course of history.
But such events need not be left to chance alone. Social psychology can help locate the right place
and the right time for a small, good thing to happen.

FUTURE ISSUES
1. Some people may afﬁrm themselves spontaneously. Indeed, some people try to turn
almost any writing exercise into a self-afﬁrming one. What are the effects of these selfgenerated afﬁrmations? How do they differ from the experimentally induced afﬁrmations?
And how can researchers capture the spontaneous afﬁrmation process and its effects in
everyday life?

362

Cohen

·

Sherman

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

2. Afﬁrmations tend to yield concentrated rather than diffuse effects, because they typically
beneﬁt the people for whom a threat in a given context is most salient and acute. Understanding this heterogeneity is important, as it can help to “reverse engineer” which
individuals and groups are most under threat in a given setting.
3. Insofar as the beneﬁts of values afﬁrmation and other social psychological interventions
result from carefully conducted research by trained experimental social psychologists,
how best should practitioners, policy makers, and researchers work together to scale
up such interventions? This seems a particularly challenging issue given that attention to local conditions, personalization of the intervention materials, considerations
of timing and other theoretical principles can be difﬁcult to maintain in the scaling-up
process.
4. Jamie Pennebaker and Cindy Chung (2011) wrote, “If you are expecting a clean and
simple explanation for the effectiveness of writing, we have some very bad news: There is
no single reason that explains it” (p. 426). The same notion applies to the effects of selfafﬁrmations. Yet some lessons have emerged related to how and when self-afﬁrmation
interventions prompt lasting change. Future research should examine a range of mechanisms and mediators at different levels of analysis, including the neural activity of the
afﬁrmed mind, the content of the writing exercises, and the recursive processes and feedback mechanisms that afﬁrmation catalyzes. Longitudinal experiments will be particularly
useful to capture the multiple processes that propagate effects over time.

DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The authors are not aware of any afﬁliations, memberships, funding, or ﬁnancial holdings that
might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Sarah Wert, Heejung Kim, Kevin Binning, Stephanie Reeves, and Amy Petermann for
assistance and thoughtful comments on earlier drafts, and Julio Garcia, Claude Steele, Gregory
Walton, David Yeager, Lee Ross, Emily Pronin, David Creswell, Kody Manke, and Shannon
Brady for helpful discussions. Preparation of this manuscript was supported by grants NSF DRL1109548 and NIH 5R01HD055342-04 to G.L.C.

LITERATURE CITED
Abelson RP. 1985. A variance explanation paradox: when a little is a lot. Psychol. Bull. 97:129–33
Addona V, Yates PA. 2010. A closer look at the relative age effect in the National Hockey League. J. Quant.
Anal. Sports 6(Artic. 9):1–17
Adler JM. 2012. Living into the story: agency and coherence in a longitudinal study of narrative identity
development and mental health over the course of psychotherapy. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 102:367–89
Allen JP, Philliber S. 2001. Who beneﬁts most from a broadly targeted prevention program? Differential
efﬁcacy across populations in the Teen Outreach Program. J. Community Psychol. 29:637–55
Alwin DF, Cohen RL, Necomb TM. 1991. Political Attitudes Over the Life Span: The Bennington Women After
Fifty Years. Madison: Univ. Wis. Press
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

363

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Anderson SL. 2003. Trajectories of brain development: point of vulnerability or window of opportunity.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 27:3–18
Armitage CJ, Harris PR, Arden MA. 2011. Evidence that self-afﬁrmation reduces alcohol consumption: randomized exploratory trial with a new, brief means of self-afﬁrming. Health Psychol. 30:633–41
Armitage CJ, Harris PR, Hepton G, Napper L. 2008. Self-afﬁrmation increases acceptance of health-risk
information among UK adult smokers with low socioeconomic status. Psychol. Addict. Behav. 22:88–95
Armor DA, Sackett AM. 2006. Accuracy, error, and bias in predictions for real versus hypothetical events.
J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 91:583–600
Aronson E. 1969. The theory of cognitive dissonance: a current perspective. In Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology, ed. L Berkowitz, 4:1–34. New York: Academic
Aronson J, Cohen GL, Nail PR. 1999. Self-afﬁrmation theory: an update and appraisal. In Cognitive Dissonance:
Progress on a Pivotal Theory in Social Psychology, ed. E Harmon-Jones, J Mills, pp. 127–48. Washington,
DC: Am. Psychol. Assoc.
Asch S. 1954. Social Psychology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall
Baumeister RF, Smart I, Boden JM. 1996. Relation of threatened egotism to violence and aggression: the dark
side of high self-esteem. Psychol. Rev. 103:5–33
Binning KR, Sherman DK, Cohen GL, Heitland K. 2010. Seeing the other side: reducing political partisanship
via self-afﬁrmation in the 2008 presidential election. Anal. Soc. Issues Public Policy 10:276–92
Blanton H, Cooper J, Skurnik I, Aronson J. 1997. When bad things happen to good feedback: exacerbating
the need for self-justiﬁcation through self-afﬁrmation. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 23:684–92
Bowen NK, Wegmann KM, Webber KC. 2013. Enhancing a brief writing intervention to combat stereotype
threat among middle-school students. J. Educ. Psychol. 105:427–35
Briñol P, Petty RE, Gallardo I, DeMarree KG. 2007. The effect of self-afﬁrmation in non-threatening persuasion domains: timing affects the process. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 33:1533–46
Bronfenbrenner U. 1977. Toward an experimental ecology of human development. Am. Psychol. 32:513–31
Bryan CJ, Walton GM, Rogers T, Dweck CS. 2011. Motivating voter turnout by invoking the self. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 108:12653–56
Bugental DB, Ellerson PC, Lin EK, Rainey B, Kokotovic A, O’Hara N. 2002. A cognitive approach to child
abuse prevention. J. Fam. Psychol. 16:243–58
Burson A, Crocker J, Mischkowski D. 2012. Two types of value-afﬁrmation: implications for self-control
following social exclusion. Soc. Psychol. Personal. Sci. 3:510–16
Cacioppo JT, Patrick W. 2008. Loneliness: Human Nature and the Need for Social Connection. New York: Norton
Carter GL, Clover K, Whyte IM, Dawson AH, D’Este C. 2013. Postcards from the EDge: 5-year outcomes
of a randomised controlled trial for hospital-treated self-poisoning. Br. J. Psychiatry 202:372–80
Carver R. 1989. A small, good thing. In Where I’m Calling From. New York: Random House
Caspi A, Elder GH, Bem DJ. 1987. Moving against the world: life-course patterns of explosive children. Dev.
Psychol. 23:308–13
Caspi A, Mofﬁtt TE. 1995. The continuity of maladaptive behavior: from description to understanding in the
study of antisocial behavior. In Developmental Psychopathology Vol. 2: Risk, Disorder, and Adaptation. Wiley
Series on Personality Processes, ed. D Cicchetti, DJ Cohen, pp. 472–511. Oxford, UK: Wiley
Čehajić-Clancy S, Effron DA, Halperin E, Liberman V, Ross LD. 2011. Afﬁrmation, acknowledgment of
in-group responsibility, group-based guilt, and support for reparative measures. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol.
101:256–70
Cent. Disease Control Prev. (CDC). Smoking and Tobacco Use. Atlanta, GA: CDC. http://www.cdc.
gov/tobacco/data_statistics/fact_sheets/fast_facts/index.htm
Chen E, Miller GE. 2012. “Shift-and-persist” strategies: why low socioeconomic status isn’t always bad for
health. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 7:135–58
Cohen D, Nisbett RE, Bowdle BF, Schwarz N. 1996. Insult, aggression, and the southern culture of honor:
an “experimental ethnography.” J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 70:945–60
Cohen GL. 2012. Identity, ideology, and bias. In Ideology, Psychology, and Law, ed. J Hanson, pp. 385–403.
New York: Oxford Univ. Press
Cohen GL, Garcia J. 2008. Identity, belonging, and achievement: a model, interventions, implications. Curr.
Dir. Psychol. Sci. 17:365–69

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

364

Cohen

·

Sherman

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Cohen GL, Garcia J, Apfel N, Master A. 2006. Reducing the racial achievement gap: a social-psychological
intervention. Science 313:1307–10
Cohen GL, Garcia J, Purdie-Vaughns V, Apfel N, Brzustoski P. 2009. Recursive processes in self-afﬁrmation:
intervening to close the minority achievement gap. Science 324:400–3
Cohen GL, Purdie-Vaughns V, Garcia J. 2012. An identity threat perspective on intervention. In Stereotype
Threat: Theory, Process, and Application, ed. M Inzlichtt, T Schmader, pp. 280–96. New York: Oxford Univ.
Press
Cohen GL, Sherman DK, Bastardi A, Hsu L, McGoey M, Ross L. 2007. Bridging the partisan divide: selfafﬁrmation reduces ideological closed-mindedness and inﬂexibility in negotiation. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol.
93:415–30
Cohen GL, Steele CM, Ross LD. 1999. The mentor’s dilemma: providing critical feedback across the racial
divide. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 25:1302–18
Cook JE, Purdie-Vaughns V, Garcia J, Cohen GL. 2012. Chronic threat and contingent belonging: protective
beneﬁts of values afﬁrmation on identity development. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 102:479–96
Cornil Y, Chandon P. 2013. From fan to fat? Vicarious losing increases unhealthy eating, but selfafﬁrmation is an effective remedy. Psychol. Sci. In press. http://pss.sagepub.com/content/early/
2013/08/07/0956797613481232.long. doi:10.1177/0956797613481232
Correll J, Spencer SJ, Zanna MP. 2004. An afﬁrmed self and an open mind: self-afﬁrmation and sensitivity to
argument strength. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 40:350–56
Creswell JD, Dutcher JM, Klein WM, Harris PR, Levine JM. 2013. Self-afﬁrmation improves problem-solving
under stress. PLoS ONE 8:e62593
Creswell JD, Irwin MR, Burklund LJ, Lieberman MD, Arevalo JM, et al. 2012. Mindfulness-based stress
reduction training reduces loneliness and pro-inﬂammatory gene expression in older adults: a small
randomized controlled trial. Brain Behav. Immunol. 26:1095–101
Creswell JD, Lam S, Stanton AL, Taylor SE, Bower JE, Sherman DK. 2007. Does self-afﬁrmation, cognitive
processing, or discovery of meaning explain cancer-related health beneﬁts of expressive writing? Personal.
Soc. Psychol. Bull. 33:238–50
Creswell JD, Welch W, Taylor SE, Sherman D, Gruenewald T, Mann T. 2005. Afﬁrmation of personal values
buffers neuroendocrine and psychological stress responses. Psychol. Sci. 16:846–51
Critcher CR, Dunning D, Armor DA. 2010. When self-afﬁrmations reduce defensiveness: timing is key.
Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 36:947–59
Crocker J, Niiya Y, Mischkowski D. 2008. Why does writing about important values reduce defensiveness?
Self-afﬁrmation and the role of positive, other-directed feelings. Psychol. Sci. 19:740–47
Dillard AJ, McCaul KD, Magnan RE. 2005. Why is such a smart person like you smoking? Using selfafﬁrmation to reduce defensiveness to cigarette warning labels. J. Appl. Biobehav. Res. 10:165–82
Doosje BE, Branscombe NR, Spears R, Manstead AS. 2006. Antecedents and consequences of group-based
guilt: the effects of ingroup identiﬁcation. Group Process. Intergr. Relat. 9:325–38
Dunning D. 2005. Self-Insight: Roadblocks and Detours on the Path to Knowing Thyself. New York: Psychol. Press
Dweck CS. 2008. Can personality be changed? The role of beliefs in personality and change. Curr. Dir. Psychol.
Sci. 17:391–94
Eccles J, Lord S, Midgley C. 1991. What are we doing to early adolescents? The impact of educational contexts
on early adolescents. Am. Educ. J. 99:521–42
Ehret PJ, LaBrie JW, Santerre C, Sherman DK. 2014. Self-afﬁrmation and motivational interviewing: integrating perspectives to reduce resistance and increase efﬁcacy of alcohol interventions. Health Psychol.
Rev. In press
Elder GH Jr. 1974. Children of the Great Depression: Social Change in Life Experience. Chicago: Univ. Chicago
Press
Elder GH. 1977. Family history and the life course. J. Fam. Hist. 2:279–304
Elder GH. 1998. The life course as developmental theory. Child Dev. 69:1–12
Epton T, Harris PR. 2008. Self-afﬁrmation promotes health behavior change. Health Psychol. 27:746–52
Finkel EJ, Slotter EB, Luchies LB, Walton GM, Gross JJ. 2013. A brief intervention to promote conﬂict
reappraisal preserves marital quality over time. Psychol. Sci. 24:1595–601
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

365

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Freedman JL, Fraser SC. 1966. Compliance without pressure: the foot-in-the-door technique. J. Personal. Soc.
Psychol. 4:195–202
Freedom Writers, Gruwell E. 1999. The Freedom Writers Diary: How a Teacher and 150 Teens Used Writing to
Change Themselves and the World Around Them. New York: Broadway Books
Freund J, Brandmaier AM, Lewejohann L, Kirste I, Kritzler M, et al. 2013. Emergence of individuality in
genetically identical mice. Science 340:756–59
Fry RB, Prentice-Dunn S. 2005. Effects of coping information and value afﬁrmation on responses to perceived
health threat. Health Comm. 17:133–47
Fuligni AJ, Telzer EH, Bower J, Cole SW, Kiang L, Irwin MR. 2009. A preliminary study of daily interpersonal
stress and C-reactive protein levels among adolescents from Latin American and European backgrounds.
Psychosom. Med. 71:329–33
Garcia J, Cohen GL. 2012. A social psychological approach to educational intervention. In Behavioral Foundations of Policy, ed. E Shaﬁr, pp. 329–50. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press
Gilbert DT, Pinel EC, Wilson TD, Blumberg SJ, Wheatley TP. 1998. Immune neglect: a source of durability
bias in affective forecasting. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 75:617–38
Gladwell M. 2008. Outliers: The Story of Success. New York: Little, Brown
Gollwitzer PM, Sheeran P. 2006. Implementation intentions and goal achievement: a meta-analysis of effects
and processes. Adv. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 38:69–119
Gottman JM. 2011. The Science of Trust: Emotional Attunement for Couples. New York: Norton
Green D, Shachar R. 2000. Habit formation and political behavior: evidence of consuetude in voter turnout.
Br. J. Polit. Sci. 30:561–73
Greenberg J, Solomon S, Pyszczynski T. 1997. Terror management theory of self-esteem and cultural worldviews: empirical assessments and conceptual reﬁnements. In Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, ed.
MP Zanna, 29:61–139. Orlando, FL: Academic
Greenwald AG. 1980. The totalitarian ego: fabrication and revision of personal history. Am. Psychol. 35:603–18
Grifﬁn DW, Harris PR. 2011. Calibrating the response to health warnings limiting both overreaction and
underreaction with self-afﬁrmation. Psychol. Sci. 22:572–78
Grubb WN. 2009. The Money Myth: School Resources, Outcomes, and Equity. New York: Sage Found.
Haines J, Neumark-Sztainer D, Wall M, Story M. 2007. Personal, behavioral, and environmental risk and
protective factors for adolescent overweight. Obesity 15:2748–60
Harackiewicz JM, Canning EA, Tibbetts Y, Giffen CJ, Hyde JS. 2014. Closing the social class achievement
gap for ﬁrst-generation students in undergraduate biology. J. Educ. Psychol. In press
Harber KD, Yeung D, Iacovelli A. 2011. Psychosocial resources, threat, and the perception of distance and
height: support for the resources and perception model. Emotion 11:1080–90
Harris PR, Epton T. 2009. The impact of self-afﬁrmation on health cognition, health behaviour and other
health-related responses: a narrative review. Soc. Personal. Psychol. Compass 3:962–78
Harris PR, Epton T. 2010. The impact of self-afﬁrmation on health-related cognition and health behaviour:
issues and prospects. Soc. Personal. Psychol. Compass 4:439–54
Harris PR, Mayle K, Mabbott L, Napper L. 2007. Self-afﬁrmation reduces smokers’ defensiveness to graphic
on-pack cigarette warning labels. Health Psychol. 26:437–46
Harris PR, Napper L. 2005. Self-afﬁrmation and the biased processing of threatening health-risk information.
Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 31:1250–63
Havranek EP, Hanratty R, Tate C, Dickinson LM, Steiner JF, Cohen GL, Blair IA. 2012. The effect of values
afﬁrmation on race-discordant patient-provider communication. Arch. Intern. Med. 172:1662–67
Heckman JJ, Lochner L, Taber C. 1998. General equilibrium treatment effects: a study of tuition policy. Am.
Econ. Rev. 88:381–86
Howell JL, Shepperd JA. 2012. Reducing information avoidance through afﬁrmation. Psychol. Sci. 23:141–45
Inzlicht M, Schmader T, eds. 2011. Stereotype Threat: Theory, Process, and Application. New York: Oxford Univ.
Press
Jaremka LM, Bunyan DP, Collins NL, Sherman DK. 2011. Reducing defensive distancing: self-afﬁrmation
and risk regulation in response to relationship threats. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 47:264–68
Karniol R, Galili L, Shtilerman D, Naim R, Stern K, et al. 2011. Why Superman can wait: cognitive selftransformation in the delay of gratiﬁcation paradigm. J. Clin. Child Adolesc. Psychol. 40:307–17

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

366

Cohen

·

Sherman

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Kennedy KA, Pronin E. 2008. When disagreement gets ugly: perceptions of bias and the escalation of conﬂict.
Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 34:833–48
Keough KA, Markus HR. 1998. The role of the self in building the bridge from philosophy to biology. Psychol.
Inq. 9:49–53
Kiecolt-Glaser JK, Page GG, Marucha PT, MacCallum RC, Glaser R. 1998. Psychological inﬂuences on
surgical recovery: perspectives from psychoneuroimmunology. Am. Psychol. 53:1209–18
Klein WM, Harris PR. 2009. Self-afﬁrmation enhances attentional bias toward threatening components of a
persuasive message. Psychol. Sci. 20:1463–67
Klein WM, Harris PR, Ferrer RA, Zajac LE. 2011. Feelings of vulnerability in response to threatening
messages: effects of self-afﬁrmation. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 47:1237–42
Koole SL, Smeets K, van Knippenberg A, Dijksterhuis A. 1999. The cessation of rumination through selfafﬁrmation. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 77:111–25
Kunda Z. 1990. The case for motivated reasoning. Psychol. Bull. 108:480–98
Lakey B, Orehek E. 2011. Relational regulation theory: a new approach to explain the link between perceived
social support and mental health. Psychol. Rev. 118:482–95
Landau MJ, Greenberg J. 2006. Play it safe or go for the gold? A terror management perspective on selfenhancement and protection motives in risky decision making. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 32:1633–45
Leary MR. 2005. Sociometer theory and the pursuit of relational value: getting to the root of self-esteem. Eur.
Rev. Soc. Psychol. 16:75–111
Legault L, Al-Khindi T, Inzlicht M. 2012. Preserving integrity in the face of performance threat: selfafﬁrmation enhances neurophysiological responsiveness to errors. Psychol. Sci. 23:1455–60
Lejuez CW, Hopko DR, LePage JP, Hopko SD, McNeil DW. 2001. A brief behavioral activation treatment
for depression. Cogn. Behav. Pract. 8:164–75
Lepper MR, Woolverton M. 2001. The wisdom of practice: lessons learned from the study of highly effective
tutors. In Improving Academic Achievement: Contributions of Social Psychology, ed. J Aronson, pp. 133–56.
Orlando, FL: Academic
Lewin K. 1943. Deﬁning the “ﬁeld at a given time.” Psychol. Rev. 50:292–310
Lewin K. 1997/1948. Resolving Social Conﬂicts and Field Theory in Social Science. Washington, DC: Am. Psychol.
Assoc.
Logel C, Cohen GL. 2012. The role of the self in physical health. Psychol. Sci. 23:53–55
Lyubomirsky S, Della Porta M. 2010. Boosting happiness, buttressing resilience: results from cognitive and
behavioral interventions. In Handbook of Adult Resilience: Concepts, Methods, and Applications, ed. JW Reich,
AJ Zautra, J Hall, pp. 450–64. New York: Guilford
Mancuso CA, Choi TN, Wenn H, Wenderoth S, Hollenberg JP, et al. 2012. Increasing physical activity in
patients with asthma through positive affect and self-afﬁrmation. Arch. Intern. Med. 172:337–43
Marigold DC, Holmes JG, Ross M. 2007. More than words: reframing compliments from romantic partners
fosters security in low self-esteem individuals. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 92:232–48
Marigold DC, Holmes JG, Ross M. 2010. Fostering relationship resilience: an intervention for low self-esteem
individuals. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 46:624–30
Martens A, Johns M, Greenberg J, Schimel J. 2006. Combating stereotype threat: the effect of self-afﬁrmation
on women’s intellectual performance. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 42:236–43
Masten AS, Cicchetti D. 2010. Developmental cascades. Dev. Psychopathol. 22:491–95
Masten AS, Obradović J. 2006. Competence and resilience in development. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1094:13–27
Master SL, Eisenberger NI, Taylor SE, Naliboff BD, Shirinyan D, Lieberman MD. 2009. A picture’s worth:
Partner photographs reduce experimentally induced pain. Psychol. Sci. 20:1316–18
Matsuda KN, Melde C, Taylor TJ, Freng A, Esbensen FA. 2013. Gang membership and adherence to the
“code of the street.” Justice Q. 30:440–48
McCord J. 1978. A thirty-year follow-up of treatment effects. Am. Psychol. 33:284–89
McQueen A, Klein WM. 2006. Experimental manipulations of self-afﬁrmation: a systematic review. Self
Identity 5:289–354
Miller G, Chen E, Cole SW. 2009. Health psychology: developing biologically plausible models linking the
social world and physical health. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 60:501–24
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

367

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Miyake A, Kost-Smith LE, Finkelstein ND, Pollock SJ, Cohen GL, Ito TA. 2010. Reducing the gender
achievement gap in college science: a classroom study of values afﬁrmation. Science 330:1234–37
Mofﬁtt TE, Arseneault L, Belsky D, Dickson N, Hancox RJ, et al. 2011. A gradient of childhood self-control
predicts health, wealth, and public safety. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108:2693–98
Murray SL, Grifﬁn DW, Rose P, Bellavia G. 2006. For better or worse? Self-esteem and the contingencies of
acceptance in marriage. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 32:866–80
Napper L, Harris PR, Epton T. 2009. Developing and testing a self-afﬁrmation manipulation. Self Identity
8:45–62
Nickerson C, Schwarz N, Diener E, Kahneman D. 2003. Zeroing in on the dark side of the American dream:
a closer look at the negative consequences of the goal for ﬁnancial success. Psychol. Sci. 14:531–36
Norris S. 2008. Coping with Illness. Video ﬁle. La Jolla: Univ. Calif. Telev. (UCTV). http://www.uctv.tv/
search-details.asp?showID=15400
Obradović J, Burt KB, Masten AS. 2010. Testing a dual cascade model linking competence and symptoms
over 20 years from childhood to adulthood. J. Clin. Child Adolesc. Psychol. 39:109–17
Ochsner KN, Bunge SA, Gross JJ, Gabrieli JD. 2002. Rethinking feelings: an fMRI study of the cognitive
regulation of emotion. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 14:1215–29
Ogedegbe GO, Boutin-Foster C, Wells MT, Allegrante JP, Isen AM, et al. 2012. A randomized controlled
trial of positive-affect intervention and medication adherence in hypertensive African Americans. Arch.
Intern. Med. 172:322–26
Overall NC, Simpson JA, Struthers H. 2013. Buffering attachment-related avoidance: softening emotional
and behavioral defenses during conﬂict discussions. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 104:854–71
Paluck EL. 2009. Reducing intergroup prejudice and conﬂict using the media: a ﬁeld experiment in Rwanda.
J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 96:574–87
Pennebaker JW, Chung CK. 2011. Expressive writing: connections to physical and mental health. In The
Oxford Handbook of Health Psychology, ed. HS Friendman, pp. 417–37. New York: Oxford Univ. Press
Peterson JC, Charlson ME, Hoffman Z, Wells MT, Wong S, et al. 2012. A randomized controlled trial
of positive-affect induction to promote physical activity after percutaneous coronary intervention. Arch.
Intern. Med. 172:329–36
Pietersma S, Dijkstra A. 2012. Cognitive self-afﬁrmation inclination: an individual difference in dealing with
self-threats. Br. J. Soc. Psychol. 51:33–51
Pratto F, John OP. 1991. Automatic vigilance: the attention-grabbing power of negative social information.
J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 61:380–91
Pressman SD, Cohen S. 2007. Use of social words in autobiographies and longevity. Psychosom. Med. 69:262–69
Raudenbush, SW. 1984. Magnitude of teacher expectancy effects on pupil IQ as a function of the credibility
of expectancy induction: a synthesis of ﬁndings from 18 experiments. J. Educ. Psychol. 76:85–97
Reardon SF. 2011. The widening academic achievement gap between the rich and the poor: new evidence
and possible explanations. In Whither Opportunity? Rising Inequality and the Uncertain Life Chances of
Low-Income Children, ed. R Murnane, G Duncan, pp. 91–116. New York: Sage Found.
Reed MB, Aspinwall LG. 1998. Self-afﬁrmation reduces biased processing of health-risk information. Motiv.
Emot. 22:99–132
Robinson TN. 2010. Stealth interventions for obesity prevention and control: motivating behavior change. In
Obesity Prevention: The Role of Brain and Society on Individual Behavior, ed. L Dube, A Bechara, A Dagher,
A Drewnowski, J Lebel, P James, R Yada, pp. 319–28. New York: Elsevier
Rokeach M. 1973. The Nature of Human Values. New York: Free Press
Rosenthal R. 1994. Interpersonal expectancy effects: a 30-year perspective. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 3:176–79
Ross LD, Nisbett RE. 2011. The Person and the Situation: Perspectives of Social Psychology. London: Pinter &
Martin
Sabaté E. 2003. Adherence to Long-Term Therapies: Evidence for Action.Geneva: World Health Organ.
Sapolsky RM. 2004. Why Zebras Don’t Get Ulcers: The Acclaimed Guide to Stress, Stress-Related Diseases, and
Coping—Now Revised and Updated. New York: Holt Paperb.
Sapolsky RM. 2010. Foreword. In Formative Experiences: The Interaction of Caregiving, Culture, and Developmental Psychobiology, ed. CM Worthman, PM Plotsky, DS Schechter, CA Cummings, pp. xxiii–xxvi.
New York: Cambridge Univ. Press

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

368

Cohen

·

Sherman

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Savitsky K, Epley N, Gilovich T. 2001. Do others judge us as harshly as we think? Overestimating the impact
of our failures, shortcomings, and mishaps. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 81:44–56
Schimel J, Arndt J, Banko KM, Cook A. 2004. Not all self-afﬁrmations were created equal: the cognitive and
social beneﬁts of afﬁrming the intrinsic (versus extrinsic) self. Soc. Cogn. 22:75–99
Schmeichel BJ, Vohs KD. 2009. Self-afﬁrmation and self-control: afﬁrming core values counteracts ego depletion. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 96:770–82
Schreier HM, Schonert-Reichl KA, Chen E. 2013. Effect of volunteering on risk factors for cardiovascular
disease in adolescents: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA Pediatr. 167:327–32
Schulz R. 1976. The effects of control and predictability on the psychological and physical well-being of the
institutionalized aged. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 33:563–73
Schulz R, Hanusa BH. 1978. Long-term effects of control and predictability-enhancing interventions: ﬁndings
and ethical issues. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 36:1194–201
Shapiro JR, Williams AM, Hambarchyan M. 2012. Are all interventions created equal? A multi-threat approach
to tailoring stereotype threat interventions. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 104:277–88
Sherman DAK, Nelson LD, Steele CM. 2000. Do messages about health risks threaten the self? Increasing
the acceptance of threatening health messages via self-afﬁrmation. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 26:1046–58
Sherman DK. 2013. Self-afﬁrmation: understanding the effects. Soc. Personal. Psychol. Compass. In press
Sherman DK, Bunyan DP, Creswell JD, Jaremka LM. 2009. Psychological vulnerability and stress: the effects of
self-afﬁrmation on sympathetic nervous system responses to naturalistic stressors. Health Psychol. 28:554–
62
Sherman DK, Cohen GL. 2006. The psychology of self-defense: self-afﬁrmation theory. In Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, ed. MP Zanna, 38:183–242. San Diego, CA: Academic
Sherman DK, Cohen GL, Nelson LD, Nussbaum AD, Bunyan DP, Garcia J. 2009. Afﬁrmed yet unaware:
exploring the role of awareness in the process of self-afﬁrmation. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 97:745–64
Sherman DK, Hartson KA. 2011. Reconciling self-protection with self-improvement: self-afﬁrmation theory. In The Handbook of Self-Enhancement and Self-Protection, ed. M Alicke, C Sedikides, pp. 128–51.
New York: Guilford
Sherman DK, Hartson KA, Binning KR, Purdie-Vaughns V, Garcia J, et al. 2013. Deﬂecting the trajectory and
changing the narrative: how self-afﬁrmation affects academic performance and motivation under identity
threat. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 104:591–618
Sherman DK, Kim HS. 2005. Is there an “I” in “team?” The role of the self in group-serving judgments.
J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 88:108–20
Shnabel N, Purdie-Vaughns V, Cook JE, Garcia J, Cohen GL. 2013. Demystifying values-afﬁrmation interventions: writing about social belonging is a key to buffering against identity threat. Personal. Soc. Psychol.
Bull. 39:663–76
Silverman A, Logel C, Cohen GL. 2012. Self-afﬁrmation as a deliberate coping strategy: the moderating role
of choice. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 49:93–98
Sivanathan N, Molden DC, Galinsky AD, Ku G. 2008. The promise and peril of self-afﬁrmation in deescalation of commitment. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 107:1–14
Sivanathan N, Pettit NC. 2010. Protecting the self through consumption: status goods as afﬁrmational commodities. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 46:564–70
Smith A. 1759/2011. The Theory of Moral Sentiments. New York: Empire
Stanton AL, Danoff-Burg S, Sworowski LA, Collins CA, Branstetter AD, et al. 2002. Randomized, controlled
trial of written emotional expression and beneﬁt ﬁnding in breast cancer patients. J. Clin. Oncol. 20:4160–
68
Steele CM. 1988. The psychology of self-afﬁrmation: sustaining the integrity of the self. In Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology, ed. L Berkowitz, 21:261–302. New York: Academic
Steele CM. 2010. Whistling Vivaldi and Other Clues to How Stereotypes Affect Us. New York: Norton
Steele CM, Southwick LL, Critchlow B. 1981. Dissonance and alcohol: drinking your troubles away.
J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 41:831–46
Steele CM, Spencer SJ, Aronson J. 2002. Contending with group image: the psychology of stereotype and
social identity threat. In Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, ed. MP Zanna, 34:379–440. New York:
Academic
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

369

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Steele CM, Spencer SJ, Lynch M. 1993. Self-image resilience and dissonance: the role of afﬁrmational resources. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 64:885–96
Stephens NM, Markus, HR, Fryberg SA. 2012. Social class disparities in health and education: reducing
inequality by applying a sociocultural self model of behavior. Psychol. Rev. 119:723–44
Sterling P. 2004. Principles of allostasis: optimal design, predictive regulation, pathophysiology and rational
therapeutics. In Allostasis, Homeostasis, and the Costs of Adaptation, ed. J Schulkin, pp. 17–64. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge Univ. Press
Stinson DA, Logel C, Shepherd S, Zanna MP. 2011. Rewriting the self-fulﬁlling prophecy of social rejection:
self-afﬁrmation improves relational security and social behavior up to 2 months later. Psychol. Sci. 22:1145–
49
Stone J, Aronson E, Crain AL, Winslow MP, Fried CB. 1994. Inducing hypocrisy as a means of encouraging
young adults to use condoms. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 20:116–28
Stone J, Whitehead J, Schmader T, Focella E. 2011. Thanks for asking: self-afﬁrming questions reduce backlash
when stigmatized targets confront prejudice. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 47:589–98
Taylor SE. 2007. Social support. In Foundations of Health Psychology, ed. HS Friedman, pp. 145–71. New York:
Oxford Univ. Press
Taylor SE. 2010. Mechanisms linking early life stress to adult health outcomes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
107:8507–12
Taylor VJ, Walton GM. 2011. Stereotype threat undermines academic learning. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull.
37:1055–67
Thomaes S, Bushman BJ, de Castro BO, Cohen GL, Denissen JJ. 2009. Reducing narcissistic aggression by
buttressing self-esteem: an experimental ﬁeld study. Psychol. Sci. 20:1536–42
Thomaes S, Bushman BJ, de Castro BO, Reijntjes A. 2012. Arousing “gentle passions” in young adolescents:
sustained experimental effects of value afﬁrmations on prosocial feelings and behaviors. Dev. Psychol.
48:103–10
Toma CL, Hancock JT. 2013. Self-afﬁrmation underlies Facebook use. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 39:321–31
Tugade MM, Fredrickson BL. 2004. Emotions: positive emotions and health. In Encyclopedia of Health and
Behavior, ed. N Anderson, pp. 306–10. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
van Koningsbruggen GM, Das E. 2009. Don’t derogate this message! Self-afﬁrmation promotes online
type 2 diabetes risk test taking. Psychol. Health 24:635–49
van Koningsbruggen GM, Das E, Roskos-Ewoldsen DR. 2009. How self-afﬁrmation reduces defensive processing of threatening health information: evidence at the implicit level. Health Psychol. 28:563–68
Verghese A, Brady E, Kapur CC, Horwitz RI. 2011. The bedside evaluation: ritual and reason. Ann. Intern.
Med. 155:550–53
Vohs KD, Park JK, Schmeichel BJ. 2013. Self-afﬁrmation can enable goal disengagement. J. Personal. Soc.
Psychol. 104:14–27
Wakslak CJ, Trope Y. 2009. Cognitive consequences of afﬁrming the self: the relationship between selfafﬁrmation and object construal. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 45:927–32
Walton GM, Cohen GL. 2011. A brief social-belonging intervention improves academic and health outcomes
of minority students. Science 331:1447–51
Walton GM, Spencer SJ. 2009. Latent ability: grades and test scores systematically underestimate the intellectual ability of negatively stereotyped students. Psychol. Sci. 20:1132–39
Ward A, Atkins DC, Lepper MR, Ross L. 2011. Afﬁrming the self to promote agreement with another:
lowering a psychological barrier to conﬂict resolution. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 37:1216–28
Wilson TD. 2011. Redirect: The Surprising New Science of Psychological Change. New York: Little, Brown
Wilson TD, Linville PW. 1982. Improving the academic performance of college freshmen: attribution therapy
revisited. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 42:367–76
Wood JV, Perunovic WQ, Lee JW. 2009. Positive self-statements: power to some, peril for others. Psychol.
Sci. 20:860–66
Woolf K, McManus IC, Gill D, Dacre J. 2009. The effect of a brief social intervention on the examination
results of UK medical students: a cluster randomised controlled trial. BMC Med. Educ. 9:35
Worthman CM, Plotsky PM, Schechter DS, Cummings CA, eds. 2010. Formative Experiences: The Interaction
of Caregiving, Culture, and Developmental Psychobiology. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

370

Cohen

·

Sherman

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

Yeager DS, Purdie-Vaughns V, Garcia J, Apfel N, Brzustoski P, et al. 2014. Breaking the cycle of mistrust:
wise interventions to provide critical feedback across the racial divide. J. Exp. Psychol.: Gen. In press.
http://psycnet.apa.org/psycarticles/2013-28213-001.pdf. doi:10.1037/a0033906
Yeager DS, Walton GM. 2011. Social-psychological interventions in education: they’re not magic. Rev. Educ.
Res. 81:267–301
Zhao X, Peterson EB, Kim W, Rolfe-Redding J. 2012. Effects of self-afﬁrmation on daily versus occasional
smokers’ responses to graphic warning labels. Comm. Res. In press. http://crx.sagepub.com/content/
early/2012/11/09/0093650212465433.full.pdf+html. doi:10.1177/0093650212465433
Zolnierek KBH, DiMatteo MR. 2009. Physician communication and patient adherence to treatment: a metaanalysis. Med. Care 47:826–34

www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

371

PS65-FrontMatter

ARI

13 November 2013

20:27

Contents

Annual Review of
Psychology

Prefatory

Volume 65, 2014

I Study What I Stink At: Lessons Learned from a Career in Psychology
Robert J. Sternberg p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 1
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

Stress and Neuroendocrinology
Oxytocin Pathways and the Evolution of Human Behavior
C. Sue Carter p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p17
Genetics of Behavior
Gene-Environment Interaction
Stephen B. Manuck and Jeanne M. McCaffery p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p41
Cognitive Neuroscience
The Cognitive Neuroscience of Insight
John Kounios and Mark Beeman p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p71
Color Perception
Color Psychology: Effects of Perceiving Color on Psychological
Functioning in Humans
Andrew J. Elliot and Markus A. Maier p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p95
Infancy
Human Infancy. . . and the Rest of the Lifespan
Marc H. Bornstein p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 121
Adolescence and Emerging Adulthood
Bullying in Schools: The Power of Bullies and the Plight of Victims
Jaana Juvonen and Sandra Graham p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 159
Is Adolescence a Sensitive Period for Sociocultural Processing?
Sarah-Jayne Blakemore and Kathryn L. Mills p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 187
Adulthood and Aging
Psychological Research on Retirement
Mo Wang and Junqi Shi p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 209
Development in the Family
Adoption: Biological and Social Processes Linked to Adaptation
Harold D. Grotevant and Jennifer M. McDermott p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 235
vi

PS65-FrontMatter

ARI

13 November 2013

20:27

Individual Treatment
Combination Psychotherapy and Antidepressant Medication Treatment
for Depression: For Whom, When, and How
W. Edward Craighead and Boadie W. Dunlop p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 267
Adult Clinical Neuropsychology

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

Sport and Nonsport Etiologies of Mild Traumatic Brain Injury:
Similarities and Differences
Amanda R. Rabinowitz, Xiaoqi Li, and Harvey S. Levin p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 301
Self and Identity
The Psychology of Change: Self-Afﬁrmation and Social
Psychological Intervention
Geoffrey L. Cohen and David K. Sherman p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 333
Gender
Gender Similarities and Differences
Janet Shibley Hyde p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 373
Altruism and Aggression
Dehumanization and Infrahumanization
Nick Haslam and Steve Loughnan p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 399
The Sociocultural Appraisals, Values, and Emotions (SAVE) Framework
of Prosociality: Core Processes from Gene to Meme
Dacher Keltner, Aleksandr Kogan, Paul K. Piff, and Sarina R. Saturn p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 425
Small Groups
Deviance and Dissent in Groups
Jolanda Jetten and Matthew J. Hornsey p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 461
Social Neuroscience
Cultural Neuroscience: Biology of the Mind in Cultural Contexts
Heejung S. Kim and Joni Y. Sasaki p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 487
Genes and Personality
A Phenotypic Null Hypothesis for the Genetics of Personality
Eric Turkheimer, Erik Pettersson, and Erin E. Horn p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 515
Environmental Psychology
Environmental Psychology Matters
Robert Gifford p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 541

Contents

vii

PS65-FrontMatter

ARI

13 November 2013

20:27

Community Psychology
Socioecological Psychology
Shigehiro Oishi p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 581
Subcultures Within Countries
Social Class Culture Cycles: How Three Gateway Contexts Shape Selves
and Fuel Inequality
Nicole M. Stephens Hazel Rose Markus, and L. Taylor Phillips p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 611
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

Organizational Climate/Culture
(Un)Ethical Behavior in Organizations
Linda Klebe Treviño, Niki A. den Nieuwenboer, and Jennifer J. Kish-Gephart p p p p p p p 635
Job/Work Design
Beyond Motivation: Job and Work Design for Development, Health,
Ambidexterity, and More
Sharon K. Parker p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 661
Selection and Placement
A Century of Selection
Ann Marie Ryan and Robert E. Ployhart p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 693
Personality and Coping Styles
Personality, Well-Being, and Health
Howard S. Friedman and Margaret L. Kern p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 719
Timely Topics
Properties of the Internal Clock: First- and Second-Order Principles of
Subjective Time
Melissa J. Allman, Sundeep Teki, Timothy D. Grifﬁths, and Warren H. Meck p p p p p p p p 743
Indexes
Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors, Volumes 55–65 p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 773
Cumulative Index of Article Titles, Volumes 55–65 p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 778
Errata
An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Psychology articles may be found at
http://psych.AnnualReviews.org/errata.shtml

viii

Contents

