Journal of Educational Psychology
2016, Vol. 108, No. 3, 329 –341

© 2016 American Psychological Association
0022-0663/16/$12.00 http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/edu0000062

A Stitch in Time: Strategic Self-Control in High School
and College Students
Angela L. Duckworth, Rachel E. White,
Alyssa J. Matteucci, and Annie Shearer

James J. Gross
Stanford University

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

University of Pennsylvania

A growing body of research indicates that self-control is critical to academic success. Surprisingly little
is known, however, about the diverse strategies students use to implement self-control or how well these
strategies work. To address these issues, the author conducted a naturalistic investigation of self-control
strategies (Study 1) and 2 field experiments (Studies 2 and 3). In Study 1, high school students described
the strategies they use to manage interpersonal conflicts, get academic work done, eat healthfully, and
manage other everyday self-control challenges. The majority of strategies in these self-nominated
incidents as well as in 3 hypothetical academic scenarios (e.g., studying instead of texting friends) were
reliably classified using the process model of self-control. As predicted by the process model, students
rated strategies deployed early in the impulse-generation process (situation selection, situation modification) as being dramatically more effective than strategies deployed later (attentional deployment,
cognitive change, response modulation). In Study 2, high school students randomly assigned to implement situation modification were more likely to meet their academic goals during the following week
than students assigned either to implement response modulation or no strategy at all. In Study 3, college
students randomly assigned to implement situation modification were also more successful in meeting
their academic goals, and this effect was partially mediated by decreased feelings of temptation
throughout the week. Collectively, these findings suggest that students might benefit from learning to
initiate self-control when their impulses are still nascent.
Keywords: self-control, self-regulated learning, metacognition, metacognitive skills, character

Moffitt et al., 2011), affirming age-old speculation that the ability
to manage conflicting desires may be at least as critical to psychosocial development as any other competency (Aristotle, 350
BCE/1999; Freud, 1977; James, 1899). In the current investigation, we systematically examine how high school and college
students exercise self-control in their everyday lives and test the
relative effectiveness of strategies deployed earlier, when impulses
are still nascent, rather than later, when impulses have grown in
strength.

A burgeoning research literature shows that students who can
resist momentarily rewarding temptations in the service of more
enduringly valued goals excel academically (Duckworth & Carlson, 2013; Mischel, Shoda, & Rodriguez, 1989; Véronneau, HiattRacer, Fosco, & Dishion, 2014), thrive socially (Eisenberg, Hofer,
Sulik, & Spinrad, 2014), and flourish physically (Tsukayama,
Toomey, Faith, & Duckworth, 2010). Remarkably, the predictive
power of self-control for consequential life outcomes rivals that of
family socioeconomic status and general intelligence (Daly, Delaney, Egan, & Baumeister, 2015; Duckworth & Seligman, 2005;

Defining and Describing Self-Control
Self-control refers to the voluntary regulation of conflicting
thoughts, feelings, and actions in accordance with long-term goals.
In a self-control dilemma, the individual wants to do something
that is immediately rewarding and, in addition, wants to do something else that has more enduring personal value. For example,
students are often confronted with choosing between engaging
diversions (e.g., texting friends) and academic work (e.g., doing
algebra homework) whose benefits are recognizably greater but,
alas, redound in the distant future. Although middle and high
school students say that academic work is more important to their
personal futures than any other waking activity, they also experience it as dramatically less enjoyable (Galla, Duckworth, Rikoon,
& Haimm, 2014). Likewise, holding one’s temper in a heated
argument and eating healthfully rather than snacking on junk food
are more beneficial in the long-run than they are gratifying in the
moment.

Angela L. Duckworth, Rachel E. White, Alyssa J. Matteucci, and Annie
Shearer, Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania; James J.
Gross, Department of Psychology, Stanford University.
Annie Shearer is now at the Center for Family Intervention Science,
Drexel University. The writing of this article was supported by the Character Lab, the Templeton Foundation, the National Institute on Aging grant
5-K01-AG033182-02, the National Institute on Aging grant R24
AG048081-01, and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. The content is
solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent
the official views of the funding agencies.
We gratefully acknowledge the research assistance of Leigh Andrews,
Ihno Lee, Katherine Loboda, Adam Millar, Ashleigh Seely, and Arianna
Ulloa in the preparation of this article.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Angela L.
Duckworth, Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, 3701
Market Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104. E-mail: duckwort@psych.upenn.edu
329

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

330

DUCKWORTH, WHITE, MATTEUCCI, SHEARER, AND GROSS

As we have defined it, self-control is an aspect of motivated
behavior, a term that in its broadest sense encompasses all intentional, goal-directed behavior. The term motivation can also be
used more specifically to refer to setting goals and evaluating their
desirability and feasibility; when used in this narrower sense,
motivation can be distinguished from volition (i.e., how effectively
students strive toward their goals once they are committed to them;
Achtziger & Gollwitzer, 2008). This distinction is important because committing to goals does not guarantee subsequently taking
steps toward their realization (Kuhl, 1984). For example, some
students genuinely want to do well in school but are unable to
autonomously regulate their behavior in ways that effectively
advance them toward that aim (Corno & Mandinach, 2004; Zimmerman & Martinez-Pons, 1990). It is exactly this gap— between
intention and striving—that interests us here.
A popular view of self-control equates the capacity to resist
temptation with internal fortitude. Indeed, lay language—willpower, force of will, just do it, just say no—implies that we
necessarily use a great deal of energy to suppress an undesirable
impulse or elevate a desirable one. Accordingly, in the social
psychology literature, the ego depletion model suggests that resolving self-control conflicts exhausts a finite energy resource,
leading to subsequent failures of self-control (Baumeister, 2014)
and a subjective sense of strain (Inzlicht, Legault, & Teper, 2014;
Kurzban, Duckworth, Kable, & Myers, 2013). Likewise, in the
developmental literature, self-control is commonly referred to as
effortful control (Rothbart & Rueda, 2005). Not surprisingly, much
of the research on mechanisms of self-control has focused on
top-down cognitive processes that inhibit lower-level impulses and
support goal-directed behavior.
Whereas effortfully modulating responses in the heat of the
moment is the most obvious way individuals exercise self-control,
it may be the least effective. It turns out that even young children
have less obvious but more artful means of manipulating their own
behavior. For instance, preschoolers forgoing immediate gratification (e.g., one marshmallow) for larger, delayed rewards (e.g., two
marshmallows) can wait significantly longer when they cover their
eyes or stare at the ceiling, when the treats are hidden from view
by an opaque cover, or when they imagine them to be fluffy, white,
and inedible clouds (Carlson & Beck, 2009; Mischel, 2014). Outside of the laboratory, there are many more “tricks,” as the economist Schelling (1984) put it, by which our future self can outmaneuver its myopic present self (p. 290).

The Process Model of Self-Control
We have recently proposed that self-control strategies—whether
obvious or less obvious— can be organized according to their
underlying mechanism and the stage at which they are used (Duckworth, Gendler, & Gross, 2014). Specifically, the process model
of self-control begins with the premise that impulses are response tendencies to think, feel, or act that develop over time.
As shown in the bottom part of Figure 1, impulses come into
being and either increase or decrease in intensity through a
recursive situation-attention-appraisal-response sequence. Impulses of sufficient strength are enacted; those that fail to reach
threshold are not. Often, impulses do not conflict. However, we
sometimes experience conflicting impulses. When an immedi-

Figure 1. The process model of self-control (adapted from Duckworth,
Gendler, and Gross (2014).

ately rewarding impulse is at odds with an impulse of greater
value to us in the long-run, we need to intervene.
This conception of impulse generation suggests that five categories of self-control strategies can be identified, corresponding to
distinct stages of impulse generation. These categories are shown
in the top portion of Figure 1. To illustrate, consider a student who
first encounters a particular situation (e.g., walks into his bedroom)
and decides whether to modify it (e.g., turning off his cell phone).
Next, he pays attention to particular features of the situation (e.g.,
looks at his textbooks), and appraises the situation (e.g., “I should
get my homework out of the way before dinner”) in a way that,
finally, gives rise to the generation of an impulse (e.g., starting his
homework). As we elaborate below, all strategies work by diminishing the strength of momentarily rewarding but ultimately undesirable impulses or, alternatively, amplifying the strength of
enduringly beneficial but relatively less enjoyable ones. The most
important prediction of the process model is that intervening
earlier in the cycle of impulse generation, when impulses are still
developing, is more effective than intervening later.

Situational Strategies
Situation selection strategies are the most forward-looking and
involve intentionally choosing to be in places or with people that
facilitate self-control. For example, in a recent mixed-age focus
group on academic success, we listened to a tenth-grade student
sagely advise a fifth grader in the same school: “If I knew at your
age what I know now, I would have chosen different friends. Your
friends really influence you. I got into the wrong crowd. It was
really hard to get back on track.” Although direct empirical evidence on situation selection in adolescent students is lacking, it has
recently been established that in adulthood, adults who are more
self-controlled report intentionally avoiding situations replete with
temptation (Ent, Baumeister, & Tice, 2015; Imhoff, Schmidt, &
Gerstenberg, 2014). Relatedly, for drug addicts, encounters with
trigger cues are perhaps the strongest predictor of recidivism, and
treatment programs invariably advise deliberately avoiding people,
places, and objects that induce craving (Bonson et al., 2002;
Doyle, Friedmann, & Zywiak, 2013; Goldstein, 1994; Kelley,
2004; O’Brien, 1976; Osgood, Wilson, O’Malley, Bachman, &
Johnston, 1996; Schroeder et al., 2001; Weiss, 2005).
As a practical matter, unfortunately, students cannot always
transport themselves to different locations, nor can they easily

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

STRATEGIC SELF-CONTROL

“switch their friends,” even if they know that doing so would help
them realize their long-term goals. What else can students do?
Situation modification strategies entail purposefully changing
physical or social circumstances in ways that facilitate self-control.
For example, adults eat less when using smaller plates and drink
less when using taller, skinnier cups (Wansink, 2004; Wansink &
Van Ittersum, 2003; Wansink, Van Ittersum, & Painter, 2006).
Recovering alcoholics can take Antabuse to dissuade themselves
from drinking (Banys, 1988). As early as 6 years old, children
know that it is easier to resist treats when they are hidden from
view (Mischel & Mischel, 1983). More relevant to the self-control
problems of students, a few studies have linked situation modification with academic performance. In one study, college students
who voluntarily self-imposed deadlines for long-term projects
turned in better work than students who were able to turn in their
work anytime during the semester (Ariely & Wertenbroch, 2002).
Likewise, Zimmerman (1989) and Marcus (1988) found that successful students manipulate their environments (e.g., turned off the
TV) to facilitate concentration.

Cognitive Strategies
Next, there are three cognitive strategies, beginning with attentional deployment strategies. These entail directing our focus to
features of the situation which strengthen desirable impulses or
diminish undesirable impulses. Without direct tutelage, children
learn this cognitive skill fairly early in life (Carlson & Beck, 2009;
Peake, Hebl, & Mischel, 2002), but more recently Sesame Street’s
Cookie Monster has been providing direct instruction. In one
episode, after learning how to pronounce “delayed gratification,”
he models looking away from a cookie he is trying not to eat. “Me
going to look away from cookie,” he declares, turning his back.
“Me not going to look at . . .” Soon, his attention is recaptured:
Sniff, sniff. He turns to glance in the cookie’s direction, then turns
away again, underscoring that attention deployment is far from
effortless: “Oooh! This hard! This hard for monster!” (PBS, 2013).
Once we have chosen where to place our attention, we can use
cognitive change strategies to diminish our undesired impulses and
amplify our desired ones. Cognitive change strategies entail thinking about our situation differently. For example, we can reappraise
an argument by imagining ourselves as a third-party spectator to
the conflict (Finkel, Slotter, Luchies, Walton, & Gross, 2013;
White, Kross, & Duckworth, 2015) a technique called “going to
the balcony” in the field of negotiations (Ury, 2007). It is likewise
possible for preschool children to pretend that a marshmallow is
“just a picture” and for adults to mentally recast cigarettes as
poison (Mischel, 2014). Still, it’s not easy to change our thoughts.
Indeed, while more effective than response modulation, intentionally changing the way we appraise our situation is far from
effortless (Sheppes & Gross, 2011).
Of all the self-control strategies, response modulation is the
most straightforward. In the “heat of the moment,” we can voluntarily suppress an undesirable impulse (e.g., to reach for a cookie)
or amplify a desirable one (e.g., to eat the apple that came with the
school lunch). Unfortunately, the human capacity to exert cognitive control over goal-incongruent impulses is far from perfect. For
example, hiding our emotions (e.g., trying not to cry when sad or
trying not to smile when amused) sometimes works but often
doesn’t, and even when successful, takes a physiological toll

331

(Gross & Levenson, 1993). The cost of waiting until the last
opportunity to modulate conflicting impulses is also phenomenological; it feels awful to deny oneself a momentary pleasure or to
enforce an action whose benefits lie entirely in the distant future.

The Current Investigation
Given the importance of self-control to successful “studenting”
(Corno & Mandinach, 2004) and other aspects of healthy development, two urgent unanswered questions concern the strategies
that students use to navigate everyday self-control dilemmas and
their relative effectiveness. The first question is descriptive and is
concerned with whether the process model of self-control can
organize students’ diverse self-control efforts into theoretically
coherent categories. The second question is normative and addresses the important question of which self-control tactics are
most effective. The process model predicts that the earlier students
attempt to turn the tide of their own conflicting impulses in favor
of their long-term objectives, the better. As noted above, there is
some empirical evidence supporting this supposition, but to date,
research has focused on other age groups (e.g., preschool children,
mature adults) or life domains (e.g., dieting, addiction, emotion
regulation).
We focused our investigation on high school and college students, rather than younger learners, for several reasons. First,
students are accorded increasing independence from parents,
teachers, and other adults as they grow older (Steinberg, 2013). In
tandem, brain areas subserving self-control mature with age (Carlson, Zelazo, & Faja, 2013), and generally, older students are more
autonomous learners than younger students (Zimmerman &
Martinez-Pons, 1990). It is therefore not surprising that relative to
other personality traits and IQ, Big Five conscientiousness—which
encompasses self-control and closely related traits (Eisenberg,
Duckworth, Spinrad, & Valiente, 2014)—is more strongly related
to academic performance in secondary and postsecondary schooling than in earlier grades (Poropat, 2009). Another reason for
focusing on adolescents is that decisions and outcomes during this
transitional stage have long-term implications for adult development (Moffitt et al., 2011).
We began with a naturalistic investigation of high school students (Study 1), who described self-control dilemmas they had
experienced and told us how they dealt with them. We also asked
students to indicate how they would respond to hypothetical scenarios in which the impulse to do academic work conflicted with
diversions like texting or videogames. We expected that the majority of self-control attempts would be classifiable using the
process model, that all five stages of the process model would be
represented in their responses, and, further, that when asked to
consider exemplar strategies, they would rate strategies deployed
earlier in the process of impulse generation as more effective than
those deployed later.
Next, in Study 2, we conducted a random-assignment field
experiment to more confidently establish the relative effectiveness
of earlier versus later strategies. Specifically, we asked high school
students to set a specific study goal for the following week and
then instructed them to use either situation modification, response
modulation, or no particular strategy at all. As noted above, we
chose to examine situation modification rather than situation selection because we assumed that some students might not be able

332

DUCKWORTH, WHITE, MATTEUCCI, SHEARER, AND GROSS

In Study 1, we asked high school students to describe incidents
from their personal lives in which they needed self-control and,
next, to indicate what they actually did. Prior research with middle
school students suggests that self-control is called for primarily in
the domains of academic work and interpersonal conflict (Tsukayama, Duckworth, & Kim, 2013), but we expected older students to grapple with additional dilemmas more common in adulthood (e.g., saving money, exercising; Tsukayama, Duckworth, &
Kim, 2012). Next, we asked students how they might handle three
hypothetical academic self-control dilemmas (e.g., studying vs.
playing videogames). To determine the utility of the process model
for organizing self-control strategies for this age group, two trained
coders classified these four open-ended responses according to the
model’s five categories. Finally, to test the prediction that early
deployed strategies are more effective than later-deployed strategies, we asked students to rate the effectiveness of specific responses to these three hypothetical scenarios, each designed to
represent one of the model’s categories.

Internet (e.g., watch YouTube videos, check your Instagram feed,
etc.) or play video games.” And, finally, the procrastination scenario read: “You have a long-term project due and don’t want to
wait until the last minute to get it done. But there are a lot of more
fun things to do, like playing video games and watching TV.”
After telling us what they would do in these three hypothetical
academic scenarios, students were asked to judge the effectiveness
of self-control responses we provided that represented each of the
five strategies defined by the process model of self-control. The
instructions were as follows: “We’ve talked to a lot of other
students about this situation. We find that five kinds of responses
are really common. Now that you’ve seen these options, rate how
effective you think each strategy would be for each of the three
hypothetical scenarios on a scale from 0 to 100 (0 ⫽ least effective,
100 ⫽ most effective)”. For example, students read and then rated
five different approaches to the texting scenario corresponding to
strategies in the process model. In this context, “I would move to
a different location to avoid being near my phone” represented
situation selection; “I would change something about my phone
like turn off the volume or put it face down” represented situation
modification; “I would not look directly at my phone. I would
instead look directly at my academic work” represented attentional
deployment; “I would change the way I think about this situation.
For example, I would change the way I think about texting or
change the way I think about the assignment” represented cognitive change; and “I would force myself not to use the phone. I
would try to use willpower to overcome that urge” represented
response modulation.

Method

Data Analysis and Coding

Participants. Participants were students from a suburban high
school in the Northeast United States. This study was added to a
survey of students enrolled in a foreign language course. Opt-in
parental consent and student assent were obtained for N ⫽ 577
students enrolled in Grades 9 through 12. Participants ranged in
age from 13 to 19 years (M ⫽ 15.49, SD ⫽ 1.13). Approximately
70% of the students were White, 15% were Hispanic, 8% were
Black, 7% were Asian, 1% were of other ethnic backgrounds; 58%
were female, and 14% were from low-income families, as indicated by eligibility for free or reduced-price meals.
Procedure and measures. Students in Grades 9 through 12
were asked to complete surveys in a single 45-min session during
the school day. In the first part of the session, they were asked to
“tell a story of a specific incident where you used self-control
when you really needed it. What were you trying to do and what
actually happened? What did you try to do to be self-controlled in
this situation?”
In the second part of the session, we described three common
academic self-control dilemmas based on pilot interviews. These
hypothetical scenarios were presented in random order, and each
was followed by an open-ended question: “What would you do to
get your studying done?” The texting scenario read, “You have set
a goal of getting better grades this year than last year. Unfortunately, you’re having difficulty staying focused on your studying
for long periods of time because you keep texting with your
friends.” The Internet/videogame scenario read, “You have to
study for a big exam but the class is a really boring one. Every time
you sit down to study, you find yourself tempted to surf the

Two trained coders categorized students’ descriptions of selfcontrol incidents in their own lives using domains (e.g., work,
interpersonal conflict, eating, physical exercise) identified by Tsukayama, Duckworth, and Kim (2012). Less than 1% of responses
could not be coded because they were blank or incomprehensible.
The remaining valid responses were coded, and there were no
disagreements on how to categorize dilemmas.
The same coders then categorized open-ended responses to this
prompt according to the five strategy types in the process model of
self-control (i.e., situation selection, situation modification, attentional deployment, cognitive change, and response modulation).
About 4% of responses could not be categorized because they did
not provide sufficient information, 2% indicated planning, but
did not indicate what action was being planned, 2% of responses could not be classified because students said they failed
to exercise self-control, and 2% were not categorized because
they named a variety of strategies that spanned multiple categories in the process model. Coders concurred on how to
categorize 81% of valid responses (␬ ⫽ .57, p ⬍ .001) and,
through discussion, arrived at a consensus for the remainder.
Likewise, the coders categorized open-ended responses to the
three hypothetical academic self-control scenarios according to the
five strategy types in the process model of self-control. About 6%
of responses could not be coded because they did not provide
sufficient information, 4% were not coded because they included
strategies that spanned multiple categories in the process model,
and 3% of responses could not be classified because they described
failures of self-control. Coders concurred on how to categorize

to choose their situations. As a comparison, we used the most
obvious cognitive strategy: response modulation. In Study 3, we
replicated these findings with college students and, in addition,
tested the process model’s prediction that undesirable impulses
curtailed at the situation modification stage would be weaker than
those countered at the response modulation stage.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Study 1: A Naturalistic Investigation of
Self-Control Strategies

STRATEGIC SELF-CONTROL

87% of the valid responses (␬ ⫽ .58, p ⬍ .001) and, through
discussion, arrived at a consensus on the type of strategy used for
the remainder.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Results
As illustrated in Table 1, students described a wide range of
self-control incidents in their own lives. Most concerned interpersonal (42%) or academic (27%) situations; a smaller proportion of
students described using self-control to regulate their eating (14%),
physical exercise (6%), or behavior in sundry other (11%) domains. Age did not moderate these or any other analyses.
In response to these everyday dilemmas, students said they
deployed a variety of strategies, examples of which are provided in
Table 1. Notably, the majority (90%) of these open-ended responses could be categorized using the process model, and all five
types of strategies were represented. They were not, however,
equally popular, ␹2(4, N ⫽ 522) ⫽ 135.99, p ⬍ .001. As shown in
Figure 2, the most commonly nominated strategy was cognitive
change (38%), followed by response modulation (24%), situation
modification (16%), situation selection (12%), and, finally, attentional deployment (10%).
Taking a closer look at the strategies nominated in the two
most commonly described self-control dilemmas, we found that
students used situation modification more often in academic
situations (29%) than in interpersonal conflicts (6%), ␹2(1, N ⫽
371) ⫽ 37.28, p ⬍ .001. Conversely, students relied on response modulation more often in interpersonal conflicts (35%)
than they did in academic situations (17%), ␹2(1, N ⫽ 371) ⫽
13.42, p ⬍ .001.
As shown in Figure 2 and Table 2, students likewise suggested
a variety of strategies for exercising self-control in three hypothetical academic dilemmas. These hypothetical scenarios pitted academic goals against texting, videogames/Internet, and procrastinating, respectively. The majority (87%) of these responses could
be categorized using the process model. Students were more likely
to recommended situation modification strategies (58%) than cognitive change (17%), situation selection (12%), response modulation (11%), or attentional deployment (1%).
Considering that what students think they should do may differ
from what they actually do, we took a closer look at (n ⫽ 156)
students who elected to describe an everyday self-control incident
that involved academic work (vs. interpersonal conflict, food, etc.).

333

Comparing hypothetical and “real-world” everyday dilemmas in
this subsample, we found no reliable differences in the popularity
of situation selection strategies. Interestingly, students were twice
as likely to suggest situation modification when recommending
what to do in hypothetical academic scenarios (58%) than when
describing what they actually did in similar situations (29%). In
contrast, students used cognitive change more often in their everyday academic lives (32%) than they recommended doing in
hypothetical scenarios (17%). Students used attentional deployment more often in their everyday academic lives (8%) than they
recommended doing in hypothetical scenarios (1%). Finally, students recommended response modulation more often in hypothetical scenarios (28%) than they mentioned using it in their everyday
academic lives (12%). One-sample nonparametric tests confirmed
that these four comparisons were reliable, ps ⬍ .001.
When asked to rate the effectiveness of exemplar strategies from
each of the five categories of the process model, students rated
some strategies as much more effective than others. Effectiveness
ratings were approximately normally distributed, with alphas ranging from .67 to .86 (M ⫽ .79). In a repeated-measures analysis of
variance (ANOVA), effectiveness ratings varied by strategy type,
F(4, 2216) ⫽ 436.94, p ⬍ .001, ␩p2 ⫽ .44. As illustrated in Figure 3,
post hoc pairwise comparisons using a Bonferroni correction
showed that situation selection strategies were rated as more
effective than situation modification strategies, p ⬍ .001, d ⫽ 0.47,
which, in turn, were rated as more effective than attention deployment, cognitive change, or response modulation strategies (ps ⬍
.001 and ds from 1.05 to 1.23). The latter three strategies did not
differ in student-rated effectiveness.

Discussion
To our knowledge, Study 1 is the first naturalistic study of
self-control in the everyday lives of high school students. When
asked about a self-control incident from their own recent experience, most students described managing interpersonal conflicts or
meeting academic work responsibilities. The same domains have
been identified as centrally important in the lives of middle school
students (Tsukayama et al., 2013), though some high school students in Study 1 mentioned self-control goals common in adulthood, including eating healthfully and getting physical exercise.
The process model proved a useful taxonomy for categorizing
the many strategies that students used in the self-control incidents

Table 1
Examples of Self-Control Challenges and Responses in the Everyday Lives of High School Students in Study 1
Type of strategy
Situation selection
Situation modification
Attentional deployment
Cognitive change
Response modulation

Self-control challenge

Self-control response

“I really needed to study for a test and I used self-control to
resist taking a nap and playing on my phone to study.”
“I knew I needed to study to get a good grade because I
needed the A.”
“At around 6pm I start to get hungry. Knowing that dinner is
around 7, I use self-control to stay away from snacks for
that hour. I do this so I still have an appetite for dinner.”
“When doing homework I usually get lazy and go on to
doing other useless things. Lately, I have been using selfcontrol to focus on homework. ”
“I was in a soccer game and a kid continuously fouled me
and was harassing me.”

“I locked myself in my room without my phone and sat
in a desk so I couldn’t fall asleep.”
“I put away all devices that hindered my ability to
focus on my task.”
“I occupied myself with other activities.”
“I simply laid out the cons of what would happen if I
didn’t do my homework, and was motivated to do
it.”
“Instead of retaliating, I used self-control and controlled
my anger and the kid eventually got a yellow card.”

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

334

DUCKWORTH, WHITE, MATTEUCCI, SHEARER, AND GROSS

Figure 2. Categories of self-control strategies suggested by high school
students in Study 1.

from their own lives. Although some of the open-ended responses
required discussion, most were agreed upon by two coders whose
initial categorizations were made independently. Likewise, when
considering three hypothetical academic scenarios, students recommended a heterogeneous array of strategies which, again, were
mostly captured in the process model and were by no means
limited to the most obvious tactic: response modulation. Interestingly, students used situation modification more often to get their
academic work done than to navigate interpersonal conflicts. This
finding suggests that certain contexts lend themselves to particular
self-control strategies, and that situation modification may be more
apt for physical temptations (e.g., a computer or cell phone, either
of which can be turned off) than emotional ones (e.g., losing one’s
temper at a classmate).
Because many students in our sample elected to tell us about an
academic situation (as opposed to an interpersonal conflict or other
type of situation) in which they recalled exercising self-control, we
were able to use this subsample to compare “real world” strategies
with those students suggested in response to hypothetical dilem-

Figure 3. Mean effectiveness ratings of example self-control strategies
by high school students in Study 1. Error bars represent 95% confidence
intervals.

mas. It turns out that when considering hypothetical academic
scenarios, as opposed to recounting what they did in their own
lives, students were more likely to suggest situation modification
and less likely to suggest cognitive change, attentional deployment
and response modulation strategies. This unexpected finding requires further research for a complete explanation. One possibility
is that by explicitly mentioning physical temptations (e.g., cell
phones) in the hypothetical scenarios, we biased students toward
situation modification strategies (e.g., turning off the cell phone).
Alternatively, it may be that when considering a hypothetical
situation, students were able to think more objectively about how
best to act. The later explanation is consistent with a large literature on construal level theory, which has established that mental
representations of hypothetical (vs. actual) situations facilitate
psychological distance, enabling proper consideration of their
goal-relevant and essential features (Fujita, 2011; Fujita, Trope,
Liberman, & Levin-Sagi, 2006).

Table 2
Examples of Responses to Hypothetical Academic Self-Control Challenges by High School Students in Study 1
Type of strategy

Studying vs. texting

Situation selection

“Lock myself in a room without my
phone so that it doesn’t become a
distraction.”

Situation modification

“I would shut off my phone and put it
under my pillow so I wouldn’t be
tempted to touch it.”

Attentional deployment

“Ease off the texting by ignoring my
phone.”

Cognitive change

“I would set up a reward for myself . . .
I would plan something for myself
that I would only do if I got straight
A’s.”
“Not be a baby and just study.”

Response modulation

Studying vs. internet/videogames

Procrastination

“I would go to the library as being
in a quiet and controlled
environment would make me
focus.”
“Remove all distractions and tell one
of my parents I had a big exam so
they would check in on me and
I’d be forced to stay on task.”
“Remind myself that even the most
boring classes count towards my
GPA which will affect my future.”
“I would tell myself that if I study
for an hour, I can reward myself
by playing video games later.”

“Lock myself in my room until it’s done,
because I don’t have a T.V. let alone a
game console in my room.”

“Just deal with it and study.”

“Just do it . . . I just focus and get my
work done.”

“I would ask my mom to take away my
phone and other distractions to make
sure I can get it done on time.”
“Think about the consequences and try
my best to close everything else out”
“Set goals, break the project up into
pieces.”

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

STRATEGIC SELF-CONTROL

When asked to consider self-control strategies that we constructed to represent the five stages in the process model, students
overwhelmingly identified situation selection to be most effective,
followed by situation modification. Rated far less effective than
either of these two situational strategies were the later-deployed
cognitive strategies. Notably, the absence of significant differences
in the perceived effectiveness among the three cognitive strategies
(i.e., attentional deployment, cognitive change, and response modulation) is at odds with empirical evidence that attentional deployment and cognitive change strategies are both more effective than
response modulation (Mischel, 2014; Webb, Miles, & Sheeran,
2012). We discuss possible explanations in the General Discussion
section.

Study 2: A Self-Control Intervention Study
in High School
The self-reported ratings of effectiveness provided by students
in Study 1 support the most direct claim of the process model
regarding the superior effectiveness of earlier deployed strategies.
As a more rigorous test, we conducted Study 2, a field experiment
with high school students. Consistent with our initial intuition that
young people might lack the freedom to choose where and with
whom they would be, students considering both real-life and
hypothetical academic dilemmas in Study 1 nominated situation
modification strategies at least twice as often as situation selection
strategies. As a foil to situation modification, we considered the
most obvious cognitive strategy: response modulation. We did so
in part because there is a long tradition of admonishing students to
“just pay attention!” or “just control yourself!” as an encouragement to their self-control. Thus, although the least sophisticated of
cognitive self-control strategies, response modulation is also the
most straightforward. Accordingly, in Study 2, we randomly assigned students to implement either situation modification, response modulation, or no particular strategy in order to attain
self-identified study goals. One week later, students in all three
conditions reported the extent to which they had accomplished
their goals and the general quality of their studying during the prior
week.

Method
Participants. Participants were students attending a boarding
high school in the Northeast United States. Opt-out parental consent and student assent were obtained for 250 students enrolled in
Grades 9 through 12, but half of students did not complete the
follow-up survey. After confirming that attrition was not related to
treatment condition, these students were excluded from further
analyses, leaving a final sample of N ⫽ 126. Participants ranged in
age from 14 to 19 (Mage ⫽ 16.4, SD ⫽ 1.27). About 58% were
White, 24% Asian, 8% multiracial, 6% African American, 3% of
other ethnic backgrounds, and 1% Hispanic; 57% were female.
Procedure. Students were randomly assigned to one of three
conditions: situation modification (n ⫽ 44), response modulation
(n ⫽ 35), or no-treatment control (n ⫽ 47). All interventions were
introduced as trying to help “students stick to study goals that they
set for themselves.”
All students were first asked to set a study goal that they would
like to accomplish over the coming week. They were then asked to

335

answer two questions about their study habits: “How many days
over the past week did you study?” and “On average, how many
hours per day did you study on the days that you studied last
week?” At the end of the first session, all students provided
demographic information and, in addition, were asked, “How
much do you believe this strategy would work?” (1 ⫽ do not
believe at all to 5 ⫽ strongly believe).
In the situation modification condition, students were instructed
to remove temptations that might distract them from reaching an
academic goal. Following a brief introduction, which introduced
them to the idea of “removing temptations from sight rather than
trying to resist them directly,” they watched an animated video
about relevant research. Specifically, students learned about a
study in which secretaries ate less candy when candy was kept in
bowls placed more than an arm’s reach away (Wansink, Painter, &
Lee, 2006). Next, they watched an expert endorse this strategy in
a clip taken from a media interview (Duckworth, 2013, October 7).
Finally, they were asked to modify their environment to minimize
temptations (e.g., setting reminders or alarms, installing online
apps to block online temptations such as Facebook). We emphasized that students should make any modification they thought
would be useful and asked them to repeat any “temporary”
changes (e.g., turning off the cell phone) as necessary.
Students assigned to the response modulation group were instructed to exert willpower whenever they were faced with temptation. Following a brief introduction, which introduced them to
the idea that “people can actually strengthen their self-control
muscle with repeated practice that consists of actively resisting
immediate temptations (rather than simply avoiding them),” they
watched an animated video about relevant research. Specifically,
students learned about a study in which individuals who practiced
exerting willpower later exhibited increases in healthy eating,
exercise, emotional control, and improvement in study habits
(Oaten & Cheng, 2006). Next, they watched an expert endorse the
concept of strengthening willpower in a media clip (McGonigal,
2012). Finally, they were asked to “practice resisting temptations
when you encounter them.” We emphasized that students should
use willpower whenever they experienced an impulse to indulge in
a temptation that conflicted with their academic goals.
In the no-treatment control condition, students were simply
asked to set a study goal. They were not given any explicit
information about how to achieve this goal.
One week later, all students were asked to report on their
progress toward the goal they had previously identified. Students
reported on the quality of their studying compared to prior weeks
(1 ⫽ a lot worse to 5 ⫽ a lot better) and how well they felt they
accomplished their goal (1 ⫽ extremely poorly to 5 ⫽ extremely
well). As a manipulation check, they were also asked an openended question, “What strategies did you actually use to deal with
temptations over the last week? Be as detailed as possible.” Two
trained coders categorized responses according to the five categories of the process model. About 14% of students did not answer
this question, which was the very last part of the follow-up survey.
An additional 7% could not be categorized because they did not
provide sufficient information; 1% could not be categorized because students named a variety of strategies that spanned multiple
categories in the process model. Coders disagreed about 2% of the
remaining 98 valid responses and resolved these discrepancies
through discussion.

336

DUCKWORTH, WHITE, MATTEUCCI, SHEARER, AND GROSS

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Results
Preliminary analyses. Randomization was successful. There
were no differences across condition in gender, age, or baseline
study habits, nor did any of these variables moderate analyses.
Therefore, these variables were not included in subsequent analyses.
We found a marginally significant effect of group on how much
students believed their strategy would help them at baseline, F(2,
126) ⫽ 2.96, p ⫽ .06, ␩p2 ⫽ .05. However, post hoc pairwise
comparisons showed that anticipated helpfulness of the situation
modification activity was not higher than either the response
modulation activity or no-treatment condition, ns. Indeed, the only
reliable pairwise difference was that the response modulation
group (M ⫽ 3.80, SD ⫽ 0.99) believed in the helpfulness of their
strategy more than the no-treatment group (M ⫽ 3.26, SD ⫽ 1.05),
p ⫽ .04, d ⫽ .50. Including anticipated helpfulness as a covariate
did not affect any results (results available upon request).
At follow-up, participants reported using different self-control
strategies as a function of condition, ␹2(8, N ⫽ 98) ⫽ 20.8, p ⬍
.01. Specifically, participants in the situation modification condition more frequently used situation modification strategies than
participants in the response modulation, ␹2(1, N ⫽ 63) ⫽ 10.5, p ⬍
.001, or no-treatment control conditions, ␹2(1, N ⫽ 71) ⫽ 15.85,
p ⬍ .001. Likewise, participants in the response modulation condition used response modulation more frequently than participants
in the situation modification condition, ␹2(1, N ⫽ 63) ⫽ 5.22, p ⫽
.02. Reported use of response modulation strategies in the response
modulation condition did not significantly differ from the notreatment control condition, ␹2(1, N ⫽ 62) ⫽ 0.88, p ⫽ .35.
Primary analyses. We first ran a one-way ANOVA to compare students’ goal accomplishment across conditions (situation
modification, response modulation, no-treatment control). As illustrated in Figure 4a, there was a significant effect of condition on
goal accomplishment, Welch F(2, 73.24) ⫽ 4.35, p ⫽ .016, ␩p2 ⫽
.06. Planned contrasts accounting for unequal variances revealed
that students in the situation modification condition (M ⫽ 3.39,
SD ⫽ 0.83) better accomplished their goals than students in other
conditions (response modulation control: M ⫽ 2.86, SD ⫽ 1.14;
no-treatment control: M ⫽ 2.91, SD ⫽ 0.85), t(90.72) ⫽ 2.91, p ⬍
.01, d ⫽ 0.56. The no-treatment control and response modulation
control conditions did not differ from one another, t(60.81) ⫽ ⫺0.23,
p ⫽ .82.
Similarly, a one-way ANOVA revealed that study quality also
differed by condition, F(2, 119) ⫽ 5.49, p ⬍ .01, ␩p2 ⫽ .08 (see

Figure 4b). Planned contrasts confirmed that students in the situation modification condition (M ⫽ 3.34, SD ⫽ 0.79) reported
better study quality than students in other conditions (response
modulation control: M ⫽ 3.00, SD ⫽ 0.77; no-treatment control:
M ⫽ 2.76, SD ⫽ 0.87), t(119) ⫽ 2.93, p ⬍ .01, d ⫽ 0.57. The
no-treatment control and response modulation control conditions
did not differ from one another, t(119) ⫽ 1.30, p ⫽ .20.

Discussion
The experimental findings in Study 2 were consistent with our
naturalistic investigation in Study 1. Specifically, high school
students randomly assigned to implement situation modification
were better able to accomplish their study goals the following
week and, in addition, reported their studying that week to be
higher in quality than students randomly assigned to implement
response modulation or no particular strategy. These differences
were large in size and reliable, whereas there were no reliable
differences between the response modulation and no-treatment
conditions.

Study 3: A Self-Control Intervention Study in College
In Study 3, we sought to replicate the findings of Study 2 in a
sample of college students and, further, test the hypothesis that
situation modification would diminish the aversive feelings of
temptation associated with directly modulating impulses. By doing
so, we tested the prediction that impulses addressed earlier in their
gestation would be weaker than those addressed later. Although we
bore no illusions that manipulating the physical surroundings
would make studying especially pleasurable, we did imagine it
might make it relatively less unpleasant. We conjectured that
reduced feelings of temptation might, therefore, mediate the effects of situation modification on goal attainment.

Method
Participants. Participants were undergraduate students recruited from psychology courses at the University of Pennsylvania.
A sample of 159 students (Mage ⫽ 20.4, SD ⫽ 1.09) completed all
study requirements and received course credit for completing the
survey. Participants were 54% Caucasian, 25% Asian, 8% of other
ethnic backgrounds, 7% Hispanic, and 6% African American; 65%
were female.

Figure 4. High school students rating of (a) goal accomplishment and (b) study quality in Study 2. Error bars
represent 95% confidence intervals.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

STRATEGIC SELF-CONTROL

Procedure. Students were randomly assigned to one of three
conditions: situation modification (n ⫽ 52), response modulation
(n ⫽ 52), or no-treatment control (n ⫽ 55). Similar to Study 2, all
interventions were introduced as trying to help “students stick to
study goals that they set for themselves.”
The instructions and activities for the three conditions were
similar to those used in Study 2. Students were asked one question
about their study habits: “On average, how many hours do you
study per day?” All students were also asked to set a study goal
that they would like to accomplish over the coming week. One
important difference is that participants in the situation modification condition used their cell phone cameras to document changes
to their environment, a manipulation check we were not able to
apply in Study 2 given the younger age and associated confidentiality concerns of those participants.
One week later, all students were asked to report on their
progress toward their goal. Specifically, they reported how well
they felt they accomplished their goal (1 ⫽ extremely poorly to
5 ⫽ extremely well), and how tempted they felt by distractions in
their environment over the past week (1 ⫽ not at all tempted to
5 ⫽ extremely tempted). Finally, we asked students to complete a
checklist of five strategies, indicating any and all they had used in
the past week. The five strategies were described without naming
them categorically. For example, students who indicated they had
“changed my surroundings so that the temptation was out of reach
or not easily accessible” were considered having used situation
modification. Students who indicated, “I told myself, I will not
give in to temptation” were considered having used response
modulation.

Results
Preliminary analyses. There were no differences across condition in gender, or age, and these variables did not moderate any
of the subsequent analyses.
However, there was a significant effect of group on the number
of hours studied per day at baseline, F(2, 161) ⫽ 6.44, p ⬍ .01,
␩p2 ⫽ .07. Pairwise comparisons showed that the response modulation group (M ⫽ 4.13, SD ⫽ 1.67) studied more than the
situation modification group (M ⫽ 3.04, SD ⫽ 1.60), p ⬍ .001,
d ⫽ 0.70. There were no differences between either situation
modification or response modulation and the no-treatment group
(M ⫽ 3.54, SD ⫽ 1.48), ps ⬍ .15. Given these differences at
baseline, hours studied was included as a covariate in subsequent
analyses.

337

As a manipulation check, we fit two binary logistic regression
models predicting use of situation modification and response modulation strategies, respectively, from condition and controlling for
hours studied. As expected, participants in the situation modification condition were more likely to use situation modification
strategies than participants in the response modulation condition,
Wald ⫽ 7.53, p ⬍ .01, or the no-treatment control condition,
Wald ⫽ 7.53, p ⬍ .01. Relative to the response modulation group,
participants in the no-treatment control group were equally likely
to use response modulation strategies, Wald ⫽ 1.03, p ⫽ .31, but
participants in the situation modification condition were marginally less likely to use response modulation, Wald ⫽ 2.62, p ⫽ .10.
Primary analyses. A one-way analysis of covariance (ANCOVA)
revealed that students’ success at achieving their goals differed by
condition, F(2, 155) ⫽ 6.48, p ⬍ .01, ␩p2 ⫽ .08. As shown in
Figure 5a, pairwise comparisons revealed that participants in the
situation modification group (M ⫽ 3.56, SD ⫽ 1.05) accomplished
their goal more often than participants in either the response
modulation (M ⫽ 3.06, SD ⫽ 1.04), p ⬍ .01, d ⫽ 0.60, or the
no-treatment group (M ⫽ 2.98, SD ⫽ 1.13), p ⬍ .01, d ⫽ 0.63. The
response modulation group, however, did not differ from the
no-treatment group, p ⫽ .97, d ⫽ 0.01.
Similarly, a separate one-way ANCOVA showed that the level
of temptation students faced over the previous week (M ⫽ 3.77,
SD ⫽ .85) also differed by condition, F(2, 155) ⫽ 5.44, p ⬍ .01,
␩p2 ⫽ .07 (Figure 5b). Participants in the situation modification
group (M ⫽ 3.46, SD ⫽ 0.83) reported having experienced less
temptation over the previous week than participants in either the
response modulation group (M ⫽ 3.97, SD ⫽ 0.83), p ⬍ .01, d ⫽
0.61, or the no-treatment control group (M ⫽ 3.87, SD ⫽ 0.82),
p ⬍ .01, d ⫽ 0.50, but the response modulation group was not
significantly different from the no-treatment group, p ⫽ .54, d ⫽
0.12.
Finally, to test the hypothesis that situation modification could
increase self-reported goal attainment, at least in part, by reducing
temptation, we used Hayes and Preacher’s (2014) Mediate Macro
for SPSS to test whether self-report of overall temptation mediated
the effect of condition on goal accomplishment. Two dummy
codes were created for the two treatment groups (coded as 1) with
the no-treatment group serving as the reference group (coded as 0).
We found that temptation partially mediated goal accomplishment
for the situation modification group (indirect effect ⫽ 0.22; 95%
bootstrapped confidence interval, CI: [0.05, 0.43]), but not for the
response modulation group (indirect effect ⫽ ⫺0.05; 95% boot-

Figure 5. College students rating of (a) goal accomplishment (b) level of temptation in Study 3. Estimated
marginal means controlling for number of hours studied at baseline. Error bars represent 95% confidence
intervals.

338

DUCKWORTH, WHITE, MATTEUCCI, SHEARER, AND GROSS

strapped confidence interval [CI]: ⫺0.22, 0.10), relative to the
no-treatment condition (see Figure 6). This supports our hypothesis that situation modification may be an effective self-control
strategy partly because it reduces the degree to which participants
felt tempted when trying to accomplish their goals during the
week.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Discussion
Study 3 confirmed the findings of Study 2. College students
encouraged to change their physical surroundings in ways that
would help them achieve their study goals were more successful in
actually accomplishing these goals in the following week. As
predicted by the process model, they reported having experienced
less temptation during the same period, and reduced feelings of
temptation partially mediated the effect of condition on selfreported goal attainment.
The contribution of Study 3 to the overall investigation was
several-fold. First, the effect of condition on study goal attainment
replicated findings of Study 2, strengthening the inference that
situation modification strategies are more effective than response
modulation strategies. Second, the mediation results supported the
process model insofar as they indicated that students who used
situation modification strategies were able to curtail the strengthening of undesirable impulses, compared to students who used
response modulation strategies or no particular assigned selfcontrol strategy. Although strong claims about the mediational role
of temptation are inappropriate given our study design (Bullock,
Green, & Ha, 2010), we are encouraged by this preliminary evidence to more rigorously test the extent to which situation modification makes self-control “easier.” Third, whereas Study 1 and
Study 2 involved high school students, Study 3 involved college
students, thus extending the external validity of our investigation
to older students accorded relatively greater autonomy in their
everyday decision making.

Figure 6. The effect of condition on goal accomplishment is partially
mediated by temptation experienced by college students in Study 3. The
coefficients shown are unstandardized. Condition effects are relative to
control (dummy coded as 0). ⴱ p ⬍ .05. ⴱⴱ p ⬍ .001.

General Discussion
Across three studies, we examined how high school and college
students exercise self-control and assessed the relative efficacy of
their efforts to do so. In Study 1, we found that high school
students use self-control in a variety of everyday situations but
most commonly to navigate interpersonal conflicts and to get their
academic work done. When asked how they handled these incidents, students named strategies that could be reliably classified
using the process model of self-control. In response to three
hypothetical academic scenarios (e.g., studying vs. texting friends),
students likewise suggested diverse means of exerting self-control,
but when asked to consider strategies we had written to represent each
of the five strategy types in the process model, they overwhelmingly
rated situation selection as most effective, followed by situation modification, and finally all three later-deployed cognitive strategies (i.e.,
attentional deployment, cognitive change, and response modulation).
We were surprised that students judged response modulation to
be as effective as attentional deployment and cognitive change
strategies. This finding is at odds with theoretical predictions from
the process model as well as empirical research showing that
preschoolers encouraged to direct attention away from tempting
treats or to think about them in “cooler,” less consummatory terms,
are better able to delay gratification (Mischel, 2014; Mischel et al.,
1989). One possibility is that young children benefit more from
these more sophisticated cognitive strategies than do adolescents,
but this explanation is hard to square with evidence that adults
more effectively regulate their emotion when using cognitive
change than when using response modulation (Gross, 2014). Alternatively, differences in effectiveness among these laterdeployed strategies might be real but too small in size for students
in our study to recognize. Relatedly, it may be that any of these
cognitive strategies is more easily reversed than situational strategies, and therefore comparably less effective. For example, when
trying to study rather than spend time on social media, students
might look away or mentally recast that pastime as a threat to their
grade point average— but, alas, it is just as easy to glance back, or
to think instead about how many “likes” you’ve garnered in the
last few minutes. In contrast, it takes effort to reverse the decision
to close the Internet browser, shut down the laptop, or find a
distraction-free room in which to study. All of these possibilities
merit further investigation.
In Studies 2 and 3, high school and college students randomly
assigned to implement situation modification strategies reported
being better able to accomplish their study goals the following
week than were students assigned to implement response modulation or given no explicit self-control strategy at all. We found
evidence in Study 3 that reduced feelings of temptation partially
mediated the effect of condition on goal attainment. These experimental results suggest that students might benefit from direct
instruction in modifying their situations to advantage. Perhaps the
activity we developed merely reminded them of the helpfulness of
situation modification. If so, one can imagine that a comparable
benefit might be realized if the content included in our intervention
was shared with students. For example, instead of simply exhorting students to rely on their willpower, teachers and professors
might instead explain that removing temptations from their surroundings makes staying on task easier.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

STRATEGIC SELF-CONTROL

Collectively, these findings suggest that intervening early in the
development of an impulse may be more effective than intervening
later. Probing how students think about various self-control tactics,
we discovered that they largely recognize that when it comes to
self-control, a stitch in time saves nine. In particular, when presented with hypothetical academic self-control dilemmas, they
recommended situation modification more than any other strategy.
However, situation modification was mentioned less than twice as
often when students told us what they did to manage their academic responsibilities in their own everyday lives. Given how
much more effective students rated situation modification than any
cognitive strategy (ds ⬎ 1), an intriguing possibility, to be pursued
in further research, is that students already recognize what they
“should” do to effectively exercise self-control but do not always
act accordingly.

Limitations and Future Directions
The current investigation had several limitations that should be
addressed in future research. Most importantly, in the interventions
presented in Studies 2 and 3, we relied upon self-reported, rather
than behavioral, measures of goal attainment. We did so in order
to allow students to set personally relevant and feasible academic
goals. As expected, these goals were extremely diverse: Some
students resolved to “finish all of [their] homework the day before
it is due,” others aimed to “study French for one hour each night
before [they] sleep, and still others hoped to “not go on Facebook
while completing [their] research paper.” Using self-reported outcomes made it possible to tailor our assessments to each participant’s goals. However, our reliance on self-reported outcomes
means that demand effects may have contributed to the superior
efficacy of the situation modification activity. We think this is
unlikely, given that Study 2 participants in the situation modification condition, at baseline, rated their activity as no different in
helpfulness than students in the other two conditions. (Unfortunately, no such manipulation check was administered in Study 3.)
Nonetheless, one important direction for future research is to
replicate and extend present findings using behavioral outcomes.
Relatedly, participants in Studies 2 and 3 reported on their goal
attainment during the prior week using single-item questions.
Measurement error on predictor variables inflates standard errors.
Thus, longer multi-item questionnaires of goal attainment, rather
than single-item measures thereof, might have provided more
precise estimates of the benefits of situation modification across
these two studies.
Future research is also needed to determine the durability of
situation modification interventions. We documented large-sized
effects on attainment of study goals one week later, but we did not
measure the effects of our manipulation beyond that time point.
Common sense suggests that an intervention lasting less than half
an hour would soon be forgotten or displaced by prior habits, but
recent research on “psychologically wise” interventions pinpointing theoretically precise targets has shown enduring effects of very
brief interventions on academic outcomes (Walton, 2014; Yeager
& Walton, 2011). Such interventions seem to work, at least in part,
by changing a recursive process (e.g., improving behavior, leading
to improvements in outcomes, thereby reinforcing motivation to
continue improving behavior). The mediation results in Study 3
give us some hope for just such a possibility. In particular, we

339

speculate that students who change their situations to their advantage experience less temptation as a result, which helps them
accomplish their study goals, leading to better academic performance, and reinforcing their motivation to continue modifying
their situations. Longitudinal experiments with a more extended
time frame are needed to test this possibility.
Finally, the random-assignment experiments in Studies 2 and 3
contrasted situation modification and response modulation as exemplar earlier versus later self-control strategies. A complete test
of the process model would ideally entail a simultaneous comparison of all five self-control strategies and a no-treatment control.
With adequate statistical power, such a study design could unambiguously establish the efficacy of strategies as a function of the
stage in process of impulse generation at which they are deployed.

Conclusion
The current investigation reveals high school and college students to have in their arsenals many more means of exercising
self-control than direct effortful inhibition of undesirable impulses.
Unfortunately, although they seem to recognize the utility of
choosing where and with whom to be, and subsequently modifying
these physical and social circumstances to advantage, they do not
always do so. Why not? Perhaps students lack the future orientation to spontaneously anticipate temptations far enough in advance
to take appropriate preemptive measures. Or perhaps they assume
that the inherently cognitive conflict between conflicting impulses
should be resolved with similarly cognitive tactics. In other words,
remedies that are qualitatively different from the problem itself
are, perhaps, less obvious, even if they are ultimately more effective. Given the importance of self-control to success in school and
beyond, the questions raised by our current findings bear special
urgency. Why don’t students capitalize on forward-looking, situational solutions to self-control dilemmas? What “psychologically
wise” interventions might equip them with these skills? How
might this broadened conception of what it means to exercise
self-control benefit “studenting” and other life responsibilities?
Answers to these questions promise both theoretical insights and
practical tools for managing the many self-control dilemmas that
characterize the human condition.

References
Achtziger, A., & Gollwitzer, P. M. (2008). Motivation and volition in the
course of action. In J. Heckhausen & H. Heckhausen (Eds.), Motivation
and action (pp. 273–295). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
Ariely, D., & Wertenbroch, K. (2002). Procrastination, deadlines, and
performance: Self-control by precommitment. Psychological Science,
13, 219 –224. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1467-9280.00441
Aristotle. (350 BCE/1999). Nicomachean ethics (T. Irwin, Trans.) (2nd
ed.). Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing Company.
Banys, P. (1988). The clinical use of disulfiram (Antabuse): A review.
Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 20, 243–261. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
02791072.1988.10472495
Baumeister, R. F. (2014). Self-regulation, ego depletion, and inhibition.
Neuropsychologia, 65, 313–319. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuro
psychologia.2014.08.012
Bonson, K. R., Grant, S. J., Contoreggi, C. S., Links, J. M., Metcalfe, J.,
Weyl, H. L., . . . London, E. D. (2002). Neural systems and cue-induced

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

340

DUCKWORTH, WHITE, MATTEUCCI, SHEARER, AND GROSS

cocaine craving. Neuropsychopharmacology, 26, 376 –386. http://dx.doi
.org/10.1016/S0893-133X(01)00371-2
Bullock, J. G., Green, D. P., & Ha, S. E. (2010). Yes, but what’s the
mechanism? (don’t expect an easy answer). Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 98, 550.
Carlson, S. M., & Beck, D. M. (2009). Symbols as tools in the development
of executive function. In A. Winsler, C. Fernyhough, & I. Montero
(Eds.), Private speech, executive functioning, and the development of
verbal self-regulation (pp. 163–175). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Carlson, S. M., Zelazo, P. D., & Faja, S. (2013). Executive function. In
P. D. Zelazo (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of developmental psychology:
Vol. 1. Body and mind (pp. 706 –742). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Corno, L., & Mandinach, E. B. (2004). What we have learned about student
engagement in the past twenty years. Big Theories Revisited, 4, 299 –
328.
Daly, M., Delaney, L., Egan, M., & Baumeister, R. F. (2015). Childhood
self-control and unemployment throughout the life span: Evidence from
two British cohort studies. Psychological Science, 26, 709 –723. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1177/0956797615569001
Doyle, T. J., Friedmann, P. D., & Zywiak, W. H. (2013). Management of
patients with alcohol dependence in recovery: Options for maintenance
and anticipating and managing relapse in primary care. In R. Saitz (Ed.),
Addressing unhealthy alcohol use in primary care (pp. 85–92). New
York, NY: Springer. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-4779-5_8
Duckworth, A. (2013, October 7). Facebook or homework? How to resist
distractions. Interview by H. Kotb & K. L. Gifford. The Today Show.
[Television broadcast]. New York: NBC.
Duckworth, A. L., & Carlson, S. M. (2013). Self-regulation and school
success. In B. W. Sokol, F. M. E. Grouzet, & U. Muller (Eds.), Selfregulation and autonomy: Social and developmental dimensions of
human conduct (pp. 208 –230). New York, NY: Cambridge University
Press. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139152198.015
Duckworth, A., Gendler, T. S., & Gross, J. J. (2014). Self-control in
school-age children. Educational Psychologist, 49, 199 –217. http://dx
.doi.org/10.1080/00461520.2014.926225
Duckworth, A. L., & Seligman, M. E. P. (2005). Self-discipline outdoes IQ
in predicting academic performance of adolescents. Psychological Science, 16, 939 –944. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2005.01641.x
Eisenberg, N., Duckworth, A. L., Spinrad, T. L., & Valiente, C. (2014).
Conscientiousness: Origins in childhood? Developmental Psychology,
50, 1331–1349. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0030977
Eisenberg, N., Hofer, C., Sulik, M. J., & Spinrad, T. L. (2014). Selfregulation, effortful control, and their socioemotional correlates. In J. J.
Gross (Ed.), Handbook of Emotion regulation (pp. 157–172). New York,
NY: Guilford Press.
Ent, M. R., Baumeister, R. F., & Tice, D. M. (2015). Trait self-control and
the avoidance of temptation. Personality and Individual Differences, 74,
12–15. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2014.09.031
Finkel, E. J., Slotter, E. B., Luchies, L. B., Walton, G. M., & Gross, J. J.
(2013). A brief intervention to promote conflict reappraisal preserves
marital quality over time. Psychological Science, 24, 1595–1601. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1177/0956797612474938
Freud, S. (1977). Introductory lectures on psychoanalysis (pp. 1916 –
1917). New York, NY: Norton.
Fujita, K. (2011). On conceptualizing self-control as more than the effortful
inhibition of impulses. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 15,
352–366. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1088868311411165
Fujita, K., Trope, Y., Liberman, N., & Levin-Sagi, M. (2006). Construal
levels and self-control. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
90, 351–367.
Galla, B. M., Duckworth, A. L., Rikoon, S. H., & Haimm, C. A. (2014).
Academic work is unpleasant but important: Reports of momentary

subjective experience in a national sample of adolescents. Manuscript in
preparation.
Goldstein, A. (1994). Addiction: From biology to drug policy. New York,
NY: Freeman/Times Books/Henry Holt & Co.
Gross, J. J. (2014). Emotion regulation: Conceptual and empirical foundations. In J. J. Gross (Ed.), Handbook of emotion regulation (2nd ed., pp.
3–20). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Gross, J. J., & Levenson, R. W. (1993). Emotional suppression: Physiology, self-report, and expressive behavior. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 64, 970 –986. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514
.64.6.970
Hayes, A. F., & Preacher, K. J. (2014). Statistical mediation analysis with
a multicategorical independent variable. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 67, 451– 470. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
bmsp.12028
Imhoff, R., Schmidt, A. F., & Gerstenberg, F. (2014). Exploring the
interplay of trait self-control and ego depletion: Empirical evidence for
ironic effects. European Journal of Personality, 28, 413– 424. http://dx
.doi.org/10.1002/per.1899
Inzlicht, M., Legault, L., & Teper, R. (2014). Exploring the mechanisms of
self-control improvement. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
23, 302–307. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0963721414534256
James, W. (1899). Talks to teachers on psychology and to students on some
of life’s ideals. New York, NY: Holt and Company. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1037/10814-000
Kelley, A. E. (2004). Memory and addiction: Shared neural circuitry and
molecular mechanisms. Neuron, 44, 161–179. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.neuron.2004.09.016
Kuhl, J. (1984). Volitional aspects of achievement motivation and learned
helplessness: Toward a comprehensive theory of action control. Progress In Experimental Personality Research, 13, 99 –171.
Kurzban, R., Duckworth, A., Kable, J. W., & Myers, J. (2013). An
opportunity cost model of subjective effort and task performance. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36, 661– 679. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/
S0140525X12003196
Marcus, M. (1988). Self-regulation in expository writing. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, Graduate School of the City University of New
York, New York, NY.
McGonigal, K. (2012, July 22). The willpower instinct. Interview by P.
Chattopadhyay. The Agenda with Steve Paikin. [Television broadcast].
Toronto, Canada: TVO.
Mischel, H. N., & Mischel, W. (1983). The development of children’s
knowledge of self-control strategies. Child Development, 54, 603– 619.
http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/1130047
Mischel, W. (2014). The marshmallow test: Mastering self-control. New
York, NY: Little, Brown, and Company.
Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., & Rodriguez, M. I. (1989). Delay of gratification
in children. Science, 244, 933–938. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science
.2658056
Moffitt, T. E., Arseneault, L., Belsky, D., Dickson, N., Hancox, R. J.,
Harrington, H., . . . Caspi, A. (2011). A gradient of childhood selfcontrol predicts health, wealth, and public safety. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 108,
2693–2698. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1010076108
Oaten, M., & Cheng, K. (2006). Longitudinal gains in self-regulation from
regular physical exercise. British Journal of Health Psychology, 11,
717–733. http://dx.doi.org/10.1348/135910706X96481
O’Brien, C. P. (1976). Experimental analysis of conditioning factors in
human narcotic addiction. Pharmacological Reviews, 27, 533–543.
Osgood, D. W., Wilson, J. K., O’Malley, P. M., Bachman, J. G., &
Johnston, L. D. (1996). Routine activities and individual deviant behavior. American Sociological Review, 61, 635– 655. http://dx.doi.org/
10.2307/2096397

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

STRATEGIC SELF-CONTROL
PBS. (2013, September 4). Cookie Monster learns a lesson from Tom
Hiddleston [Video file]. Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v⫽b_ubVVnWglk
Peake, P. K., Hebl, M., & Mischel, W. (2002). Strategic attention deployment for delay of gratification in working and waiting situations. Developmental Psychology, 38, 313–326. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/00121649.38.2.313
Poropat, A. E. (2009). A meta-analysis of the five-factor model of personality and academic performance. Psychological Bulletin, 135, 322–338.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0014996
Rothbart, M. K., & Rueda, M. R. (2005). The development of effortful
control. In U. Mayr, E. Awh, & S. W. Keele (Eds.), Developing individuality in the human brain (pp. 167–188). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Schelling, T. C. (1984). Choice and consequence: Perspectives of an
errant economist. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Schroeder, J. R., Latkin, C. A., Hoover, D. R., Curry, A. D., Knowlton,
A. R., & Celentano, D. D. (2001). Illicit drug use in one’s social network
and in one’s neighborhood predicts individual heroin and cocaine use.
Annals of Epidemiology, 11, 389 –394. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S10472797(01)00225-3
Sheppes, G., & Gross, J. J. (2011). Is timing everything? Temporal considerations in emotion regulation. Personality and Social Psychology
Review, 15, 319 –331. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1088868310395778
Steinberg, L. (2013). Adolescence. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Tsukayama, E., Duckworth, A. L., & Kim, B. E. (2012). Resisting everything except temptation: Evidence and an explanation for domainspecific impulsivity. European Journal of Personality, 26, 318 –334.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/per.841
Tsukayama, E., Duckworth, A. L., & Kim, B. (2013). Domain-specific
impulsivity in school-age children. Developmental Science, 16, 879 –
893.
Tsukayama, E., Toomey, S. L., Faith, M. S., & Duckworth, A. L. (2010).
Self-control as a protective factor against overweight status in the
transition from childhood to adolescence. Archives of Pediatrics &
Adolescent Medicine, 164, 631– 635. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
archpediatrics.2010.97
Ury, W. (2007). Getting past no: Negotiating in difficult situations. New
York, NY: Random House.
Véronneau, M.-H., Hiatt-Racer, K., Fosco, G. M., & Dishion, T. J. (2014).
The contribution of adolescent effortful control to early adult educational attainment. Journal of Educational Psychology, 106, 730 –743.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0035831

341

Walton, G. M. (2014). The new science of wise psychological interventions. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 23, 73– 82. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1177/0963721413512856
Wansink, B. (2004). Environmental factors that increase the food intake
and consumption volume of unknowing consumers. Annual Review of
Nutrition, 24, 455– 479. http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.nutr.24
.012003.132140
Wansink, B., Painter, J. E., & Lee, Y. K. (2006). The office candy dish:
Proximity’s influence on estimated and actual consumption. International Journal of Obesity, 30, 871– 875. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/sj.ijo
.0803217
Wansink, B., & Van Ittersum, K. (2003). Bottoms up! The influence of
elongation on pouring and consumption volume. Journal of Consumer
Research, 30, 455– 463. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/378621
Wansink, B., Van Ittersum, K., & Painter, J. E. (2006). Ice cream illusions
bowls, spoons, and self-served portion sizes. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 31, 240 –243. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2006
.04.003
Webb, T. L., Miles, E., & Sheeran, P. (2012). Dealing with feeling: A
meta-analysis of the effectiveness of strategies derived from the process
model of emotion regulation. Psychological Bulletin, 138, 775– 808.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0027600
Weiss, F. (2005). Neurobiology of craving, conditioned reward and relapse. Current Opinion in Pharmacology, 5, 9 –19. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.coph.2004.11.001
White, R. E., Kross, E., & Duckworth, A. L. (2015). Spontaneous selfdistancing and adaptive self-reflection across adolescence. Child Development. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/cdev.12370
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological interventions
in education: They’re not magic. Review of Educational Research, 81,
267–301. http://dx.doi.org/10.3102/0034654311405999
Zimmerman, B. J. (1989). A social cognitive view of self-regulated academic learning. Journal of Educational Psychology, 81, 329 –339. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.81.3.329
Zimmerman, B. J., & Martinez-Pons, M. (1990). Student differences in
self-regulated learning: Relating grade, sex, and giftedness to selfefficacy and strategy use. Journal of Educational Psychology, 82, 51–
59. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.82.1.51

Received January 27, 2015
Revision received May 15, 2015
Accepted May 26, 2015 䡲

E-Mail Notification of Your Latest Issue Online!
Would you like to know when the next issue of your favorite APA journal will be available
online? This service is now available to you. Sign up at http://notify.apa.org/ and you will be
notified by e-mail when issues of interest to you become available!

