See	discussions,	stats,	and	author	profiles	for	this	publication	at:	https://www.researchgate.net/publication/317554274

Assessing	interpretations	of	experienced	ease
and	difficulty	as	motivational	constructs.
Article	·	June	2017
DOI:	10.1037/mot0000055

CITATIONS

READS

2

119

2	authors:
Oliver	Fisher

Daphna	Oyserman

University	of	Southern	California

University	of	Southern	California

5	PUBLICATIONS			3	CITATIONS			

217	PUBLICATIONS			11,582	CITATIONS			

SEE	PROFILE

SEE	PROFILE

Some	of	the	authors	of	this	publication	are	also	working	on	these	related	projects:

Identity-based	motivation	View	project

Social	Issues	and	Policy	Review	View	project

All	content	following	this	page	was	uploaded	by	Daphna	Oyserman	on	18	June	2017.
The	user	has	requested	enhancement	of	the	downloaded	file.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 1
Assessing Interpretations of Experienced Ease and Difficulty as Motivational Constructs
Oliver Fisher and Daphna Oyserman
University of Southern California

UNCORRECTED MS for: Fisher, O. & Oyserman, D. (2017). Assessing
interpretations of experienced ease and difficulty as motivational
constructs. Motivational Science, 3(2), 133-163. DOI 10.1037/mot0000055

Author note: Corresponding author email: oyserman@usc.edu, mailing address: University of
Southern California, Dornsife Mind and Society Center, 635 Downey Way
Verna & Peter Dauterive Hall, Suite 205, Los Angeles, CA 90089-3333. We thank the IBM lab
for all their helpful comments, Stephen Read and Norbert Schwarz for their comments on earlier
drafts, the University of Southern California, Mind and Society Center for funding, and all our
research participants without whom no study is possible.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 2
Abstract
Are people motivated by ease and sapped by difficulty, or the reverse, does ease undermine
motivation while difficulty bolsters it? Following identity-based motivation theory, whether ease
or difficulty bolsters or undermines motivation depends on which lay theory of ease or difficulty
is accessible in the moment. Experienced ease can imply that something is "possible for me" in
part because the odds of success are high, or that something is "not worth my time" in part
because the task is of low value. Experienced difficulty can imply that something is "important
for me" the task is valued, or that something is "impossible for me" as odds of success are low
for "me" or "us". We developed ease-as-possibility, ease-as-triviality, difficulty-as-importance,
and difficulty-as-impossibility measures to assess individual differences in endorsement of these
lay theories (N=963). We tested (N=200) convergent and discriminant validity with other
measures of motivation: self-efficacy, locus of control, growth, grit, mental toughness,
prevention and promotion regulatory focus, and construal level. We documented predictive
validity by showing that performance on a cognitive reasoning task correlates with ease-aspossibility, ease-as-triviality, and difficulty-as-impossibility (N=183). Ease-as-possibility, easeas-triviality, difficulty-as-importance, and difficulty-as-impossibility supplement other measures
of motivation, yielding new insight into motivational processes. These measures can be used in
addition to other tools, including priming and implicit assessment.
Word count = 211
Key words: Identity-based motivation, motivation, regulatory focus, grit, growth mindset,
cognitive reflective task, self-efficacy, locus of control, mental toughness

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 3
Assessing Interpretations of Experienced Ease and Difficulty as Motivational Constructs
Everyday life, indeed, almost anything a person does, can feel easy or difficult; people may or
may not infer something from these feelings, but often do. At the same time, since life’s course is
uncertain and people cannot fully know their capacities at each juncture along the way, what a
particular experience of ease or difficulty implies for who one is now and for who one might
become in the future is not certain. Experienced ease might signify that succeeding at a task is
likely and possible, a “me” thing to do, or that though possible, it is trivial and hence “not worth
my time, not for me.” Experienced difficulty might signify low odds of success, that succeeding
at a task is impossible for “me” and hence “just not worth my time” or that no matter the odds,
the task is an important and valued one, “no pain, no gain” and hence a “me” thing to do.
Identity-based motivation theory predicts that people’s attributions about what experienced ease
and difficulty imply are a function of which identities come to mind and what these identities
seem to imply in context for action and meaning-making (Oyserman, 2007, 2009). Task-related
motivation could be bolstered or undermined as a consequence of either ease or difficulty
depending on whether an odds (possible for me, impossible for me) or a value (important for me,
trivial for me) attribution is brought to bear in making sense of one’s experience. Yet, without
measures of these attributions of ease (ease-as-possibility, ease-as-triviality) and difficulty
(difficulty-as-importance, difficulty-as-impossibility), it is not possible to know how these lay
theories relate to other measures of motivation.
In the current studies, we address this gap in three steps. First, we develop measures of lay
theories of what experienced ease and difficulty imply. Then we demonstrate convergent and
discriminant validity with other measures of motivation and finally we turn to predictive validity.
We show that how much each lay theory of ease and difficulty is endorsed significantly

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 4
correlates with performance on a cognitive task requiring noticing that rule-based, systematic
reasoning is required.
Metacognition and Identity-based Motivation
A lay theories formulation implies that thinking involves both content (what is on one’s
mind) and interpretation of metacognitive experience (the meaning attributed to experienced ease
and difficulty while thinking). A large body of work demonstrates that people make inferences
based on their metacognitive experiences unless given reason not to, even if they could draw on
otherwise relevant content (for reviews, Oppenheimer, 2008; Schwarz, 2015). The lay theories
that people hold, whether chronically or momentarily activated by situational cues, influence
how metacognitive experience is interpreted (Oppenheimer, 2008; Reber & Schwarz, 1999;
Reber, Winkielman, & Schwarz, 1998; Rhodes, 2006; Schwarz, 2015). These lay theories often
do not feel like theories at all, but rather like spontaneous natural observations of reality itself
(sometimes termed naïve realism, Griffin & Ross, 1991). Identity-based motivation theory
provides a theoretical framework for how this works in the domain of identity, predicting that
people are motivated to act and interpret their experiences in ways that feel congruent with their
identities (Oyserman, 2007). At the same time, which identities come to mind and what these
identities are taken to mean and imply for behavior and interpretation of experience is
dynamically constructed in the moment (Oyserman, 2015).
Experienced difficulty can imply that one’s odds of success are low, with experienced
difficulty implying impossibility: “I don’t know this (or cannot learn it), this is not for me.” This
lay theory seems common. For example, presumably because they cannot shake their lay theory
of experienced difficulty as implying “not for me,” people are not motivated to use learning
strategies they experience as difficult even when shown that these difficult strategies are more

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 5
effective for learning (Karpicke, Butler, & Roediger, 2009; Kornell & Bjork, 2008; Yan, Bjork,
& Bjork, 2016). Experienced difficulty can also imply that one values the task, with experienced
difficulty implying importance: “I really care about this, ‘no pain, no gain,’ this is for me.” This
interpretation is less common, as shown in an analysis of word usage in the English-language
(Yan & Oyserman, 2017). However, students can be easily guided to adopt this lay theory,
reporting more centrality of academics in their current self-concept (Smith & Oyserman, 2015)
and their future possible selves (Aelenei, Lewis, & Oyserman, 2017) after being led to consider
that difficulty means importance. The opposite is also true: guiding students to imagine their
academic future selves increases their endorsement of a difficulty-as-importance lay theory
(Oyserman, Destin, & Novin, 2015).
It is not just one’s interpretation of experienced difficulty that matters; interpretation of
experienced ease matters as well. Experienced ease can imply something about one’s high odds
of success, with experienced ease implying possibility: “I know this (or can know it), I am (or
can become) good at this”. Indeed, the large body of work on judgments of learning suggests that
when people experience ease, they typically infer that they know the material or are doing well
on a test or exam (for a review Bjork, Dunlosky, & Kornell, 2013). At the same time,
experienced ease can also imply something about value, easy tasks may be of low value and
interpreted as trivial, just not worth one’s time, even if one is likely to be successful at them: “I
should not waste my time on this stuff, it is beneath me”. For example, gifted students are at risk
of disengaging and underperforming if they interpret their experienced ease in learning as
implying that schoolwork is so easy as to be trivial and not worth their time (Kanevsky &
Keighley, 2003).

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 6
However, the evidence that lay theories of what ease and difficulty imply for oneself
matter for motivation is mostly indirect because lay theories themselves are not directly assessed.
Instead, researchers have used two indirect routes. One route is to induce an experience of ease
or difficulty on an unrelated task and show that this carries over to judgments about identity
(e.g., Oyserman, Fryberg, Yoder, 2007; Oyserman, 2007). The other route is to make a specific
lay theory of what ease or difficulty implies momentarily accessible and document change in
identity and task-related motivation (e.g., Elmore, Oyserman, Smith, & Novin, 2016; Lewis &
Earl, in press; Smith & Oyserman, 2015).
Consider first studies that induce an unrelated experience of ease or difficulty and test
downstream consequences for identity. For example, in one study, adults rated themselves as
more invested in politics after being given easy-to-answer rather than difficult-to-answer
political knowledge questions (Schwarz & Schuman, 1997). In another study, participants rated
healthy living strategies as more likely to improve their own longevity after being given an easyto-answer rather than a difficult-to-answer unrelated question about their racial-ethnic group
(Oyserman et al., 2007). Those induced to experience difficulty on the preceding unrelated
question rated strategies for healthy living as less effective than those who were not induced to
experience difficulty. This main effect was moderated by beliefs about in-group identity. Though
all participants in the difficult condition rated the question as difficult, subsequent judgment of
the effectiveness of strategies for healthy living for one’s own longevity was only undermined
among participants who believed that their in-group did not engage in healthy habits (Oyserman
et al., 2007). The results of these studies suggest that participants take their experience of ease or
difficulty in answering a prior unrelated question and use their interpretation of their ease or
difficulty (based on the lay theory they apply) in making subsequent judgments about

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 7
themselves. Though which lay theory is being used is not assessed, results imply that accessible
lay theories link task to identity. The problem here is that the author is making an inference about
the lay theory participants are using and whether or not the inference is correct is not testable.
This particular limitation is addressed in the other indirect route linking identity and lay
theory of ease and difficulty, which is making a specific lay theory accessible and documenting
its consequences for identity and motivation (e.g., Elmore et al., 2016; Lewis & Earl, in press;
Smith & Oyserman, 2015). This is done by having participants read and rate their agreement or
disagreement with a biased scale, one that presents only the notion that experienced difficulty
implies impossibility or only the notion that experienced difficulty implies task importance. The
effect of bringing the lay theory to mind on subsequent identity and task-related motivation is
tested by comparing identity, motivation and performance across participants randomized to be
exposed to one or another of the lay theories. For example, in one set of studies, compared to
college students guided to use a lay theory that difficulty implies impossibility, college students
guided to use a lay theory that difficulty implies importance were significantly more likely to
describe academics as central to their current identity and performed better on a standardized
intelligence test (Smith & Oyserman, 2015). This effect on performance was replicated with
middle school students (Elmore et al., 2016). Similarly, Lewis and Earl (in press) showed that
dieters guided to use a lay theory that difficulty implies importance felt significantly less tempted
to continue snacking compared to dieters guided to use a lay theory that difficulty implies
impossibility. Though clear as to which lay theory is on the mind, these studies do not address
the question of how much each is endorsed or how they relate to one another.
However, in spite of these limitations, the results of these studies show the consequences
of lay theories. These results are important because they demonstrate that an upstream

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 8
experience of ease or difficulty can have downstream consequences on ostensibly separate
downstream judgments. Moreover, results show that it is not the ease or difficulty itself, but what
that ease or difficulty is taken to mean that matters. Some lay theories yield an estimate of the
odds of success, other lay theories yield an estimate of the value of success difficulty-asimportance.
As detailed next, there are a number of ways in which our lay theories focus is distinct
from the focus of expectancy-value theory (e.g., Atkinson, 1964; Wigfield & Eccles, 2000).
First, expectancy-value theory focuses on how objective features of task difficulty translate into
an expectation of success (Atkinson, 1964; Brehm & Self, 1989). In contrast, our lay theories
framework focuses instead on interpretation of subjective experience. Results of studies such as
the ones we summarize above show that sometimes task-related motivation is based on
interpretation of a metacognitive experience of ease or difficulty that is not related to the task but
is carried over and used as input as to the value or odds of the task itself. Second, expectancyvalue theory operationalizes motivation as a product of expectancy and value with highest
motivation when odds (expectations of success) and value are high (Atkinson, 1964; Wigfield &
Eccles, 2000). In contrast, our lay theories framework focuses on the impact of odds and value
separately with the implication that motivation is not always a result of the product of
expectancy x value. Our lay theories framework also predicts that motivation (high or low) is
based on (high or low) odds sometimes and at other times on (high or low) value. Thus: Ease-aspossibility focuses on odds, difficulty-as-importance focuses on values, yet both are motivating
lay theories. At the same time: Ease-as-triviality focuses on value and difficulty-as-impossibility
focuses on odds and both are demotivating. Hence motivation can be the result of productive
(motivating) or unproductive (demotivating) lay theories of what experienced ease and difficulty

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 9
implies. Motivational consequences do not require that ease and difficulty be objective features
of the task or that a product of expectancy and value be obtained1.

Motivation, Motivational Style and Identity-based Motivation
A few studies directly measure endorsement of the lay theory that experienced difficulty
signals task importance and the lay theory that experienced difficulty signals task impossibility
(Aelenei et al., 2017; Oyserman, Novin, Elmore, & Smith, 2017). In these studies, how much
people endorse one lay theory is not very correlated with how much they endorse another,
implying that each is a separate lay theory rather than be two sides of a single theory. Moreover,
these studies find that on average, people agree with the difficulty-as-importance lay theory and
disagree with the difficulty-as-impossibility lay theory. There is also some indication that low
place in social hierarchy (e.g., minority status, low education) is associated with less
endorsement of the difficulty-as-importance lay theory that experienced difficulty implies task
importance (Aelenei et al., 2017).
However, the broader question of how lay theories relate to other measures of motivation
and motivational style and whether assessed lay theories yield the same pattern of effects as
priming studies has not yet been addressed. To make the task more manageable, in the current
study we parsed measures of motivation and motivational style to three groups, which we termed

1

For different reasons, Brehms’ Motivational Intensity (e.g., Brehm & Self, 1989) and Higgins’
Regulatory Focus (e.g., Higgins & Cornwell, 2016) also make this point. Brehms’ Motivational
Intensity Theory predicts and shows that lowering odds of success, as operationalized by
increasing difficulty, increases rather than decreases motivation up to the point that the task
becomes impossible or that effort is no longer justified (e.g., Brehm & Self, 1989; Richter, et al.,
2016). Higgins’ Regulatory Focus Theory predicts and shows that sometimes low odds are
irrelevant to motivation --when one is obligated to act (ought self-focus) or is focused on
preventing failures (prevention focus), then motivation is not undermined by low odds of success
(e.g., Higgins & Cornwell, 2016; Scholer, et al., 2010).

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 10
measures of ‘motivation as experienced control’, measures of ‘motivation as resilient character’,
and measures of ‘motivation as goal formulation’. Below we articulate our predictions about the
relationship between measures in each group and lay theories of experienced ease and difficulty.
For clarity, we first describe the measures we clustered in each group and prior research showing
predictive, convergent and discriminant validity (inter-correlations) of measures of each group.
To interpret correlations, we used three rules-of-thumb: Cohen’s (1988) correlational size ruleof-thumb (.1=small, .3=moderate, .5=large); Campbell and Fiske’s (1959) convergent validity
rule-of-thumb (correlations significantly different from zero); and Kline’s (2011) discriminant
validity rule-of-thumb (correlations below .85). In each case, cut off refers to absolute value of a
correlation (e.g., it could be positive or negative). For ease of recall, we also briefly summarize
the predicted strength and direction of relationship between of our four lay theories of experience
and each of the other measures of motivation in Table 1.
Measures of motivation as experienced control (self-efficacy and locus of control).
Implicit in the idea of motivation is the notion that one could succeed if one tries enough
and in that sense, that desired outcomes are within one’s control – that if one tries, then one can
succeed. This idea is central to the concepts of self-efficacy (Bandura, 2006; 2012) and internal
locus of control (Rotter, 1966). Empirically, efficacy and locus of control are distinct but highly
associated (in meta-analyses, r=.56; Judge, Erez, Bono, & Thoresen, 2002). Theoretically, both
should be associated with more persistent task engagement since both focus on the likelihood of
success given engagement. Evidence supports this prediction in the domains of work and school;
work self-efficacy (Alessandri, Borgogni, Schaufeli, Caprara, & Consiglio, 2015), school selfefficacy (Bouffard-Bouchard, Parent, & Larivee, 1991; Komarraju & Nadler, 2013), and locus of
control (Judge & Bono, 2001) are each associated with better outcomes.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 11
We draw on the definition of efficacy and locus of control as one’s belief that one has
what it takes to attain an outcome (Bandura, 2006; Rotter, 1966), to make the following
straightforward predictions about the relationship with lay theories of ease and difficulty. We
predict that efficacy and locus of control will be positively associated with motivation-increasing
lay theory scores (difficulty-as-importance, ease-as-possibility) and negatively associated with
motivation-undermining lay theories scores (difficulty-as-impossibility, ease-as-triviality). In
terms of the strength of these associations, we predict weak associations with difficulty-asimportance and ease-as-triviality and moderate associations with difficulty-as-impossibility and
ease-as-possibility lay. Our rationale is that efficacy and locus of control do not necessarily
imply anything about the value of a task, and would therefore be weakly related to these lay
theories (difficulty-as-importance, ease-as-triviality). However, lay theories that emphasize the
odds of success (difficulty-as-impossibility, ease-as-possibility) would be moderately related to
belief that if one tries one could succeed, as this implies high odds of success.
Motivation as resilient character (grit, mental toughness, growth).
Just as self-efficacy and internal locus of control focus on one’s ability to change one’s
outcomes if one tries, growth mindset focuses on the belief that abilities can change as a result of
effort (e.g., Chiu, Hong, & Dweck, 1997; Dweck, 2000; Dweck, Chiu, & Hong, 1995; Job,
Dweck, & Walton, 2010). While grit (Crede, Tynan, & Harms, 2016; Duckworth, Peterson,
Matthews, & Kelly, 2007) and mental toughness (Andrews & Chen, 2014; Gucciardi, Hanton,
Gordon, Mallett, & Temby, 2015; Mahoney, Gucciardi, Ntoumanis, & Mallet, 2014) focus on
ability to stick with a goal. Theoretically as well as empirically, grit, mental toughness, and
growth mindset are associated but distinct constructs. Grit and mental toughness are moderately
positively correlated, r=.46 (Crede et al., 2016); correlations between grit and growth vary from

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 12
small to medium sized (r=.18, West et al., 2016; r=.16, Yeager et al., 2016; r=.35, Myers, Wang,
Black, Bugescu & Hoeft, 2016). Each is associated with better goal-focused attainment (e.g.,
Grit: Duckworth & Gross, 2014; Eskries-Winkler, Schulman, Beal, & Duckworth, 2014; Mental
Toughness: Nicholls, Polman, Levy, & Blackhouse, 2008; Gucciardi et al., 2015; Growth
mindset: Burnette, O’Boyle, VanEpps, Pollack, & Finkel, 2013; Dweck, 2000; Job et al., 2010).
We draw on the definition of growth mindsets as belief that one is able to change
(Dweck, 2000) to make the following straightforward predictions about the relationships with lay
theories of ease and difficulty. We predict that growth mindsets will be positively associated
with motivation-increasing lay theory scores (difficulty-as-importance, ease-as-possibility) and
negatively associated with motivation-undermining lay theory scores (difficulty-as-impossibility,
ease-as-triviality). As regards to strength of associations, we predict weak associations with
difficulty-as-importance, ease-as-possibility, and ease-as-triviality and a moderate association
with difficulty-as-impossibility. Our rationale is that growth mindset does not address ease or
difficulty explicitly, therefore most associations will be weak with the exception of a moderate
predicted relationship between growth and difficulty-as-impossibility scores. We predict a
moderate correlation in this case because difficulty-as-impossibility implies that one should
disengage in response to difficulty, which is incongruent with the growth mindset belief that one
can change and overcome difficulty.
We draw on the definition of grit and mental toughness as valuing stick-to-it-ness and
sustained effort towards goals (Duckworth et al., 2007; Gucciardi et al., 2015) to make the
following straightforward predictions about the relationships with lay theories of ease and
difficulty. We predict that grit and mental toughness will be weakly positively associated with
motivation-bolstering lay theory scores (difficulty-as-importance, ease-as-possibility) and

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 13
moderately negatively associated with motivation-undermining lay theories scores (difficulty-asimpossibility, ease-as-triviality). Regarding strength of associations, our rationale for predicting
a weak association is that grit and mental toughness focus on stick-to-it-ness, which does not
necessarily mean that difficulty would imply importance or that ease would imply possibility.
Our rationale for predicting that any association no matter if weak will be positive is that higher
scores on each of these constructs are associated with positive outcomes. Hence, any relationship
that is found would likely be positive. With regard to our prediction of a moderate association
between difficulty-as-impossibility, ease-as-triviality lay theories and measures of grit or mental
toughness, the latter scores operationalize valuing stick-to-it-ness, which implies that one should
persevere towards goals, even when they feel difficult or are trivial. This is incongruent with
difficulty-as-impossibility and ease-as-triviality lay theories and would therefore suggest a
moderate negative relationship.
Motivation as goal formulation (regulatory focus and construal level).
Rather than focus on ability to make change and sustain effort, regulatory focus (Higgins,
1998) and construal-level (Trope & Liberman, 2010) theories examine the relationship between
motivation and how goals are formulated. Regulatory focus includes promotion-focus -motivation to move eagerly toward successes, and prevention-focus -- motivation to vigilantly
avoid failures (Frietas, Liberman, Salovey, & Higgins, 2002; Lanaj, Change, & Johnson, 2012).
Which regulatory focus works better depends on the situation; prevention-focused participants
start taking action sooner and are better able to attain goals if avoiding temptations is necessary
(Freitas et al., 2002). In contrast, promotion-focused participants are better able to attain goals if
distractions are not present (Freitas, Salovey, & Liberman, 2001). Construal level theory
distinguishes behaviors instantiated abstractly in terms of the value of the outcome (e.g.,

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 14
studying as learning the material) from behaviors instantiated concretely in terms of the specific
steps (e.g., studying as taking notes) involved to attain an outcome (Trope & Lieberman, 2003).
Research has shown that both abstract and concrete construal can improve motivation and
performance; a concrete construal is more effective for simpler tasks and an abstract construal is
more effective for more complex tasks or those that involve task switching (Freund & Hennecke,
2015; Schmeichel, Vohs, & Duke, 2011). Empirically regulatory focus and construal level are
linked; motivation increases when abstract construal is paired with promotion-framing and when
concrete construal is paired with prevention-framing (Lee, Keller, & Sternthal, 2010; White,
MacDonnel, & Dahl, 2011). In terms of measures, we did not find published studies correlating
construal level and regulatory focus scores, and the extent that promotion and prevention scores
correlate depends on the actual measures used (Haws, Dholakia, & Bearden, 2010; meta-analytic
r=.08; Lanaj, Chang, & Johnson, 2012).
We draw on the definition of promotion focus as eager focus on successfully attaining
means (Higgins, 1998) to make the following straightforward predictions about the relationships
with lay theories of ease and difficulty. We predict that promotion focus will be positively
associated with motivation-increasing lay theory scores (difficulty-as-importance, ease-aspossibility) and negatively associated with motivation-undermining lay theories scores
(difficulty-as-impossibility, ease-as-triviality). With regard to strength of association, we predict
weak associations with lay theories of difficulty and moderate association with lay theories of
ease. Our rationale is that promotion focus does not address experienced difficulty, hence we
predict weak associations with lay theories of experienced difficulty. We expect moderate
associations between promotion focus and lay theories of experienced ease as detailed next. We
predict a positive association between promotion focus and ease-as-possibility since eagerness to

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 15
attain success (promotion) and increased engagement after experiencing ease (ease-aspossibility) both should encourage engagement. We predict a negative association between
promotion focus and ease-as-triviality since eagerness to attain success (promotion) should
increase engagement and devaluing ease (ease-as-triviality) should decrease engagement after
experiencing ease, respectively.
We draw on the definition of prevention focus as vigilant guarding from failures
(Higgins, 1998) to make the following straightforward predictions. Prevention focus will be
positively associated with motivation-increasing lay theory scores (difficulty-as-importance,
ease-as-possibility) and negatively associated with motivation-undermining lay theories scores
(difficulty-as-impossibility, ease-as-triviality). We predict a weak association with difficulty-asimportance and ease-as-possibility and a moderate association with difficulty-as-impossibility
and ease-as-triviality. Our rationale is that prevention focus is about vigilance, which is
necessary no matter the odds of success and hence prevention focus should be associated with
rejecting those lay theories implying that engagement might not be worthwhile (difficulty-asimpossibility, ease-as-triviality). In contrast, prevention is less associated with concerns about
value and self-relevance (difficulty-as-importance, ease-as-possibility) since vigilance is not
contingent. Our predictions are in line with research showing that prevention focused individuals
prefer vigilant means to goal pursuit (Idson & Higgins, 2000; for a review Higgins & Cornwell,
2016), though we have no direct measure of this match and found none in the literature.
We draw on the definition of construal level as a focus on essential goals or on peripheral
means (Trope & Liberman, 2010) to make the following straightforward predictions. An abstract
construal will be moderately associated with difficulty-as-importance and with ease-as-triviality
scores, while a concrete construal will be moderately associated with difficulty-as-impossibility

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 16
and ease-as-possibility scores. We make these predictions because abstract construal focuses on
the essence and value of a task, therefore an abstract construal is likely to be associated with lay
theories that emphasize value (i.e. difficulty-as-importance; ease-as-triviality). In contrast,
concrete construal is concerned with the means needed to attain an outcome and would therefore
be associated with lay theories that emphasize odds of success (difficulty-as-impossibility, easeas-possibility).
CURRENT STUDIES
Reliable measures of lay theories of experienced ease and difficulty have not been
developed; as a consequence, convergent and discriminant validity with measures of motivation
and motivational style have not been assessed. Hence, in the current studies, we had three goals:
First, to develop reliable measures (Studies 1 to 5). Second, to examine convergent and
discriminant validity of these measures with other measures of motivation (Study 4). Third, to
place our lay theory measures in context by providing initial evidence of predictive validity. To
do so, we used a measure of cognitive style (Study 5) to bridge between our lay theory measures
and prior evidence from studies documenting indirectly that interpretation of experience matters
for cognitive performance (e.g., Elmore, et al., 2016; Smith & Oyserman, 2015).
As a first step, we revised existing lay theories of experienced difficulty measures
(Aelenei et al, 2017; Elmore et al., 2016; Oyserman, et al., 2015) to develop a set of items for lay
theories of experienced ease and difficulty. From this base, we developed 6-item measures (see
Table 2), verified factor structure and reliability, developed short form (4-item) measures,
verified reliability, and used the short form measures to assess convergent and discriminant
validity. We detail sample, procedure, and analyses plan next.
Samples

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 17
Sample information for Studies 1 to 5 is presented in Table 3. We chose our planned
sample size (N=200) for each study using the rule of thumb for factor analytic studies; that is that
there should be at least 10 times the number of subjects as the number of items (Everitt, 1975).
We maintained this sample size goal for our convergent, discriminant, and predictive validity
studies. We met our sample size goal (Study1 N=244, Study 2 N=204, Study 3 N=178, Study 4
N=200, Study 5 N=183) except when our subject pool allotment was somewhat under our goal
of 200 (Study 3 and 5). Participants from Amazon Mechanical Turk (mTurk) Workers were
compensated $0.45 (Studies 1, 2) or $1.20 (Study 4, due to longer time request). Participants
from subject pool were undergraduates and compensated with half an hour of participation credit
(Studies 3 and 5).
Procedure
Studies were programmed in Qualtrics. Participants were welcomed to “Answer a short
survey (~15 minutes) about how you interpret your daily experiences,” informed of the voluntary
and anonymous nature of the study, provided consent, rated their endorsement of statements, and
gave demographic information.
Lay theory of experienced ease and difficulty In Studies 1, 2, and 4 items were
presented first in two randomized blocks --one block included difficulty-as-importance and easeas-triviality items and the other block included difficulty-as-impossibility and ease-as-possibility
items. Items were randomized within blocks. To reduce rote responding, in Studies 1, 2, and 4
the two blocks were separated by a filler that included four unrelated statements about the future.
Filler items and a correlation matrix of all items are presented in the Supplemental Materials,
Table S1 and S2.2 In Studies 3 and 5, participants were in the subject pool so we did not add the

2

Fillers were not intended to correlate with experienced ease and difficulty and do not.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 18
interleaved filler blocks and instead randomized items across all four lay theories. In Study 5, the
predictive validity measure (performance task) preceded the lay theory items as detailed below.
Demographics were age, gender, race, education, and income (in that order). There were
two exceptions. First, in Study 1 a handling error meant that no demographics were collected.
Second, in Studies 3 and 5, participants were undergraduates –so we omitted questions about
their own education level (which would be invariant) and income (which would be meaningless).
Hence, we could explore demographics associates of responses to lay theories in Studies 2 and 4.
We combined the data from both studies in our descriptive analyses presented in Supplemental
Materials, Table S3.
Other measures of motivation (Study 4) were presented in randomized blocks after the
lay theory items, following the same method of randomizing items within blocks. Response
scales followed the original measures. Measures of motivation as experienced control were
Bandura’s work self-efficacy (8 items α= .93, Bandura, 2006) and Rotter’s locus of control (10
items α= .82, Rotter, 1966). Measures of motivation as resilient character were Duckworth’s
short-form grit (8 items, α= .89, Duckworth & Quinn, 2009), Gucciardi’s mental toughness (8
items, α= .89, Gucciardi et al., 2015), and Dweck’s growth mindset (8 items, α= .94, Dweck,
2000). Measures of motivation as goal formulation measures were: Lockwood, Jordan, and
Kunda’s (2002) operationalization of Higgins’ regulatory focus, promotion (6 items α= .75) and
prevention (6 items α= .92), and Vallacher and Wegner’s (1989) concrete vs. abstract construal
of goals (25 item Behavioral Identification Form α= .93).
Predictive validity was assessed through a performance task presented prior to the lay
theories of ease and difficulty measures. Prior studies showed effects of primed lay theory of
difficulty on various measures of academic performance (Elmore et al., 2016; Horowitz,

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 19
Sorensen, Yoder, & Oyserman, 2017; Oyserman et al., 2017; Smith & Oyserman; 2015) and
various measures of identity (Aelenei et al., 2017 et al., 2017; Oyserman et al., 2017; Smith &
Oyserman; 2015). Therefore, we assessed association with a general measure of sensitivity to
rule-based reasoning. We used a 12-item version of the Cognitive Reflective Task (Ackerman,
2014; Beaman, 2002; Frederick, 2005; Primi, Morsani, Ciesi, & Donati, 2015; Thompson &
Oppenheimer, 2016). The full set of items (percentage correct M=44.89, SD=22.88, α= .74) used
can be found in Table S4 the supplemental materials.
Analysis Plan
Measure development. We used exploratory (Study 1) and then confirmatory (Studies 25) factor analyses to address our first goal of developing brief measures of lay theories of
experienced ease and difficulty. Before conducting exploratory factor analysis, we tested for
factorability using the Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin Measure of Sampling Adequacy and Bartlett’s Test
of Sphericity (Bartlett, 1950; Kaiser, 1970). In Study 1 we chose maximum likelihood with an
oblique rotation (direct oblimin) as our exploratory factor analytic model (Fabrigar, Wegener,
MacCallum, & Strahan, 1999). This method allowed any factor structure to emerge and allowed
for correlations among factors. In Studies 2 to 5 we chose confirmatory factor analyses to test the
four-factor result of Study 1, using fixed factor scaling, setting the variance of each factor to 1,
and testing the extent each item loaded onto its respective factor. We contrasted a four-factor
solution (difficulty-as-importance, difficulty-as-impossibility, ease-as-triviality, ease-aspossibility) to the fit of a two-factor solution (likelihood –ease-as-possibility and difficulty-asimpossibility, and value –ease-as-triviality and difficulty-as-importance).
After establishing factor structure, we created lay theory scores and examined these
scores as follows. First, we examined whether each lay theory was measured with adequate

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 20
reliability, using George and Mallery’s (2003) rule of thumb that scale reliability is adequate at
Cronbach’s alpha >.70. Second, we examined whether each lay theory was endorsed (mean score
was significantly above the neutral point) or rejected (mean score was significantly below the
neutral point) on average, using single sample t-tests comparing response to neutral point. Third,
we examined the correlations among our lay theories of experienced ease and difficulty,
conducting a mini-meta analysis combining data across the five studies and using as a rule of
thumb Cohen’s (1988) cut offs. Finally, although our samples were not designed to provide a full
test of demographic associates, we conducted exploratory multiple regression analyses of
potential demographic associates of each lay theory score (presented in the Supplemental
Materials).
Convergent and discriminant validity. We used correlational analyses to address our
second goal of verifying convergent and discriminant validity (Campbell & Fiske, 1959; Kline,
2011). Convergent validity involves finding overlap in theoretically linked measures,
operationalized as a correlation significantly different from zero (Campbell & Fiske, 1959).
Discriminant validity involves finding that theoretically novel measures are distinct from related
ones, operationalized as correlations below .85 in absolute magnitude (Kline, 2011). We
followed recent construct development work (‘Grit’ Duckworth et al., 2007; ‘Internal-External
Motivation to Avoid Prejudice’, Major, Sawyer, & Kunstman, 2013) to set up our analyses. At
step one we calculated two mean absolute correlations, tested for the difference between these
correlations by examining their confidence intervals, and compared them using the above rules
of thumb for size of effect, convergent and discriminant validity. The first mean absolute
correlation was among the measures of motivation (i.e. self-efficacy, locus of control, grit,
mental toughness, growth mindset, regulatory focus, and construal level) and the second was

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 21
between our lay theory of experience measures and each of the measures of motivation. Having
completed this initial test, we replicated this comparison within each of the three groups of
measures of motivation and motivational style (‘motivation as experienced control’, ‘motivation
as resilient character’, and ‘motivational as goal formulation’). Step one analyses address the
core question of validity, which focuses on the absolute magnitude of correlation.
At step two, we shifted attention to distinctness of lay theories, addressed by examining
the relative magnitude of correlation. These analyses examine the distinctness of lay theories
from other measures of motivation by asking if the size of correlation between lay theories and
other measures of motivation differs from the size of correlation of measures of motivation with
one another. To address this question, we used Fisher’s r-to-z transformation with Steiger’s
(1980) correction for correlations coming from the same sample.
Predictive validity. We used correlational analyses to address our third goal of providing
initial evidence of predictive validity. Predictive validity involves finding a significant
correlation between predictor and proposed outcome variables (Cronbach & Meehl, 1955).
According to Cronbach and Meel (1955), predictive validity “is adequately described by the
coefficient, and a statement of the experimental and sampling conditions” (p. 283). We chose
academic performance (cognitive reflexive task) so that our correlational analyses would be
interpretable in light of prior experimental results using indirect assessment of the lay theory
measures being validated (e.g., Ravens Progressive Matrices, Smith & Oyserman, 2015).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Scale Development
Exploratory factor analyses Sampling adequacy score of .886 (above .5 suggests
factorability) and significant Sphericity score at p < .000 showed that data were factorable

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 22
(Bartlett, 1950; Kaiser, 1970). Kaiser’s Guttman retention criteria (Kaiser, 1960) and Cattell’s
scree plot test (Cattell, 1966) revealed a four-factor solution explaining 66% of total variance
(see Table 2). Each factor included items from one lay theory of experienced ease or difficulty
and item loading (partial regression coefficient) was always above .66. No items from one lay
theory factor loaded onto another lay theory factor (cross-loading was never above .20).
Exploratory Factor results support the use of four lay theory measures.
Confirmatory factor analyses In Studies 2 to 5 we replicated Study 1’s four-factor
solution (for factor loadings see Table 5 and for fit indices see Table 6). The four-factor solution
was a good fit across recommended indices of fit; Root Mean Square Error of Approximation
(RMSEA good fit is < .05), the Comparative Fit Index (CFI good fit is > .95), and the TuckerLewis Index (TLI good fit is > .95; Jackson, Gillaspy, & Purc-Stephenson, 2009; Hu & Bentler,
1999). As shown in Table 6, the two-factor solution was not an adequate fit to the data; none of
the fit indices reached criterion. Hence, results support the notion that people have four lay
theories relating to difficulty-as-importance, difficulty-as-impossibility, ease-as-triviality, and
ease-as-possibility. We allowed for but did not find alternative factor structures, for example we
did not find a lay theory about likelihood (ease-as-possibility and difficulty-as-impossibility) and
a lay theory about value (ease-as-triviality and difficulty-as-importance).
Scale reliability, means, and patterns of endorsement Scale reliabilities ranged from
0.76 to 0.95, above George and Mallery’s (2003) threshold for adequate reliability (Table 7 for
full descriptive information). We compared participant responses to a neutral score of 3.5.
Participants agreed that experienced difficulty implies importance (composite Study 1 to 5
M=4.10, SD=0.94; t(962)=19.73, p<0.000, 95% CI of difference [0.54, 0.66]) and that
experienced ease implies possibility (composite Study 1 to 5 M=4.93, SD=0.77; t(962)=57.46,

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 23
p<0.000, 95% CI of difference [1.37, 1.47]). They disagreed that experienced difficulty implies
impossibility (composite Study 1 to 5 M=2.59, SD=1.07; t(962)=-26.25, p<0.000, 95% CI of
difference [-0.98, -0.84]) and that experienced ease implies triviality (composite Study 1 to 5
M=2.61, SD=.95; t(962)=-29.06, p<0.000, 95% CI of difference [-0.95, -0.83]).
Scale correlations In addition to factor analyses, as summarized in Table 8, we
examined the correlation among the four lay theories of ease and difficulty and conducted a fixed
effects mini meta-analysis, using Comprehensive Meta-Analysis version 3 (Biostat) to examine
the pattern of correlations. Correlations are not necessarily significant in each study (Table 8 left
panel), but synthesized across studies (Table 8 right panel) are significant (ps< .000) and small in
size, except for the moderate-sized correlation between the lay theory that experienced ease
means triviality and the lay theory that experienced difficulty means impossibility. Correlations
are graphically displayed (Figure 1) as diamonds whose edges represent the lower and upper
bounds (95% confidence interval) and center represents the mean correlation. Results suggest
that each lay theory can be separately assessed and yields a distinct measure. The moderate sized
correlation between ease-as-triviality lay theory and difficulty-as-impossibility lay theory
suggests a possible unproductive interpretation pair in which both ease and difficulty is
demotivating.
Convergent and Discriminant Validity: Using Rules of Thumb
Across measures of motivation and motivational style We examined the absolute
mean correlation among self-efficacy, locus of control, grit, mental toughness, growth mindset,
promotion focus, prevention focus, and construal level (r(200)=0.39, 95% CI [0.27, 0.55]) and
the absolute mean correlation between these measures of motivation and the four lay theories
measures (r(200)=0.21, 95% CI [0.07, 0.35]). In each case, the lower bound of the confidence

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 24
interval provides evidence for convergent (> 0) validity and the upper bound of the confidence
interval provides evidence for discriminant (< .85) validity. Moreover, the confidence intervals
overlap, implying that the correlations among measures of motivation and between these
measures of motivation and lay theory measures are of the same magnitude. Hence, lay theories
of experienced ease and difficulty measures can be considered additions to other measures of
motivation rather than redundant with them – since these measures are not considered redundant
with one another.
Correlations across measures of motivation as experienced control Next we turned to
the correlations among the measures of motivation as experienced control, finding a medium-tolarge sized correlation between work self-efficacy and locus of control, r(200)=0.49, p<0.01,
95% CI [0.40, 0.68]. As presented in Table 9, all correlations between these measures and our
lay theory measures met criteria for discriminant and convergent validity, with two exceptions.
Locus of control is distinct from both difficulty-as-importance (r(200)=-0.01, p>0.05, 95% CI [0.15, 0.13]) and ease-as-possibility (r(200)=0.08, p>0.05, 95% CI [-0.06, 0.22]). In each case,
confidence intervals include 0 hence the criteria of r > 0 is not met, implying that difficulty-asimportance and ease-as-possibility lay theories do not have a common link with locus of control.
Correlations across measures of motivation as resilient character With regard to
correlations among measures of motivation as resilient character, we found a large-sized
correlation between grit and mental toughness (r(200)=0.68, p<0.01, 95% CI [0.60, 0.75]), and a
small-to-moderate-sized correlation between grit and growth mindset (r(200)=0.27, p<0.01, 95%
CI [0.14, 0.39]), and between mental toughness and growth mindset (r(200)=0.31, p<0.01, 95%
CI [0.18, 0.43]). As presented in Table 10, all correlations between these measures and our lay
theory measures met criteria for discriminant and convergent validity, with two exceptions.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 25
Growth mindset is distinct from difficulty-as-importance (r(200)=0.07, p>0.05, 95% CI [-0.07,
0.21]). Grit is distinct from ease-as-possibility (r(200)=0.09, p>0.05, 95% CI [-0.05, 0.22]). In
each case, confidence intervals include 0 hence the criteria of r > 0 is not met, implying that
difficulty-as-importance lay theory does not have a common link with growth mindset and that
ease-as-possibility lay theory does not have a common link with grit as measures of motivation.
Correlations across measures of motivation as goal formulation We examined
correlations among measures of motivation as goal formulation, finding a small-sized correlation
between prevention focus and construal level (r(200) = -0.13, p > 0.05, 95% CI [=-0.26, -0.01]),
and medium-sized correlations between promotion focus and construal level (r(200) = 0.36, p <
0.01, 95% CI [0.23, 0.48]), and between promotion and prevention focus (r(200) = -0.33, p <
0.01, 95% CI [-0.45, -0.20]). As presented in Table 11, correlations between these measures and
our lay theory measures met criteria for discriminant and convergent validity, with five
exceptions. Promotion focus is distinct from ease-as-triviality (r(200)=-0.08, p>0.05, 95% CI [0.22, 0.06]). Prevention focus is distinct from difficulty-as-importance (r(200)=0.03, p>0.05,
95% CI [-0.11, 0.17]) and ease-as-possibility (r(200)=0.00, p>0.05, 95% CI [-0.14, 0.14]).
Construal level is distinct from ease-as-possibility (r(200)=0.11, p>0.05, 95% CI [-0.03, 0.24])
and ease-as-triviality (r(200)=0.01, p>0.05, 95% CI [-0.13, 0.15]). In each case, confidence
intervals include 0 hence the criteria of r > 0 is not met, implying that ease-as-triviality lay
theory does not have a common link with promotion focus; difficulty-as-importance and ease-aspossibility lay theories do not have a common link with prevention focus, that ease-as-possibility
and ease-as-triviality lay theories do not have a common with construal level.
Convergent and Discriminant Validity: Differences in Magnitude of Correlations

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 26
Motivation as experienced control Results are presented graphically in the top panels of
Figures 2 and 3, and detailed in Table S5 in the Supplemental Materials. As can be seen, each of
the four lay theories of experienced ease and difficulty were each significantly less or as
correlated with efficacy and with locus of control than efficacy and locus of control were with
each other. This means that lay theories of ease-as-possibility, ease-as-triviality, difficulty-asimportance and difficulty-as-impossibility are both theoretically and likely also empirically
distinct from locus of control and efficacy, adding meaningfully to variance explained over and
above efficacy or locus of control.
Motivation as resilient character As presented graphically in the middle panels of
Figures 2 and 3, and detailed in Table S6 in the Supplemental Materials, ease-as-triviality, easeas-possibility and difficulty-as-importance were each significantly less or as correlated with
measures of motivation as resilient character as they were with each other. Findings differed
somewhat with regard to difficulty-as-impossibility. Difficulty-as-impossibility was significantly
more correlated with grit (r(200)=-0.54, p<0.01, 95% CI [-0.63, -0.43]) and with mental
toughness (r(200)=-0.47, p<0.01, 95% CI [-0.57, -0.36]) than growth mindset was with grit
(Z=2.16, p<0.01) or with mental toughness (Z=3.78, p<0.01).
This means that lay theories of ease-as-possibility, ease-as-triviality, and difficulty-asimportance are not only theoretically distinct but likely are also empirically distinct from grit,
growth, and mental toughness, adding meaningfully to variance explained over and above
growth, grit, and mental toughness. Difficulty-as-impossibility is both theoretically distinct and
also empirically distinct from growth mindset. While meeting criteria for discriminant validity, it
is less empirically distinct from lack of grit or lack of mental toughness.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 27
Motivation as goal formulation As presented graphically in the bottom panels of
Figures 2 and 3, and detailed in Table S7 in the Supplemental Materials, ease-as-triviality, easeas-possibility and difficulty-as-importance were each significantly less or as correlated with
measures of motivation as goal formulation as they were with each other. Findings differed
somewhat with regard to difficulty-as-impossibility. Here the correlation with prevention focus
(r(200)=0.49, p < 0.01, 95% CI [0.38, 0.59]) was greater in magnitude than the correlation
between prevention and promotion focus (Z = 2.22, p <0.05) and the correlation between
prevention focus and construal level (Z=4.40, p < 0.01).
This means that lay theories of ease-as-possibility, ease-as-triviality, and difficulty-asimportance are not only theoretically distinct but likely are also empirically distinct from
regulatory focus and construal level, adding meaningfully to variance explained over and above
these measures of goal formulation. While meeting criteria for discriminant validity, difficultyas-impossibility is less empirically distinct prevention focus than it is from promotion focus and
construal level.
Predictive Validity: Patterns of Correlation
Lastly we examined the predictive validity of our lay theories of ease and difficulty
measures by examining patterns of correlation with a performance on a cognitive reflexive task
and mean endorsement of ease-as-possibility, ease-as-triviality, difficulty-as-importance, and
difficulty-as-impossibility lay theories. Better performance on the cognitive-reflective task was
associated with higher ease-as-possibility (r(183)=0.20, p<0.01, 95% CI [0.06, 0.36]), lower
difficulty-as-impossibility (r(183)=-0.29, p<0.01, 95% CI [-0.49, -0.15]), and lower ease-astriviality (r(183)=-0.26, p<0.01, 95% CI [-0.39, -0.12]) lay theory endorsement. Cognitive

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 28
reflective task scores were not associated with endorsement of difficulty-as-importance (r(183)=-0.03, p>0.05, 95% CI [-0.17, 0.12]).
GENERAL DISCUSSION
Almost anything a person does can feel easy or difficult; people may or may not infer
something from these feelings, but they often do. To date, research has documented effects of the
lay theories people hold about what ease and difficulty imply indirectly by creating an
experience of ease or difficulty or by guiding participants to use a particular lay theory. To test
the effects of lay theories of what ease and difficulty imply directly requires a way to measure
lay theory endorsement. In the current studies, we developed short reliable measures of lay
theories of ease and difficulty and showed that each is a separate indicator. People separately
experience ease as implying possibility and as implying triviality; they separately experience
difficulty as implying importance and as implying impossibility. A meta-analysis across the five
studies showed that the correlations among the lay theories were of small size except for a
moderate correlation between difficulty-as-impossibility and ease-as-triviality lay theories,
implying that in some conditions, both ease and difficulty can undermine motivation.
We compared the correlation between each lay theory and other measures of motivation
and motivational style using rules of thumb for convergent and discriminant validity. We also
looked at the relative size of the correlation between each lay theory and measures of motivation
within three domains, which we labeled motivation as experienced control, motivation as
resilient character, and motivation as goal formulation. These analyses showed that lay theories
of ease and difficulty can be used in addition to other measures of motivation, adding to variance
explained. Two lay theories stood out as particularly distinct from other measures of motivation
– ease-as-possibility and difficulty-as-importance.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 29
We explored demographic associates of endorsing lay theories of ease and difficulty
finding three: age, social status, and race. Older and younger participants showed the same
pattern of endorsing lay theories of ease-as-possibility and difficulty-as-importance and rejecting
lay theories of ease-as-triviality and difficulty-as-impossibility. However, older participants
agreed more with the ease-as-possibility lay theory and less with difficulty-as-importance,
difficulty-as-impossibility and difficulty-as-triviality lay theories. In addition, lower social status
was associated with more endorsement of difficulty-as-impossibility and stigmatized minority
racial-ethnic group membership was associated with higher endorsement of difficulty as
importance and ease as triviality.
To begin to establish predictive validity, we examined the correlations between our lay
theory measures and a measure academic performance. We picked academic performance
because effects found in studies that guided students to consider difficulty-as-importance or
difficulty-as-impossibility (e.g., Smith & Oyserman, 2015). We generally found the predicted
associations; endorsing ease-as-possibility and rejecting difficulty-as-impossibility and ease-astriviality were associated with better performance on the cognitive reflective task, a task
requiring noticing that a rule is required to solve a problem and correctly applying it. Since prior
studies did not include priming of ease lay theories, our current results provide important initial
evidence that interpreting ease matters for academic performance. However, prior studies
showed a positive effect of priming difficulty-as-importance on cognitive performance and
centrality of academics in identity (e.g., Smith & Oyserman, 2015). Yet when measured in the
current studies, we found no correlation between endorsing difficulty-as-importance and
performance. One possibility is that these differences are due to differences in the specific
performance and identity measures we used in this study compared to the prior studies.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 30
Implications and Connections
Each lay theory (ease-as-possibility, ease-as-triviality, difficulty-as-importance,
difficulty-as-impossibility) measure met criteria for discriminant validity and was less or no
more correlated with measures of motivation than these measures were with each other. Thus,
lay theories of experienced ease and difficulty add to research on efficacy, locus of control,
growth, grit, mental toughness, prevention focus, promotion focus, and construal level. This is
the case even for difficulty-as-impossibility, which, though meeting criteria for discriminant
validity, had relatively higher correlations with lack of grit, lack of mental toughness, and with
higher prevention focus. The implication is that one way in which lack of grit and lack of mental
toughness matter is via a difficulty-as-impossibility lay theory, if something is impossible, there
is no point persisting after all. With regard to prevention focus, the implication is that one way
that vigilant guarding against failure might be attained is by being sensitive to the possibility that
difficulty implies impossibility. Beyond value from fit explanations (Higgins, 2005; Mann,
Sherman, & Updegraff, 2004), the association of prevention focus with difficulty-asimpossibility beliefs might explain why prevention focus has been found to be helpful in risky
contexts (e.g., Scholer, Stroessner, & Higgins, 2008; Scholer et al., 2010; for a review Scholer &
Higgins, 2013). Risky contexts may be failure-likely settings, knowing when to switch attention
to something else could be useful in these settings – for example when the cost of switching is
low and the cost of staying on task is high.
By developing and validating short reliable measures of ease-as-possibility, ease-astriviality, difficulty-as-importance, and difficulty-as-impossibility, we set the stage for research
examining when experiences of ease and difficulty are motivating and when they are
demotivating. Having brief measures is likely to be helpful in understanding seemingly

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 31
conflicting findings about experienced ease and difficulty. For example, having measures of
ease-as-possibility and ease-as-triviality allows for studies to understand why experienced ease is
associated both with feelings of mastery (Koriat, Ma’ayan, & Nussinson, 2006) and with feelings
of boredom and disengagement from schoolwork (Kanevsky & Keighley, 2003). Similarly,
having brief measures is likely to be helpful in understanding parallel effects of experienced
difficulty as implying both importance and impossibility. The small negative correlation between
the measures implies that on average, people hold both lay theories in mind. This is consistent
with evidence that people can focus on one lay theory or the other depending on contextual cues
(Aelenei et al., 2017; Elmore et al., 2016; Smith & Oyserman, 2015). Moreover, having
measures adds to the research toolkit, complementing priming methods and implicit association
methods (O’Donnell & Oyserman, 2017). For some purposes, explicit endorsement may be
useful, for other purposes, salient lay theory may matter, separate from its endorsement (e.g.,
Oyserman et al., 2017).
Our results are important for research on the motivational consequences of lay theories of
experienced ease and difficulty for learning, judgment and identity-based motivation. With
regard to learning and judgment, previous research has focused on creating conditions in which
ease or difficulty while thinking is likely to be experienced and inferred from results what the
likely inferences might have been (Bjork et al. 2013; Schwarz, 2015). In the context of research
on judgments of learning for example, people often use experienced ease and difficulty to infer
the likelihood of remembering some information that has been studied for a future test (for a
review Bjork et al., 2013). Following an ease-as-possibility lay theory, ease is often incorrectly
interpreted as meaning that one has already learned or mastered the work (Koriat et al., 2006;
Bjork et al., 2013). Following a difficulty-as-impossibility lay theory, students often reject

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 32
attempts to teach them to use more difficult but more effective study strategies (Yan et al., 2016).
By adding measures of ease-as-triviality and difficulty-as-importance, learning researchers can
expand their focus.
More generally, by providing measures of lay theories of experienced ease and difficulty,
our work provides tools to test the circumstances in which experienced ease and difficulty are
likely to lead to better task-related motivation and outcomes. Research to date highlights two
possible venues for future research. The first venue focuses on difference in the structure of
tasks. Thus, rule-based tasks such as many tasks in academic contexts are likely to benefit from
not interpreting experienced difficulty as impossibility but instead as importance and hence
increasing effort in the form of more time on task, when the task feels difficult. In contrast,
insight-based tasks such as creativity tasks or associative reasoning task may not benefit from
spending more time and may be more efficiently handled when experienced difficulty is
understood as meaning impossibility and attention shifted to something else (for relevant
research, see Ackerman, 2014). The second venue focuses on lifespan and other forces
influencing the relative benefits of sticking to a self-relevant goal vs. changing course. While
researchers typically focus on the ability to stick to a goal, age, physical and mental health,
among other factors may make letting go of a self-relevant goal a necessity (e.g., King & Raspin,
2004; Pizzolato, 2007). By freeing one’s energy to develop a new goal, a difficulty-asimpossibility lay theory may be productive in situations in which goals are actually impossible or
unattainable (for a review Wrosch, 2010).
Limitations and Future Directions
We developed brief reliable measures of lay theories of what ease and difficulty imply
and examined their convergent and discriminant validity, showing that people hold four lay

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 33
theories which seem distinct from one another. Our participants were the groups commonly used
in psychological research using measures of motivation -- MTurk and college students. This was
a reasonable place to start. That said, understanding how our lay theories of ease and difficulty
measures function across a broader range of age, economic status, and cultural backgrounds is an
important next step. More research involving economically and socially diverse groups and other
measures of social status (e.g. Piff, Kraus, Cote, Cheng, & Keltner, 2010) is needed to obtain a
better estimate of the relationship between chronic endorsement of motivating (ease-aspossibility, difficulty-as-importance) and demotivating (ease-as-triviality, difficulty-asimpossibility) lay theories of experienced ease and difficulty and socio-economic status.
Similarly, we used one set of common theories of motivation and one set of measures to
operationalize each; future research could test links to other motivating frames and could use
other measures of the theories we currently used since each might be limited (e.g. Haws et al.,
2010 on our measures of regulatory focus).
Rather than a single lay theory of ease versus difficulty or a set of lay theories of value
and of expectancy, we found evidence that people hold four distinct lay theories, ease-aspossibility, ease-as-triviality, difficulty-as-importance, and difficulty-as-impossibility.
Endorsement of one lay theory had only small overlap with endorsement of another (correlations
were small in magnitude), with the exception of a moderate-sized correlation between endorsing
difficulty-as-impossibility and ease-as-triviality lay theories. There are a number of implications
of the finding that people hold four separate lay theories about their experienced ease and
difficulty and each is worthy of future research. The first implication of finding four separate lay
theories is that at least in some circumstances, both ease and difficulty can be demotivating, just
as both can be motivating. That difficulty can be motivating is consistent with Motivation

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 34
Intensity Theory, which states that increased difficulty leads to increased motivation until the
difficulty becomes overwhelming or the value of engagement is no longer worth the effort (for
reviews Brehm & Self, 1989; Richter et al., 2016). Indeed, as summarized by Richter and
colleagues, difficulty does show this pattern, when motivation is assessed as cardiovascular
physiological arousal, but not always when motivation is measured by performance or behavior
(for a review Richter et al., 2016). Our lay theory framework suggests that this variability is due
to (unassessed) differences in what experienced difficulty is taken to mean, performance effects
may be due to endorsing difficulty-as-importance or to rejecting difficulty-as-impossibility (e.g.,
Elmore et al., 2016; Horowitz et al., 2017). Cardiovascular arousal may also be compatible with
rejecting difficulty-as-importance or accepting difficulty-as-impossibility cues, resulting in no
necessarily consistent link from behavior to arousal. Which lay theory comes to mind in the
moment may be driving whether difficulty bolsters performance and not just arousal, but lay
theories are not assessed in these studies so it is hard to know.
The second implication of finding four separate lay theories of ease and difficulty is that
when one lay theory of experienced ease or difficulty is reinforced by experience, other lay
theories are unlikely to be influenced. Hence, even if a person is routinely reinforced for
interpreting difficulty as importance, that will not make them invulnerable to cues that difficulty
means impossibility. Reinforcement that ease means possibility does not make one invulnerable
to cues that ease means triviality. Indeed, identity-based motivation theory predicts a
bidirectional relationship between salient identities and salient lay theories of ease and difficulty
and assumes that what a salient identity implies is dynamically constructed in context
(Oyserman, 2015).

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 35
A third implication of finding four separate lay theories of ease and difficulty is that
whether a productive or unproductive interpretation of ease or of difficulty comes to mind is
likely to be function of the fit between accessible lay theory and experience. Just as fit between
how means and ends are framed matters within a regulatory focus frame (e.g. Higgins, 2005),
some form of fit may matter for whether experienced ease and difficulty are motivating or
demotivating. Strong adherence to the Protestant Ethic (Mirels & Garrett, 1971) might make it
more likely that ease will be dismissed as triviality for example, so that if difficulty is valued as
character building, people may be demotivated by ease, even when it could help them attain their
goals. Our correlational finding that performance is associated with endorsing ease-as-possibility
and rejecting ease-as-triviality is interesting, but in the moment, an easy task may or may not
evoke both lay theories.
A fourth implication of finding four separate lay theories of ease and difficulty is that
they can be added to other measures of motivation to better understand underlying processes. For
example, given the literature on the positive consequences of efficacy (Bandura, 2006), it would
be useful to examine the relative explanatory power of lay theories of ease and difficulty and
other measures of motivation, including grit and growth mindset on feelings of efficacy. Other
mediational analyses also are possible given our lay theory measures. For example, interventions
using growth mindset highlight that believing that ability can change influences outcomes
(Yeager & Dweck, 2012). While not yet tested, it is possible that positive effects of such
interventions are mediated by change in lay theories of experienced difficulty away from the
difficulty-as-impossibility lay theory (for detailed development of this idea, see Lewis &
Oyserman, in press; Oyserman & Lewis, 2017; Oyserman & Fisher, in press).

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 36
A final implication comes from our initial test of predictive validity. We found some
evidence that performance is associated with a particular pattern of endorsement of lay theories
of ease and difficulty: that ease means possibility (so one should “get going”) and not triviality
(“too easy to care”) and that difficulty does not mean impossibility (“do not quit”). We did not
find evidence that performance is associated with endorsing difficulty-as-importance in spite of
prior priming studies suggesting that guiding people to use this lay theory promotes performance
on difficult academic tasks (Aelenei et al., 2017; Elmore et al., 2016; Oyserman et al, 2017;
Smith & Oyserman, 2015). Perhaps our current task was not difficult enough for difficulty-asimportance to matter, or perhaps because people’s implicit and explicit beliefs about what
difficulty implies are not related (O’Donnell & Oyserman, 2017), theory on the mind matters.
This is a future venue of research deserving of further attention. Because a difficulty-asimportance lay theory has little overlap with other measures of motivation, focusing on this lay
theory can be of both theoretical and applied significance.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 37
References
Ackerman, R. (2014). The diminishing criterion model for metacognitive regulation of time
investment. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 143(3), 1349-1368.
Aelenei, C., Lewis, N. A., Jr., & Oyserman, D. (2017). No pain, no gain? Social demographic
correlates and identity consequences of interpreting experienced difficulty as
importance. Contemporary Educational Psychology.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cedpsych.2016.08.004
Alessandri, G., Borgogni, L., Schaufeli, W. B., Caprara, G. V., & Consiglio, C. (2015). From
positive orientation to job performance: The role of work engagement and self-efficacy
beliefs. Journal of Happiness Studies, 16, 767-788.
Andrews, P., & Chen, M. A. (2014). Gender differences in mental toughness and coping with
injury in runners. Journal of Athletic Enhancement 3, 1-5.
Atkinson, J. W. (1964). An introduction to motivation. Princeton, NJ: D. Van Nostrand.
Bandura, A. (2006). Guide for constructing self-efficacy scales. In F. Pajares & T. Urdan (Eds.),
Self-Efficacy Beliefs of Adolescents (pp. 307-337). Greenwich, CT: Information Age
Publishing.
Bandura, A. (2012). On the functional properties of perceived self-efficacy revisited. Journal of
Management, 38, 9-44.
Bartlett, M. S. (1950). Tests of significance in factor analysis. British Journal of Statistical
Psychology, 3, 77-85.
Beaman, C. P. (2002). Why are we good at detecting cheaters? A reply to Fodor. Cognition,
83(2), 215-220.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 38
Bjork, R. A., Dunlosky, J., & Kornell, N. (2013). Self-regulated learning: Beliefs, techniques,
and illusions. Annual Review of Psychology, 64, 417-444.
Bouffard-Bouchard, T., Parent, S., & Larivee, S. (1991). Influence of self-efficacy on selfregulation and performance among junior and senior high-school age students.
International Journal of Behavioral Development, 14, 153-164.
Brehm, J. W., & Self, E. A. (1989). The intensity of motivation. Annual Review of Psychology,
40, 109-131.
Burnette, J. L., O'Boyle, E. H., VanEpps, E. M., Pollack, J. M., & Finkel, E. J. (2013). Mind-sets
matter: A meta-analytic review of implicit theories and self-regulation. Psychological
Bulletin, 139, 655-701.
Campbell, D. T. & Fiske, D. W. (1959). Convergent and discriminant validation by the
multitrait-multimethod matrix. Psychological Bulletin, 56, 81-105.
Cattell, R. B. (1966). The scree test for the number of factors. Multivariate Behavioral Research,
1, 245-276.
Chiu, C., Hong, Y., & Dweck, C. S. (1997). Lay dispositionism and implicit theories of
personality. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 19-30.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Comprehensive Meta-Analysis (Version 3) [Computer software]. Englewood, NJ: Biostat.
Crede, M., Tynan, M. C., & Harms, D. (2016). Much ado about grit: A meta-analytic synthesis
of the grit literature. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/pspp0000102

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 39
Cronbach, L. J., & Meehl, P. E. (1995). Construct validity for psychological tests. Psychological
Bulletin, 52, 281-302.
Duckworth, A., & Gross, J. J. (2014). Self-control and grit related but separable determinants of
success. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 23(5), 319-325.
Duckworth, A. L., Peterson, C., Matthews, M. D., & Kelly, D. R. (2007). Grit: Perseverance and
passion for long-term goals. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 97, 10871101.
Duckworth, A. L. & Quinn, P. D. (2009). Development and validation of the short grit scale
(Grit-S). Journal of Personality Assessment,91(2), 166-174.
Dweck, C. S. (2000). Self-theories: Their Role in Motivation, Personality, and Development.
Edward Brothers: Lillington, NC.
Dweck, C. S., Chiu, C., & Hong, Y. (1995). Implicit theories and their role in judgments and
reactions: A word from two perspectives. Psychological Inquiry, 6, 267-285.
Elmore, K., Oyserman, D., Smith, G., & Novin., S. (2016). When the going gets tough:
Implications of reactance for interpretations of experienced difficulty in the classroom.
American Education Research Association Open. doi: 10.1177/2332858416664714
Eskreis-Winkler, L., Shulman, E. P., Beal, S. A., & Duckworth, A. L. (2014). The grit effect:
Predicting retention in the military, the workplace, school and marriage. Frontiers in
Psychology, 5, 1-12.
Everitt, S. (1975). Multivariate analysis: The need for data, and other problems. British Journal
of Psychiatry, 126, 237-240.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 40
Fabrigar, L. R., Wegener, D. T., MacCallum, R. C., & Strahan, E. J. (1999). Evaluating the use
of exploratory factor analysis in psychological research. Psychological Methods, 4, 272299.
Frederick, S. (2005). Cognitive reflection and decision making. Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 19(4), 25-42.
Freitas, A. L., Liberman, N., Salovey, P., & Higgins, E. T. (2002). When to begin? Regulatory
focus on initiating goal pursuit. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 121-130.
Freitas, A. L., Salovey, P., & Liberman, N. (2001). Abstract and concrete self-evaluative goals.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 410-412.
Freund, A. M., & Hennecke, M. (2015). On means and ends: The role of goal focus in successful
goal pursuit. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 24, 149-153.
George, D., & Mallery, P. (2003). SPSS for Windows Step by Step: A Simple Guide and
Reference. 11.0 update (4th ed.). Boston, MD: Allyn & Bacon.
Griffin, D. W., & Ross, L. (1991). Subjective construal, social inference, and human
misunderstanding. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 24, 319-359.
Gucciardi, D. F., Hanton, S., Gordon, S., Mallett, C. J., & Temby, P. (2015). The concept of
mental toughness: Tests of dimensionality, nomological network and traitness. Journal of
Personality, 83, 26-44.
Haws, K. L., Dholakia, U. M., & Bearden, W. O. (2010). An assessment of chronic regulatory
focus measures. Journal of Marketing Research, 47, 967-982.
Higgins, E. T. (1998). Promotion and prevention: Regulatory focus as a motivational principle.
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 30, 1-46.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 41
Higgins, E. T. (2005). Value from regulatory fit. Current Directions In Psychological
Science, 14(4), 209-213.
Higgins, E. T., & Cornwell, J. F. M. (2016). Securing foundations and advancing frontiers:
Prevention and promotion effects on judgment and decision making. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 136, 56-67.
Horowitz, E., Sorensen, N., Yoder, N., & Oyserman, D. (2017). Creating a pathway to success:
teachers can change their students’ identity-based motivation. Manuscript under editorial
review.
Hu, L.-T. & Bentler, P. M. (1999). Cutoff criteria for fit indexes in covariance structure analysis:
Conventional criteria versus new alternatives. Structural Equation Modeling, 6, 1-55.
Idson, L. C., & Higgins, E. T. (2000). How current feedback and chronic effectiveness influence
motivation: Everything to gain versus everything to lose. European Journal of Social
Psychology, 30, 583-592.
Jackson, D. L., Gillaspy, J. A., & Purc-Stephenson, R. (2009). Reporting practices in
confirmatory factor analysis: An overview and some recommendations. Psychological
Methods, 14, 6-23.
Job, V., Dweck, C. S., & Walton, G. M. (2010). Ego-depletion- Is it all in your head? Implicit
theories about willpower affect self-regulation. Psychological Science, 21, 1686-1693.
Judge, T. A., & Bono, J. E. (2001). Relationship of core self-evaluations traits—self-esteem,
generalized self-efficacy, locus of control, and emotional stability—with job satisfaction
and job performance: A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86, 80-92.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 42
Judge, T.A., Erez, A., Bono, J. E., & Thoresen, C. J. (2002). Are measures of self-esteem,
neuroticism, locus of control, and generalized self-efficacy indicators of a common core
construct? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 693-710.
Kaiser, H. F. (1960). The application of electronic computers to factor analysis. Educational and
Psychological Measurement, 20, 141-151.
Kaiser, H. F. (1970). A second generation little jiffy. Psychometrika, 35, 401-415.
Kanevsky, L. & Keighley, T. (2003). To produce or not to produce? Understanding boredom and
the honor in underachievement. Roeper Review, 26, 20-28.
Karpicke, J. D., Butler, A. C., & Roediger, H. (2009). Metacognitive strategies in student
learning: Do students practice retrieval when they study on their own? Memory, 17, 471479.
King, L. A., & Raspin, C. (2004). Lost and found possible selves, subjective well-being, and ego
development in divorced women. Journal of Personality, 72(3), 603-632.
Kline, R. B. (2011). Principles and Practice of Structural Equation Modeling. New York, NY:
Guilford Press.
Komarraju, M., & Nadler, D. (2013). Self-efficacy and academic achievement: Why do implicit
beliefs, goals, and effort regulation matter? Learning and Individual Differences, 25, 6772.
Koriat, A., Ma’ayn, H., & Nussinson, R. (2006). The intricate relationship between monitoring
and control in metacognition: Lessons for the cause-and-effect relation between
subjective experience and behavior. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 135,
36-69.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 43
Kornell, N., & Bjork, R. A. (2008). Learning concepts and categories: Is spacing the “enemy of
induction”? Psychological Science, 19, 585-592.
Lanaj, K., Chang, C.-H. “D.”, & Johnson, R. E. (2012). Regulatory focus and work-related
outcomes: A review and meta analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 5, 998-1034.
Lee, A. Y., Keller, P. A., & Sternthal, B. (2010). Value from regulatory construal fit: The
persuasive impact of fit between consumer goals and message concreteness. Journal of
Consumer Research, 36, 735-747.
Lewis Jr., N. & Oyserman, D. (in press). Using identity-based motivation to reduce health gaps
and disparities. Behavioral Science & Policy
Lewis, N. A., Jr., & Earl, A. (in press). Seeing more and eating less: effects of information
granularity on the perception and regulation of food consumption. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology.
Lockwood, P., Jordan, C. H., & Kunda, Z. (2002). Motivation by positive or negative role
models: Regulatory focus determines who will best inspire us. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 83, 854-864.
Mahoney, J. W., Gucciardi, D. F., Ntoumanis, N., & Mallet, C. J. (2014). Mental toughness in
sport: Motivational antecedents and associations with performance and psychological
health. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 36, 281-292.
Major, B., Sawyer, P. J., & Kunstman, J. W. (2013). Minority perceptions of whites’ motives for
responding without prejudice: The perceived internal and external motivation to avoid
prejudice scales. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 39, 401-414.
Mann, T., Sherman, D., & Updegraff, J. (2004). Dispositional motivations and message framing:
A test of the congruency hypothesis in college students. Health Psychology, 23, 330-334.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 44
Mirels, H. L., & Garrett, J. B. (1971). The Protestant ethic as a personality variable. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 36, 40-44.
Myers, C. A., Wang, C., Black, J. M., Bugescu, N., & Hoeft, F. (2016). The matter of
motivation: Striatal resting-state connectivity is dissociable between grit and growth
mindset. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 11, 1521-1527.
Nicholls, A. R., Polman, R. C., Levy, A. R., & Backhouse, S.H. (2008). Mental toughness,
optimism, pessimism, and coping among athletes. Personality and Individual
Differences, 644, 1182-1192.
Oppenheimer, D. M. (2008). The secret life of fluency. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12, 237241.
O’Donnell, S. C. & Oyserman, D. (2017). Assessing interpretations of experienced ease and
difficulty as motivational constructs: An Implicit Measure. Manuscript in preparation.
Oyserman, D. (2007). Social identity and self-regulation. In A. W. Kruglanski & E. T. Higgins
(Eds.), Social Psychology: Handbook of Basic Principles (pp. 432-453). New York, NY:
Guilford.
Oyserman, D. (2009). Identity-based motivation: Implications for action-readiness, proceduralreadiness, and consumer behavior. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 19, 250-260.
Oyserman, D. (2015). Pathways to Success through Identity-Based Motivation. New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.
Oyserman, D., Destin, M., & Novin, S. (2015). The context-sensitive future self: Possible selves
motivate in context, not otherwise, Self and Identity, 14(2), 173-188.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 45
Oyserman, D. & Fisher, O. (in press). Identity-based motivation and health: An identity-based
motivation and social stigma approach. In B. Major, J. F. Dovidio, and B. G. Link. The
Oxford Handbook of Discrimination, Stigma and Health, NY: Oxford University Press.
Oyserman, D., Fryberg, S. A., & Yoder, N. (2007). Identity-based motivation and health.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 93, 1011-1027.
Oyserman, D. & Lewis, N. (2017). Seeing the destination and the path: using identity-based
motivation to understand and reduce racial disparities in academic achievement. Social
Issues and Policy Review, 11, 159-194.
Oyserman, D., Novin, S., Elmore, K., & Smith, G. C. (2017). Interpretation of experienced
difficulty shapes identity, motivation, and performance. Manuscript under editorial
review.
Piff, P. K., Kraus, M. W., Cote, S., Cheng, B. H., & Keltner, D. (2010). Having less, giving
more: The influence of social class on prosocial behavior. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 99, 771-784.
Pizzolato, J. E. (2007). Impossible selves investigating students’ persistence decisions when their
career-possible selves border on impossible. Journal of Career Development, 33, 201223.
Primi, C., Morsanyi, K., Ciesi, F., Donati, M. A., & Hamilton, J. (2015). The development and
testing of a new version of the cognitive reflection test applying item response theory
(IRT). Journal of Behavioral Decision Making.
Reber, R., & Schwarz, N. (1999). Effects of perceptual fluency on judgments of truth.
Consciousness and Cognition, 8, 338-342.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 46
Reber, R., Winkielman, P., & Schwarz, N. (1998). Effects of perceptual fluency on affective
judgments. Psychological Science, 9, 45-48.
Rhodes, G. (2006). The evolution of facial attractiveness. Annual Review of Psychology, 57, 199226.
Richter, M., Gendolla, G. H. E., & Wright, R. A. (2016). Three decades of research on
motivational intensity theory: What we have learned about effort and what we still don’t
know. In A. J. Elliot (Ed.), Advances in Motivation Science, 149-186.
Rotter, J. B. (1966). Generalized expectances for internal versus external control of
reinforcement. Psychological Monographs, 80, 1-28.
Schmeichel, B. J., Vohs, K. D., & Duke, S. C. (2010). Self-control at high and low levels of
mental construal, Social Psychology and Personality Science, 2, 182-189.
Scholer, A. A., & Higgins, E. T. (2013). Dodging monsters and dancing with dreams: Success
and failure at different levels of approach and avoidance. Emotion Review, 5, 254-258.
Scholer, A. A., Stroessner, S. J., & Higgins, E. T. (2008). Responding to negativity: How a risky
tactic can serve a vigilant strategy. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 44, 767–
774.
Scholer, A. A., Zou, X., Fujita, K., Stroessner, S. J., & Higgins, E. T. (2010). When risk seeking
becomes a motivational necessity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 99,
215–231.
Schwarz, N. (2015). Metacognition. In M. Mikulincer & P.R. Shaver, (Eds.) APA Handbook of
Personality and Social Psychology: Attitudes and Social Cognition (Vol.1, pp. 203-229).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 47
Schwarz, N. & Schuman, H. (1997). Political knowledge, attribution, and inferred interest in
politics: The operation of buffer items. International Journal of Public Opinion
Research, 9, 191-195.
Smith, G. C. & Oyserman, D. (2015). Just not worth my time? Experienced difficulty and time
investment. Social Cognition, 33, 1-18.
Song, H., & Schwarz, N. (2008). If it’s hard to read, it’s hard to do: Processing fluency affects
effort prediction and motivation. Psychological Science, 19, 986-988.
Steiger, J. H. (1980). Tests for comparing elements of a correlation matrix. Psychological
Bulletin, 87, 245-251.
Thompson, K. S. & Oppenheimer, D. M. (2016). Investigating an alternate form of the cognitive
reflection test, Judgment and Decision Making, 11(1), 99-113.
Trope, Y. & Liberman, N. (2003). Temporal construal. Psychological Review, 110, 403-421.
Trope, Y. & Liberman, N. (2010). Construal-level theory of psychological distance.
Psychological Review, 117, 440-463.
West, M. R., Kraft, M. A., Finn, A. S., Martin, R. E., Duckworth, A. L., Gabrieli, C. F. O., &
Gabrieli, J. D. E. (2016). Promise and paradox: Measuring students’ non-cognitive skills
and the impact of schooling. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 38, 148-170.
Wigfield, A. & Eccles, J. S. (2000). Expectancy-value theory of motivation. Contemporary
Educational Psychology, 25, 68-81.
White, K., Macdonnell, R., & Dahl, D. W. (2011). It’s the mind-set that matters: The role of
construal level and message framing in influencing consumer efficacy and conservation
behaviors. Journal of Marketing Research, 11, 472-485.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 48
Wrosch, C. (2010). The self-regulation of unattainable goals and pathways to quality of life. In S.
Folkman (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Stress, Health, and Coping (pp. 319-333). New
York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Vallacher, R. R., & Wegner, D. M. (1989). Levels of personal agency: Individual variation in
action identification. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57, 660-671.
Yan, V. X., Bjork, E. L., & Bjork, R. A. (2016). On the difficulty of mending metacognitive
illusions: A priori theories, fluency effects, and misattributions of interleaving benefit.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 145, 918-933.
Yan, V. X. & Oyserman, D. (2017). Linking mindsets with toolsets: interpretations of
experienced difficulty matter for knowing how to learn. Manuscript under editorial
review.
Yeager, D. S., & Dweck, C. S. (2012). Mindsets that promote resilience: When students believe
that personal characteristics can be developed. Educational Psychologist, 47(4), 302-314.
Yeager, D. S., Romero, C., Paunesku, D., Hulleman, C. S., Schneider, B., Hinojosa, C., …
Dweck, C. S. (2016). Using design thinking to improve psychological interventions: The
case of the growth mindset during the transition to high school. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 108, 374-391.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 49
Tables
Table 1.
Predicted Associations Between Lay Theories of Experience and Other Motivational Constructs
Difficulty-asEase-asMotivational Construct
Importance Impossibility Possibility Triviality
Efficacy, Locus of Control
+
+
Growth Mindset
+
+
Grit, Mental Toughness

+

-

+

Promotion Focus

+

-

+

Prevention Focus

+

-

+

a

Construal Level

+

-

+

Note: Direction of association is represented by a plus sign ‘+’ for positive and a minus sign ‘-’
for negative associations. Magnitude of association is represented by the size and color of the
plus ‘+’ or minus ‘-’ sign. Small size and grey color for small predicted magnitude; moderate
size and black color for moderate predicted magnitude We use Cohen’s (1988) rules of thumb

+,-

quantify predicted weak (r <.1; + , -), moderate (r <.3; + , -), and large (r <.5;
)
associations. Note that we predict no large associations between our lay theories and other
motivational constructs. aConstrual level is represented such that lower values are concrete and
larger values are abstract, such that a positive association implies that high lay theory scores
would be associated with a more abstract construal.

View publication stats

