Running head: SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

1

New Evidence on Self-Affirmation Effects and Theorized Sources
of Heterogeneity from Large-scale Replications
Paul Hanselman, Christopher S. Rozek, Jeffrey Grigg,
and Geoffrey D. Borman

ACCEPTED FOR PUBLICATION AT JOURNAL OF EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

Author Note
Paul Hanselman, University of California, Irvine
Christopher S. Rozek, University of Chicago
Jeffrey Grigg, Johns Hopkins University
Geoffrey Borman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
We are grateful to Geoffrey Cohen for sharing implementation materials, and to Geoffrey Cohen,
Gregory Walton, Joshua Aronson, and Valerie Purdie-Vaughns for advice during the design of
this project. We appreciate helpful comments on previous versions of this manuscript from Greg
Duncan and Judy Harackiewicz, as well as seminar participants at the advisory board meeting of
the Irvine Network on Interventions in Development (January, 2015) and the Irvine Motivation
Meeting (January, 2015). Jaymes Pyne provided specific research assistance related to this paper.
Research reported in this paper was supported by: U.S. Department of Education, through Grant
R305A110136 to the University of Wisconsin, (PI: Geoffrey Borman) and Grant R305B120013
to the University of California, Irvine (PI: Greg Duncan); the Spencer Foundation Grant
201500044 (PI: Geoffrey Borman); and the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute Of Child
Health & Human Development of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number
P01HD065704 (PI: Greg Duncan). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and
does not necessarily represent the official views of the supporting agencies.
Address correspondence to Paul Hanselman, University of California, Irvine, 3200 Education
Irvine, CA 92697-5500.
Contact: paul.hanselman@uci.edu

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

2

Abstract
Brief, targeted self-affirmation writing exercises have recently been offered as a way to reduce
racial achievement gaps, but evidence about their effects in educational settings is mixed, leaving
ambiguity about the likely benefits of these strategies if implemented broadly. A key limitation
in interpreting these mixed results is that they come from studies conducted by different research
teams with different procedures in different settings; it is therefore impossible to isolate whether
different effects are the result of theorized heterogeneity, unidentified moderators, or
idiosyncratic features of the different studies. We addressed this limitation by conducting a wellpowered replication of self-affirmation in a setting where a previous large-scale field experiment
demonstrated significant positive impacts, using the same procedures. We found no evidence of
effects in this replication study and estimates were precise enough to reject benefits larger than
an effect size of 0.10. These null effects were significantly different from persistent benefits in
the prior study in the same setting, and extensive testing revealed that currently theorized
moderators of self-affirmation effects could not explain the difference. These results highlight
the potential fragility of self-affirmation in educational settings when implemented widely and
the need for new theory, measures, and evidence about the necessary conditions for selfaffirmation success.
Keywords: values affirmation, replication, stereotype threat, intervention, achievement gap,
scale-up, middle school

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

3

New Evidence on Self-Affirmation Effects and Theorized Sources of Heterogeneity from
Large-scale Replications
One potentially promising approach to reducing persistent racial/ethnic achievement gaps
is to tackle their social-psychological dimensions, including the negative consequences of
stereotype threat and other identity threats in school. Because identity threats have detrimental
consequences for marginalized groups in many academic settings (Steele, Spencer, & Aronson,
2002), such approaches can have substantial impacts. For instance, brief reflective writing
exercises conducted in school settings can provide large and lasting benefits for theoreticallythreatened groups, such as African American and Hispanic middle-school students (Cohen,
Garcia, Purdie-Vaughns, Apfel, & Brzustoski, 2009; Sherman et al., 2013), women in a college
physics course (Miyake et al., 2010), and first-generation college students (Harackiewicz et al.,
2014).
How robust are these effects? Although benefits of seemingly simple interventions
suggest great potential, researchers caution that these techniques are “not magic” (Yeager &
Walton, 2011). By their nature, the interventions target specific interactions between individuals
and their social context and, therefore, critical differences in intervention delivery, individual
students, or social contexts may lead to substantial variability in effectiveness. As a result, one
must gauge the impact of these interventions in diverse settings and, to the extent that there are
meaningful differences in effects, assess whether theorized moderators explain these differences.
If heterogeneous effects follow theoretically predictable patterns, then these interventions have a
clear role in improving educational outcomes and reducing achievement gaps. However, if
heterogeneity remains unpredictable, then the immediate value of these interventions is less
clear.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

4

Theorized heterogeneity also complicates the fundamental enterprise of independent
replication, which is increasingly recognized as necessary to build firm scientific understanding
in psychology as in other fields (Ioannidis, 2005; Ioannidis, 2012; Pashler & Harris, 2012). If the
impacts of social-psychological interventions depend on seemingly subtle differences in
delivery, individuals, and social contexts, then discrepant replication results may reflect
predictable differences in effectiveness across diverse settings. On the other hand, mixed results
may be due to unpredictable study-specific differences, such as unrecognized moderators or
sampling variation. This distinction is especially difficult to disentangle when studies are
conducted by different investigators and with different populations in different contexts. As a
result, initial replication efforts of affirmation interventions in educational settings—which
demonstrate success (e.g. Sherman et al., 2013), challenges (e.g. Kost-Smith et al., 2012), and
failure (e.g. Dee, 2015)—raise questions about both the size and variability of these effects when
implemented broadly. In particular, do theorized moderators explain differences in selfaffirmation benefits? This study provides unique evidence on this question by reporting on a new
large-scale test of self-affirmation effects and comparing these results to a previous effort in the
same setting.
Self-affirmation: Theory and Promise
This study is informed by theories of social identity threats, which create particular
challenges for members of marginalized social groups in school (Steele et al., 2002). For
instance, Black and Hispanic students are subject to stereotype threat in academic settings, in
which they face the threat of conforming to or being judged by negative stereotypes about their
racial/ethnic group (Steele & Aronson, 1995). The experience of stereotype and other identity
threats leads to poorer academic performance through a variety of psychological responses,

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

5

including stress, anxiety, and vigilance (Schmader, Johns, & Forbes, 2008), and may contribute
to longer term disengagement and a “downward spiral” of performance (Cohen & Garcia, 2008).
Since these stereotype threats uniquely apply to groups subject to negative academic stereotypes,
they may account for portions of the widening of racial achievement gaps in school.
Stereotype threats are pernicious because students are affected by virtue of membership
in a marginalized group (regardless of whether or not they endorse a negative stereotype, as long
as they are aware of it), and broad social stereotypes are difficult to change. Instead, the goal of
many social-psychological interventions is to reduce the harm that existing threats cause by
shifting how students view themselves and/or their social world (Wilson, 2011). The example we
consider is a set of brief writing exercises that ask students to reflect on meaningful personal
values, such as family, friends, music, or sports. Following their initial presentation (e.g. Cohen,
Garcia, Apfel, & Master, 2006; Cohen et al., 2009; Sherman et al., 2009), we refer to these
activities as self-affirmation interventions throughout this paper, reflecting the goal to allow
students to “reaffirm their self-integrity” (Cohen et al., 2006, p. 1307). Similar interventions have
also been described as “values affirmation” (e.g. Cook, Purdie-Vaughns, Garcia, & Cohen, 2012;
Harackiewicz et al., 2014; Shnabel, Purdie-Vaughns, Cook, Garcia, & Cohen, 2013).
Self-affirmation interventions are believed to restore an individual’s sense of worth in the
face of threats related to social identity, thus mitigating detrimental stress responses (Steele,
1988). Because individual identities are complex, individuals “can maintain an overall selfperception of worth and integrity by affirming some other aspect of the self, unrelated to their
group” (Sherman & Cohen, 2006, p. 206). Threats to academic identity experienced by minority
members in school can be muted by focusing attention on other specific aspects of identity
(Critcher & Dunning, 2015; Sherman & Cohen, 2006; Steele, 1988; Walton, Paunesku, &

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

6

Dweck, 2012). Reflection on important values provides a psychological buffer against the full
brunt of detrimental stereotype threats in school, and because of the potentially recursive nature
of threat and poor performance, subtle buffering early on may lead to substantial benefits over
time (Cohen & Garcia, 2008; Cohen et al., 2009; Taylor & Walton, 2011; Walton, 2014).
Geoffrey Cohen and his colleagues have developed these theoretical ideas alongside
specific classroom writing activities to promote self-affirmation via reflection on important
values. Each activity takes 15-20 minutes and is conducted by classroom teachers several times
during the school year; the timing emphasizes critical moments such as the beginning of the
school year and potentially stressful evaluative milestones. Consistent with theoretical
expectations, these activities did not significantly impact White students’ academic performance,
who likely experienced relatively little academic identity threat (Walton & Cohen, 2003).
However, the effects on grade point average for 7th grade African American and Hispanic
students were substantial and persistent (Cohen et al., 2006; Cohen et al., 2009; Cook et al.,
2012; Sherman et al., 2013). Remarkably, the benefits of the intervention reduced the racial
achievement gap in the targeted course by 40% (Cohen et al., 2006, p. 1307), which suggests
great potential for this approach to address educational disparities that are associated with
identity threat processes.
What mediates these effects? Critcher and Dunning (2015) presented recent laboratory
evidence for an “affirmation as perspective” model, in which self-affirmations “expand the
contents of the working concept—thus narrowing the scope of any threat” (p. 4). Working
concept refers to the salient identities that make up one’s self-concept in consciousness at any
point in time. When aspects of identity are threatened, working self-concept tends to constrict,
amplifying the negative experiences of that threat. However, if a broader working concept is

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

7

maintained, then threats associated with a specific aspect of identity are less salient. It stands to
reason that self-affirmation in school expands the contents of self-concept for students subject to
academic stereotypes, thus reducing attention to the threat and muting the stress responses that
lead to poorer performance.
Empirical tests of mediators in middle school settings have been mixed. Cook et al.
(2012) reported impacts of self-affirmation on Black students’ level and variability of sense of
belonging in school, which indicate effects on students’ construal of their social environments,
but the authors argued that these effects are “not a mechanism in the sense of mediation” (p.
483). Similarly, Sherman et al. (2013) reported impacts on higher levels of construal and a more
robust sense of social belonging, while Cohen et al. (2006) reported decreases on a measure of
cognitive activation of racial stereotype, yet neither found evidence that these effects mediated
the impact of self-affirmation. Shnabel et al. (2013) found that writing about social belonging
mediated some of the self-affirmation benefits; however, Tibbetts et al. (in press) did not
replicate this result in another setting and instead found that writing about independence
mediated some of the affirmation benefits.
The self-affirmation writing exercises have been implemented in at least four middle
school field settings beyond the original one. Figure 1 summarizes both the positive impacts
from early field trials within three schools (Cohen et al., 2006; Sherman et al., 2013) and smaller
and sometimes non-statistically significant estimates in large-scale, multi-school replications
(Borman, Grigg, & Hanselman, 2016; Dee, 2015).1 The latter are well-powered studies

1

The summary presented in Figure 1 should be viewed as an informal account of previous self-affirmation
impacts in middle school settings. A formal and more expansive meta-analysis will certainly be useful in the future
as more independent evidence emerges, but our specific purpose in collecting these estimates was to provide context
for the current study. We therefore focus only on studies in middle schools that report self-affirmation effects on
overall GPA relative to an alternate activity. These criteria rule out studies at other levels (e.g., Miyake et al., 2010),

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

8

conducted by independent research teams, and their results raise questions about the fundamental
sources of variability in self-affirmation effects. Unfortunately, many features of the research
settings varied in these studies and little implementation information is available to isolate the
impact of specific differences. For instance, the study conducted by Dee (2015) illustrates
multiple potentially relevant changes across research efforts. For one, it was conducted in
schools with substantial minority student populations; these are contexts where self-affirmation
may be less effective (Hanselman, Bruch, Gamoran, & Borman, 2014). For another, it recruited
an unusually representative sample of students (a 94% consent rate), which could account for
dampened impacts if the students not typically included in other studies benefit less from the
intervention. These preliminary results suggest the need for more precise consideration of where,
for whom, and under what conditions self-affirmation is beneficial.
Theoretical Moderators of Self-Affirmation Effects
Psychological theory posits that self-affirmation is beneficial in specific circumstances
(Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Yeager & Walton, 2011), highlighting the need to identify the
necessary and sufficient “preconditions” for its benefits in educational settings (Cohen et al.,
2006). Null results emphasize this point, since existing theory provides post hoc explanations but
not clear insight into when, where, and why self-affirmation might not have worked (e.g., see
Harackiewicz, Canning, Tibbetts, Priniski, & Hyde, in press). And of course if moderators were
well understood, then studies would likely not have been fielded in such unsuccessful contexts.

those that consider other outcomes (e.g., Cook et al., 2012, Study 1), and those without a non-self-affirmation
control group (e.g., Cook et al., 2012, Study 2). Similarly, we omit the study by Bowen, Wegmann, and Webber
(2013) because reported values do not include an overall estimate of impacts on GPA (that study reports offsetting
impacts on initial GPA and slope over time; inspection of their Table 3 and Figure 1 suggests this study would
contribute a small negative effect on overall GPA to our summary if included). We include detailed information
about the source of represented estimates in Appendix Table A1.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

9

In surveying potential self-affirmation moderators, the literature points to three relevant
domains: features of the delivery of the activities, individual characteristics of the participating
students, and aspects of the social context. First, specific features of the delivery of the brief selfaffirmation intervention are hypothesized to be necessary for students to benefit. For example,
Critcher, Dunning, and Armor (2010) found that self-affirmation exercises were only effective
when introduced before a threat or before participants became defensive in response to a threat,
which suggests that it is important to implement self-affirmation exercises before stressful events
in school in order to short-circuit negative recursive cycles (see also Cohen & Garcia, 2014;
Cook et al., 2012). Qualities of presentation that shape how students perceive the writing
activities—such as making participants aware that exercises are beneficial (Sherman et al., 2009)
or externally imposing affirmation (Silverman, Logel, & Cohen, 2013)—may mute selfaffirmation benefits. Conversely, researchers have argued that the activity is most beneficial
when presented as a normal classroom activity (Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Purdie-Vaughns et al.,
2009) and when promoting specific types of writing (e.g., Shnabel et al., 2013). Finally, the type
of control group used has also been suggested as an implementation-based moderator of the
effects of self-affirmation. The typical control group, which asks students to write about nonimportant values, has the potential to undermine students’ confidence if they write about
activities in which they have low ability whereas other control writing prompts, which are more
neutral or open-ended, might allow control participants to spontaneously affirm themselves
(McQueen & Klein, 2006).
Second, numerous individual difference variables have been hypothesized to make
students more vulnerable to stereotype threat and thus moderate the effects of self-affirmation,
including identifying with a negatively stereotyped group, being knowledgeable about self-

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

10

relevant negative stereotypes, and caring about doing well in school (Aronson, Lustina, Good,
Keough, & Steele, 1999; Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Shapiro & Neuberg, 2007). Therefore, while
all negatively stereotyped minority students might be helped by self-affirmation, subgroups that
are even more highly negatively stereotyped, such as Black males (Eagly & Kite, 1987; PurdieVaughns & Eibach, 2008; Sidanius & Pratto, 1999) or the lowest-achieving minority students
(Cohen et al., 2009), might benefit most from self-affirmation.
Finally, context variables are hypothesized to moderate self-affirmation benefits. Social
characteristics, such as group composition and environmental cues, influence the behavior and
performance of stereotyped students (Dasgupta, Scircle, & Hunsinger, 2015; Inzlicht & BenZeev, 2000; Murphy, Steele, & Gross, 2007). The effectiveness of self-affirmation approaches
depends on the identity threats “in the air” in a particular setting (Steele, 1997), and the
hypothesized recursive benefits are theorized to depend on relatively rich learning environments
for threatened students to take advantage of as they are buffered from perceived threats (Cohen
& Sherman, 2014). Because self-affirmation is theorized to disrupt stereotype threat processes,
settings in which threats are more likely to be experienced may provide the greatest opportunity
for benefits. For instance, while self-affirmation reduced gender disparities in performance in an
introductory college physics course (Miyake et al., 2010), it was not beneficial in introductory
science settings in which gender gaps and stereotype threat were not present (Lauer et al., 2013).
Theory and empirical evidence also suggest that minority students attending schools in which
their group is poorly represented and in which there are large racial achievement gaps benefit
most from self-affirmation (Cohen & Garcia, 2014; Hanselman et al., 2014).
In summary, psychological theory posits moderators of self-affirmation effects in several
domains, but evidence for specific moderators is limited because the data to test these theories

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

11

are lacking, especially in applied educational settings. This means that mixed evidence of selfaffirmation benefits may be due to theorized variation in how the activities were delivered,
individual characteristics, or social contexts. In particular, very little is known about how to
translate theorized constructs and laboratory manipulations into measures of the relevant
moderating features as they occur in applied settings. Moreover, it is impossible to isolate
specific relevant differences between the independent field trials to date, which have been
conducted in different contexts with different populations and different procedures. Nonetheless,
interrogating potential moderators is key to assessing both the underlying theory of selfaffirmation and its likely practical impact. To the extent that a priori hypotheses predict
heterogeneity, these results would confirm theory and point to where these strategies have the
most potential to improve student outcomes. On the other hand, it is possible that mixed selfaffirmation results are not explained by currently theorized moderators, which would imply the
need for greater and more specific inquiry into the necessary conditions for success.
A New Self-affirmation Replication Study
Given variable evidence of impacts in applied settings, we tested the effects of brief, inclass self-affirmation writing exercises for 7th grade students on subsequent academic outcomes
in a new double-blind randomized experiment in a sample of over 1200 students in one
Midwestern school district. We sought to learn whether similar benefits could be attained in a
different setting, both in terms of geographic location and scale of implementation.
The Original Study
The original self-affirmation study in a middle school setting was first reported by Cohen
et al. (2006), with supplemental analyses elsewhere (Cohen et al., 2009; Cook et al., 2012;
Shnabel et al., 2013). We replicated the procedures in the original experiments as described

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

12

below. Cohen and his colleagues originally reported several substantively important features of
self-affirmation intervention on student outcomes: substantial persistent benefits for “negatively
stereotyped” students (African American and Hispanic students) on Grade Point Average;
significantly higher benefits for low-performing African American students; an improved trend
in grades throughout the year; and no benefits for European American students. Our primary
focus was on the first finding, representing the highly policy-relevant main impact of the
intervention on negatively stereotyped groups. The impact for African American students ranged
from 0.21 to 0.34 GPA points across individual experiments and across courses (Cohen et al.,
2006, p. 1308).
The Previous Independent Replication in the Current Research Setting
The immediate precedent for the current self-affirmation replication is the study reported
by Borman et al. (2016). That study was the first successful independent replication of the
benefits of self-affirmation benefits in middle schools. The researchers reported statistically
significant benefits for “potentially threatened” students (Black and Hispanic) on 7th grade GPA
across all schools in the district. Like the original study, term-specific GPA data revealed a less
negative trend for potentially threatened students in the self-affirmation condition, and no
benefits for “not potentially threatened” students (White and Asian). Some results deviated from
the original patterns. For one, the impacts were smaller, with an impact of 0.065 cumulative
GPA points; the confidence interval for this estimate was (0.001, 0.128), which excludes all
impact estimates from the original study. The authors speculated that this difference may have
been at least partially related to the challenges of implementing at scale. Also, the replication
found no evidence of an interaction between the intervention and prior achievement. In
supplemental analyses, researchers reported that the treatment benefits in this scale-up were

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

13

concentrated in a subset of schools hypothesized to have the most threatening environments for
potentially threatened groups, based on the numerical presence and relative academic standing of
these students (Hanselman et al., 2014).
The Current Study
The current study was designed to replicate both the original self-affirmation study
(Cohen et al., 2006) and the previous successful independent replication (Borman et al., 2016).
Three key features of this design provide unique insights into the effects of self-affirmation in
educational settings. First, procedures followed those in the original study, including intervention
materials, as we detail below. The study therefore is an example of a well-powered “close”
replication of the effects of self-affirmation for potentially threatened groups in middle school
(Brandt et al., 2014). Moreover, given the scale of the research, the study contributes important
evidence about the general promise of these interventions to improve minority students’
achievement.
The second key feature of the study is that it was conducted in the same setting as a
previous randomized trial of self-affirmation, in the same district and schools, by the same
research team, with the same research protocols. In the current study, we ask whether these
middle school scale-up results were replicated, and we use comparisons across studies to test
theorized sources of heterogeneity. Since features of the study corresponded closely to those in
the previous one (Borman et al., 2016; see Table A2 for a summary), the within-setting
comparisons across the two studies allow for much more specific tests of moderation than
comparisons between settings. A recent precedent for such a within-setting comparison is
provided by Harackiewicz et al. (in press), who found different affirmation effects in a college

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

14

setting and discussed several potential explanations for the difference. We exploit a similar
pattern to conduct comprehensive tests of theorized sources of heterogeneity.
A third contribution of this study is that we collected information on self-affirmation
implementation, including qualitative features of students’ responses to the exercises. These data
provide an unprecedented picture of the experience of the self-affirmation activities when they
are implemented in an entire school district. And, in combination with information about
individual student characteristics and features of the social context, this information supports
unique tests of the theorized sources of heterogeneity.
Building on the unique empirical features of this research, we addressed three sequential
research questions. Our first question was: (1) what was the effect of the self-affirmation
intervention in the new large-scale implementation? Because we found no evidence of benefits,
we asked: (2) were estimated effects substantively and significantly different from the impacts
for the students from a previous study in the same setting? Given meaningful and detectable
differences, we finally asked: (3) why was the same intervention seemingly beneficial for
targeted students in one implementation but less so in the next?
The third research question is the most theoretically important, but it also is the most
challenging. To preview our approach, we drew on the theory underlying the design of the
interventions to conduct a series of tests of potential explanations for differences in effects across
studies. Based on hypothesized moderators of the impacts of self-affirmation, these explanations
fall into three broad classes: characteristics of implementation, individuals, and social context.
We then conducted a series of empirical tests of these potential explanations to assess which, if
any, explained the differences in experimental impact estimates.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

15

Method
The Large-scale Self-Affirmation Studies
All data were generated or collected as part of two randomized trials of self-affirmation
writing activities among 7th grade students. The research was conducted through a partnership
with the school district, which recognized large racial achievement gaps and was interested in
strategies to improve the performance of minority students. District administrators provided
support to the project, and principals at all 11 regular middle schools agreed to participate. Given
this support, study implementation involved researchers (who provided training and activity
materials), school learning coordinators (who coordinated the site-specific logistics, including
scheduling), and teachers (who implemented the activities in their classrooms). The involvement
of educators in diverse roles approximated how the exercises would be likely to be implemented
if adopted as a universal district initiative.
Throughout this paper we refer to the first study, conducted with 7th grade students in
2011-2012, as “cohort 1” and the second study, conducted in 2012-2013, as “cohort 2.” The
focus of this paper is on the new evidence on self-affirmation effects provided by cohort 2; no
results from this study have been reported previously. In order to compare results across the two
studies, we also conducted new analyses of participants in cohort 1, including documenting
impacts in 8th grade. We therefore detail aspects of both the new study (cohort 2) and the
previous one (cohort 1).
The general outline of both studies was similar, as follows: Research activities began in
the summer with parallel contact at each of district’s 11 middle schools. After confirming
authorization from the principal and identifying an appropriate setting for the writing exercises
with each school’s learning coordinator, research staff provided a training session for the 7th

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

16

grade instructional teams at each school. During the 30-minute training session, a member of the
research staff introduced the study as research about 7th grade students’ experiences, beliefs, and
social-emotional learning. The researcher described the mechanics of implementation and
reviewed the teacher implementation script. Teachers administered the writing exercises during
normal class time with materials provided by the research team and the completed exercises were
returned to the research team for recording. After the school year, the district provided
administrative data, including transcript and demographic information. No study activities were
conducted after the 7th grade year, but additional administrative data on 8th grade performance
were collected after the following year.
Below we highlight the core features of the intervention, with a focus on similarities and
differences between the two studies. Appendix Table A2 provides a summary.
Self-affirmation Intervention and Implementation
The self-affirmation intervention procedure followed Cohen et al. (2006). Seventh grade
students completed a short (15-20 minute) writing prompt as part of normal class activities
several times during the school year. We identified four time points for the self-affirmation
writing interventions. These provided a consistent template for the district, but scheduling varied
according the formative assessment dates in individual schools. The time points were: (1) at the
start of the school year, in the week prior to formative fall standardized assessments, (2) in
November, in the week prior to the state’s standardized achievement test for accountability
purposes, (3) in the winter, in the week prior to a midyear language skills formative assessment,
and (4) in the spring, in the week prior to the final formative assessment of the year. Based on
the evidence that self-affirmation exercises are most effective earliest in the school year (Cook et

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

17

al., 2012), we provided school officials with the option of omitting the winter exercise to reduce
logistical challenges; four schools did so for cohort 1 and two did so for cohort 2.
The activities were administered by teachers in the classroom using scripts provided by
the original research team. 45 teachers were involved in cohort 1, 44 were involved in cohort 2,
and 33 were consistent across both studies; teacher changes reflected exits from the school, reassignments, and looping (teachers moving grades along with students). The intervention
activities were completed in a classroom setting determined by the school’s learning coordinator
to be the most appropriate for the writing exercises: in Language Arts classes at seven schools
and homeroom period at four (constant across both cohorts). Homeroom periods were
abbreviated classes with non-academic curricula, including activities related to socio-emotional
standards. In either case, exercises were implemented among all 7th graders in these regular
classrooms by their classroom teachers.
The activities were packets of 3-4 pages with prompts and spaces for individual writing
responses. They were identical on the cover sheet, which included the student’s name. On
subsequent pages the exercises varied by randomly assigned condition (for consented students;
all non-consented students, including newly enrolled students without a personalized packet,
completed the procedural/neutral control prompts). The treatment condition, following the
original study, prompted students to reflect on values (such as friends, family, music, or sports)
that were important to them. The precise format of the treatment exercise varied throughout the
year to avoid repetition. There were two randomly assigned control conditions: one focused on
values, in which students are asked to select least important values from the same list presented
to treatment students and explain why they may be important to someone else, and a second
devoted to various procedural writing prompts, such as describing summer activities or

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

18

explaining how to open a locker (we refer to these prompts as “neutral,” as they do not explicitly
concern values). The latter control branch was introduced after the first administration in the
cohort 1 study, so all control students in the first cohort received the “Least Important Values”
prompt for the first exercise. Because we found no evidence of differences between control
conditions in either cohort nor evidence that these differences explain differential impacts, we
combined both control groups in our main analyses.
Individualized packets were prepared for every student in the district based on classroom
rosters and distributed to teachers ahead of implementation. The priority in implementation
procedures was to promote an environment in which students engaged in the genuine selfreflection about aspects of identity that is hypothesized to lead to self-affirmation benefits. One
implication, following previous research, is that activities were to be conducted as a normal part
of classroom activity; this point was stressed in the teacher training and implementation scripts.
However, the fact that teachers implemented the activities independently in their own classrooms
created challenges for documenting precise features of implementation, as we discuss below.
We also instructed teachers to avoid representing the activities as evaluative, to avoid
reference to external research, and to avoid presenting the activities as beneficial. These
guidelines were based on theory and empirical evidence (Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Silverman et
al., 2013), with the caveat that there is little existing guidance about how these features translate
into best practice for teachers in established educational settings. For instance, anecdotal
feedback from teachers highlighted some tension between these theoretical ideals and integration
into classroom activities. For many students and some teachers, the medium of the activities—a
personalized packet completed individually—led to a default perception of the activities as a test
or assessment. We made efforts to mitigate these perceptions. For instance, previous studies have

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

19

distributed activities in individual envelopes. In initial planning, we found this to be well outside
the norm of classroom activities in the current setting, and instead used a collated packet of
papers with a cover sheet to mask differences across conditions.
Some teachers also reported questions from students along the lines of: “if this isn’t
graded, why do I have to do it?” One response was for teachers to justify the activities as part of
a research study. Recognizing the potential for such deviations from instructions, researchers
never described the project to teachers in terms of stereotypes, identity, or self-affirmation.
Instead, researchers emphasized that the study concerned the thoughts and opinions of middle
school students. Therefore, to the extent that teachers presented or justified the activities as part
of a research project, they communicated that students’ responses were valued, which we
expected would encourage expressive self-reflection.
Comparison to Original Study
In the context of replication, it is important to be clear about key similarities and
differences in protocol, subjects, and context. This is particularly true for interventions in applied
school settings, where procedures must be sensitive to local conditions and can shift over time
due to logistical constraints or contextual appropriateness. Previous self-affirmation interventions
highlight this point: Sherman et al. (2013) reported creating simplified versions in a setting with
many English Language Learners, and even in the original setting, the experimental protocols
(including the number of exercises, and instructions for choosing important values) shifted
between years (Cohen et al., 2006).
The current study set out to replicate the original research (i.e., Cohen et al., 2006) as
closely as possible at a larger scale in a new setting. Intervention materials—student exercises
and teacher implementation instructions—were provided by the original research team. The

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

20

fielded activities correspond most closely to Experiment 2 reported by Cohen et al. (2006)—
circling important values instead of marking most and least important—and the simplified
version employed by Sherman et al. (2013). Timing followed the original experiments,
prioritizing a first administration as early in the school year as possible and spacing additional
implementations throughout potentially stressful periods later in the school year.
The original study included three to five 7th grade implementations, depending on
experiment (Cohen et al., 2009); we fielded three or four (depending on school) in both cohorts.
In contrast to the original studies, we did not field implementations in 8th grade; a maximum of
four implementations was feasible in the current context, and we prioritized the earliest
activities. The original study also administered a student survey at the beginning and end of the
7th grade academic year. The survey addressed students’ “self-perceived ability to fit in and
succeed in school” (Cohen et al., 2009, p. 401). We conducted a similar survey at the beginning
and end of the 7th grade school year for cohort 2. In this respect, the cohort 2 study was more
similar to the original research than cohort 1, when no surveys were administered.
The original study was conducted in a single school, described as “middle- to lowermiddle-class families at a suburban northeastern middle school whose student body was divided
almost evenly between African Americans and European Americans” (Cohen et al., 2006, p.
1307). The current context included students in 11 Midwestern middle schools in a single
district. Overall student 7th grade enrollments in the district were 45% White, 25% Black, 19%
Hispanic, and 10% Asian. Based on the original finding that results were consistent when nonAsian minority students were combined as “potentially stereotyped,” we combined Black and
Hispanic (including multiracial) students in preferred analyses. Across the 11 schools, the share
of potentially threatened students ranged from 19% to 81%. As in the original study, the

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

21

intervention was provided to students independently by teachers in their classrooms, with
materials provided by the research team. The original study was conducted with 3 teachers. The
current study (cohort 2) was conducted with 44 teachers in 77 classrooms.
Our analyses include only administrative outcomes. It was not feasible to collect the more
detailed outcome measures of the original study, including teacher gradebooks and a race
activation task at the end of grade 8 (Experiment 2) or grade 7 (Experiment 1). However, we
collected state standardized achievement test results, which were not considered in the original
research.
Fidelity
Previous research provides little specific guidance on how to identify or measure the
most relevant aspects of self-affirmation implementation, but the anecdotal challenges that
teachers reported in implementing the activities in their classrooms highlight the need for more
attention to these issues in applied settings. We considered several indicators of fidelity. One
indicator is whether students responded to the writing prompts. By that standard, fidelity was
quite high in both cohort 1 and cohort 2. In terms of basic exposure to the assigned materials, 8895% of students completed the assigned activity for each administration. Student absences from
class accounted for the majority of non-completion, while less than 1% of students in each
administration completed a non-assigned packet due to administrative errors (such as a roster
change).
We also coded the content of all students’ responses, distinguishing between responses
that showed clear evidence of self-affirming reflection and those that did not. Each response was
coded independently by two trained coders who were blind to the experimental condition. A
response was coded as self-affirming if it met three criteria: (1) the student wrote about

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

22

themselves, (2) the response identified a listed “value” from the experimental prompt, and (3) the
text expressed either the importance of the value (for example: “My family is the most important
thing to me because…”) or that they are “good in” the valued domain (example: “I’m good at
drawing.”). Inter-rater agreement was above 80% in both cohorts, and discrepant cases were
resolved with the guidance of a core research team member. Based on those measures, fidelity to
treatment was high in both cohorts, with 98.0% of treatment students providing at least one
response reflecting self-affirming reflection, and 95.8% doing so during the first two exercises of
the year.
Although our study is unprecedented in the scale at which we have documented fidelity
in self-affirmation writing exercises, we acknowledge that it is possible for more subtle aspects
of implementation to have failed in ways that we could or did not observe. Teachers’
independent actions in the classroom, as discussed above, provide one example. Educational
research has highlighted the organizational mechanisms that buffer teachers’ practice from
external demands (Weick, 1976) and the role of individual teachers’ sense-making in shaping
how reforms are enacted in the classroom (Coburn, 2004). We therefore gathered additional
evidence with a teacher survey conducted at the end of each school year. These responses should
be interpreted with caution for several reasons: we obtained reports from the teachers of only
56.0% of students (46.1% for cohort 1 and 64.2% for cohort 2), the items were retrospective
reports (6 months on average after the fact), and it is unknown whether these (or any) teacher
behaviors are critical to self-affirmation success. Nevertheless, these data complement other
implementation measures and provide a preliminary window into teachers’ administration of the
activities.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

23

Teacher responses supported the anecdotal reports discussed above, suggesting that the
presentation of the exercises was not always as directed. Teachers of 31.1% of students reported
describing the writing exercises as being part of a research study, and teachers of 20.3% of
students reported describing the activities as “good for” students. These deviations may have
detracted from the effectiveness of the self-affirmation activities, but we do not know how they
compare to previous studies, since prior research has not reported systematically on teacher
administration.
Sample
Because the study was administered in regular classrooms, all students in these
classrooms completed some form of individual activity during implementation. However,
students were only participants in the study (i.e., they were randomized to experimental
condition, had data collected, and were included in analyses) if they assented and their parents
consented. All seventh grade students in all 11 regular middle schools in the Midwestern school
district were recruited to participate at school registration days (attended by the vast majority of
parents and students) at the end of summer and with follow-up at the start of the school year. In
the cohort 1 study, we received consent and assent for 63.6% (1048/1648) of the population; for
cohort 2 the number was 72.8% (1269/1722), reflecting improved recruiting efforts. Study
participants were individually randomly assigned to the experimental group with randomization
blocked by school.
Because attrition was low, even into 8th grade, we analyzed a consistent full cases sample.
We dropped 9.0% of cases overall due to missing data/attrition: 2.6% of cases were missing data
on covariates we included in models for precision, an additional 4.4% had no transcript data in
8th grade, and 2.1% more were missing standardized testing outcomes. The extent of attrition

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

24

overall and the individual sources of attrition were statistically equivalent across experimental
condition (cohort 1: 10.6% treatment and 10.2% control, 𝜒 2 =0.03, df=1, p=0.86; cohort 2: 7.5%
and 8.1% attrition, respectively, 𝜒 2 =0.14, df=1, p=0.71); overall attrition was higher for cohort 1
than cohort 2 (10.4% vs. 7.8%, 𝜒 2 =4.75, df=1, p=0.03). To the extent that differential attrition
contributed to possible differences between cohorts, it would have operated (along with
differences in recruiting) through different types of individuals being included in the two analytic
samples, which we addressed explicitly (see “Individual Student Differences” Results section).
Measures
All student demographic information was derived from district administrative records.
Our primary individual demographic variable was an indicator for students’ potential
susceptibility to social identity threats relating to academic performance in school, which we
operationalized as African American or Hispanic racial/ethnic group membership. We treated
multiracial students as potentially susceptible to racial identity threat because they are likely to
identify with or be perceived as a member of a marginalized group, but results were similar when
these students were excluded (see Figure 3, Panel C). To the extent that administrative
racial/ethnic group membership misrepresents susceptibility to social identity threats, our impact
estimates may have been attenuated, but similarly so for both cohorts.
To increase the precision of the self-affirmation treatment effect estimates, we included
additional baseline student characteristics in our preferred specification for impact models. These
included pre-treatment (grade 6) achievement outcomes and binary indicators for female, limited
English proficiency status, receipt of special education services, and eligibility for free or
reduced price lunch, which we included as a proxy for family economic resources. Results were
substantively similar when we excluded these covariates (see Figure 3 and Appendix Figure A1).

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

25

In some models, we restricted the sample to schools with relatively low proportions of
Black and Hispanic students and relatively large prior achievement gaps for those students, both
of which serve as proxies for more potentially threatening school contexts. Following previous
research, we created a binary indicator for potentially threatening school contexts, defined as
schools with below average numbers of Black and Hispanic students and above average prior
racial achievement gaps (Hanselman et al., 2014).
Our ultimate interest was students’ academic performance. The primary outcomes,
following previous research in the self-affirmation literature, were students’ overall grade point
average (GPA) in grade 7 and grade 8. GPA reflects overall academic performance across all
academic subjects and was recorded on a 4-point scale. Results were robust to focusing on only
core academic courses, which corresponded closely to overall GPA (correlations of 0.98-0.99 in
each grade). We gave grade 8 GPA conceptual priority, as it was the only grade point average
measured entirely subsequent to the full treatment regime.
In supplementary analyses, we assessed treatment effects on a standardized academic
assessment, the Wisconsin Knowledge and Concepts Examination (WKCE) tests in mathematics
and reading. During the study period, WKCE tests were administered for state accountability
purposes in November of grade 7 and grade 8. Although the grade 7 tests were administered
relatively early in the course of the intervention, the second exercise explicitly targeted the
potentially high stress week prior to WKCE testing, making effects on this early outcome worthy
of consideration.
Experimental Balance
Table 1 reports descriptive statistics and tests of baseline experimental equivalence for
each cohort, both overall and within the subset of potentially threatened (Black and Hispanic)

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

26

students. The sample was majority White, but included a substantial number of potentially
threatened students in each cohort (reported numbers include multi-racial students). Pretreatment differences between the treatment and control group were substantively small
(generally less than 0.1 standard deviations) and not statistically significantly different,
suggesting that randomization was successful in yielding comparable groups.
Analyses
All analyses were based on intention-to-treat estimates of the effect of self-affirmation,
which assess the impact of assignment to the treatment group and therefore reflect the policyrelevant impacts of providing the self-affirmation (Borman, 2002). We calculated effects overall
and within theoretically relevant subgroups. Estimates were based on the following general
multilevel model of treatment effects:
𝑌𝑖𝑗 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 (𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖 ) + 𝛽𝑿𝒊 + 𝜂𝑗 + 𝜀𝑖

(1)

In this model, 𝑌𝑖𝑗 is the observed outcome for student i in school j, 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖 is the
randomly assigned self-affirmation treatment status for student i, 𝑿𝒊 is a vector of pre-treatment
covariates (grade 6 outcome, gender, limited English proficiency, special education, and free
lunch eligibility), 𝜂𝑗 is the residual component for school j, and 𝜀𝑖 is the residual for student i.
Because the treatment was randomly assigned to each student, 𝛽1 provides an unbiased estimate
of the effect of the self-affirmation intervention without additional controls, but we included a
pretreatment achievement measure and additional covariates, 𝑿𝒊 , to increase the precision of this
estimate.2

2

Some previous research has highlighted self-affirmation effects on achievement trajectories. These trends
are especially helpful in characterizing the decline of minority students’ achievement relative to majority students.
We focus only on impacts on outcomes at single points in time here for two reasons: (a) our substantive interest is
(variability in) the ultimate benefits of the intervention among potentially threatened students, which is best captured
by overall impacts, and (b) given baseline equivalence, impacts on overall outcomes are analogous to impacts on

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

27

Within this basic framework, we conducted specific analyses to explore potential
differences between the two studies, including alternate outcomes and estimates for theoretically
relevant sub-groups. Many of our analyses tested for differences in effects between cohort 1 and
cohort 2 by estimating cohort-by-treatment interactions in pooled models with all observations,
and we also estimated overall effects with the pooled data. We provide additional details for
specific analyses as we present the results below.
Results
Estimated Impacts of Self-Affirmation
The raw pattern of results for the new study of self-affirmation (cohort 2) for the focal
outcome (Grade Point Average) is presented in the right panel of Figure 2. As expected, there
were no effects of the intervention on the performance of Asian and White students, who are not
hypothesized to be subject to the same types of identity threats in school as are the other groups.
Potentially threatened groups (Black and Hispanic) performed worse overall, but the differences
between treatment and control groups were similarly small in both 7th and 8th grade. To estimate
treatment effects as precisely as possible for this targeted group, we used multilevel models of
the self-affirmation intervention, controlling for pre-treatment student characteristics. Estimates
for all outcomes were negative, but none were statistically different from zero (Table 2). The
GPA effect in grade 7 was approximately zero (d=-0.002), while the effect in grade 8 was
nominally negative (d=-0.072). Because the sample was quite large, these null results rule out (at
the 0.05 significance level) impacts of 0.10 standard deviations or greater on GPA in grades 7

(linear) trends. Estimates from longitudinal growth models were substantively similar to those presented here but
less precise.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

28

and 8.3 Results for standardized achievement outcomes were similar. Concerning our first
research question, therefore, we found no evidence of treatment benefits for the targeted
population in the new study.
Although not our primary focus, we also tested three additional findings reported by
Cohen et al. (2006). First, we found no evidence of greater benefits of the intervention for
potentially threatened students; the estimated interaction pointed in the opposite direction in our
preferred specification but was not significantly different from zero (p=0.15). Second, we found
no evidence of differential effectiveness by prior academic performance. Following the
procedures described by Cohen et al. (2006), we created tercile groups based on 6th grade GPA,
within the potentially threatened and potentially non-threatened groups. We failed to reject the
null hypothesis that treatment impacts were equivalent across all three groups (p=0.20). We also
found no evidence of differential impacts by prior achievement among White and Asian students
(p=0.73). Finally, we tested for evidence of an improved trajectory of performance throughout
the year. Considering students’ grades in each of the four terms of the school year, we tested for
an interaction between treatment and term. GPA declined by 0.05 GPA points per term on
average among Black and Hispanic students, but there was no difference by experimental
condition (p=0.77).
Comparing Self-affirmation Effects across Studies
The results above led us to ask whether the null effects in the current study (cohort 2)
differed from those in the previous research in the same setting (cohort 1). A first question was
whether the benefits observed previously (Borman et al., 2016) were detectable in the year

3

The 95 percent confidence interval for the self-affirmation effect on overall grade point average in grade 7
was (-0.047, 0.165) for cohort 1 and (-0.088, 0.083) for cohort 2. The intervals for grade 8 were (0.015, 0.282) and (0.192, 0.047).

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

29

following the intervention. We analyzed data from the subset of students from the prior study
with valid observations in grade 8, using parallel procedures to those above (estimates
summarized in Table 2).4 We found that self-affirmation group students received significantly
higher grades in 8th grade (d=0.152), bolstering the interpretation that the intervention led to
detectable increases in academic performance for African American and Hispanic students.
However, when we combined cases across studies, we did not find a statistically significant
average self-affirmation treatment effect (grade 7: p = 0.54, grade 8: p = 0.58).
To address our second research question, we estimated the difference between selfaffirmation impacts for cohort 1 and cohort 2 by pooling data from both samples and including
cohort interactions with all covariates. We found that in several cases the null effects for cohort 2
were distinguishable from comparable effects for cohort 1. For the primary outcome, 8th grade
GPA, the standardized cohort 2 estimate was small and negative (d=-0.072), while the cohort 1
estimate was positive (d=0.152), and we could reject the null hypothesis that effects were equal
(p = 0.013).5 We also found statistical evidence of differences between the treatment effects
across cohorts for the two supplementary mathematics state test score outcomes (p = 0.037 in
Grade 7, p = 0.023 in Grade 8), although only the grade 8 mathematics cohort effect difference
would be statistically significant if the Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons was
applied to both estimates in this mathematics domain.

4

These analyses differed from previous reported by considering only students with grade 8 information for
all outcomes. The main implication was that the reanalyzed results were less precise, and therefore provided more
conservative tests of statistical significance. The pattern of results across grade 7 matched those reported by Borman
et al. (2015)—positive benefits for GPA and mathematics achievement and smaller negative impacts on reading—
although none of these were statistically significant in the reduced sample (see Table 2).
5
Appendix Table A3 presents all estimates from pooled models of treatment effects in both cohorts. These
models suggest general similarity between cohorts in the associations between covariates and outcomes (fewer
significant interactions than would be expected by chance). There is also suggestive evidence that the control group
was higher achieving in cohort 2 in GPA and mathematics, conditional on grade 6 scores, but none of these
differences are significant at the 0.05 level.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

30

These results were robust across different specifications of the treatment effects model. In
addition to our preferred specification, which included the full set of individual control variables,
we also estimated impacts in models with no covariates and with controls only for the pretreatment outcome measure. Figure 3 summarizes results of these three specifications
(represented by symbol shapes) for the focal group and comparison (Black/Hispanic students,
combined control; Panel B1), as well as for alternate comparisons testing theorized moderators
(discussed in the corresponding sections below). Appendix Figure A1 presents comparable
results for grade 7 overall grade point average. In all cases, results were substantively robust
across all covariate specifications, although predictably less precise for the models omitting the
alternate control cases.
To summarize results to this point, the two studies provided diverging pictures of the
impacts of the self-affirmation intervention on Black and Hispanic students’ academic outcomes.
For cohort 1, benefits in GPA persisted in the academic year following the intervention. For
cohort 2, however, we found no evidence of benefits of the intervention. Moreover, we rejected
the null hypothesis that impacts were equal in both studies, despite being conducted in the same
research setting. These results motivated our final research question: do the currently theorized
moderators of self-affirmation explain the differences in treatment effects across the two
cohorts? In the remaining sections, we focus on the primary outcome measure, grade 8 GPA, and
assess potential explanations for the decline in treatment effects from cohort 1 to cohort 2.
Differences in the Delivery of Self-affirmation: Intervention Design
Research projects, like educational practice, evolve over time for pragmatic reasons. For
instance, in previous self-affirmation studies, investigators adjusted the frequency and content of
intervention exercises as they were implemented across successive cohorts and in new settings

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

31

(Cohen et al., 2009; Sherman et al., 2013). In the current study, two design changes between the
first and second cohort created differences in the delivery of the self-affirmation activities that
potentially explain differential impacts: a shift in comparison group activities for one of the four
exercises and a pre-intervention survey, which was added in the second study.
First, a randomly selected half of the control group was assigned a different first exercise
in the cohort 2 study, compared to cohort 1. All control students were assigned the original
control activity in cohort 1, which directed students to select values that were unimportant to
them and write about why these values may be important to someone else. Half of the control
group did the same in cohort 2, but half was randomly assigned to an alternate control activity
for exercise 1 that asked students to write about what they did over the summer. Alternate
control conditions were added in response to reported struggles of some students with the
original “least important values” control activity. The alternate control writing prompt was
modeled after typical classroom free-writing prompts, and was administered to non-consented
students in both years. This prompt is “neutral” in the sense that it does not explicitly refer to
values, but students could, potentially, write self-affirming responses (see “Student Experiences”
section below). A random half of the control group in both cohorts completed a comparable
alternate activity for exercise 2, which asked students to describe how to complete a procedural
task, such as how to open a locker.
To assess whether this modification in the control regime contributed to different
intervention impacts, we focused on the randomly selected half of the control group in both
cohorts that received exactly the same sequence of exercises, which directly followed the
original design (Cohen et al., 2006). These estimates are presented in Figure 3 in subpanel 2 for
each sample (labeled “Original Control”). The cohort-by-treatment interaction estimates were

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

32

substantively unchanged in these analyses, though less precise owing to the smaller sample size,
implying that the slight procedural change does not explain the drop-off in impact in the second
cohort. Since we found no evidence of differences between the two control groups, we pooled
both groups for all reported analyses, unless noted otherwise.
A second design change for the second cohort was the administration of a 15-20 minute
survey by researchers in classrooms in the first week of school. Interaction with research team
members was similar for both studies because, for cohort 1, researchers visited classrooms
during this time to collect student assent forms. In both assent (cohort 1) and survey (cohort 2),
researchers did not connect these overt research activities with the writing exercises, the first of
which was administered on average one week later. Students were told in both cases that the
study was interested in their thoughts and opinions as middle school students. The survey
included items about individual characteristics (e.g., locus of control, self-complexity, and social
belonging) but omitted any specific reference to racial identity, stereotypes, or self-affirmation,
which might have primed students to experience identity threats.
It is theoretically possible that survey prompts about social-psychological constructs like
social belonging could change how students respond to the self-affirmation exercises. Although
we could not directly assess whether the inclusion of the survey accounted for lower benefits for
cohort 2, this explanation is unlikely for two reasons. First, to explain the decline in our setting,
prior surveys would needed to have muted the treatment contrast (such as by inoculating
treatment students from self-affirmation benefits), but the original large and persisting impacts
were found in the presence of a pre-survey (Cohen et al., 2009). Based on this result, we might
have expected the largest benefits for cohort 2. Second, the prior surveys were distinct from the
self-affirmation exercises, fielded on a different day by the researchers, instead of teachers, and

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

33

not explicitly linked to the exercises. Therefore social psychological responses activated by the
survey would have to persist over time and remain relevant for a separate task. While future
research is necessary to test whether such prior prompts modify self-affirmation benefits, we
note that if such brief, distinct stimuli moderate self-affirmation impacts, then there are many
other school experiences that are also likely to matter. If true, the effects of the self-affirmation
intervention would be extremely difficult to predict a priori.
Differences in the Delivery of Self-affirmation: Student Experiences
One potential explanation for heterogeneity in treatment effects between the two studies
is a decline in the quality of students’ experience of the activities related to implementation.
Although formal and informal procedures were consistent, the hypothesized psychological
processes may be sensitive to subtle changes in delivery (Yeager & Walton, 2011), and it is
possible that small changes in classroom procedures had large consequences for effectiveness.
For instance, if teachers presented the materials differently in the second cohort, then fewer
students may have engaged in genuine self-reflection. As discussed in the “Fidelity” section, no
direct observations of classroom implementation were collected (the activities were intended to
be part of regular classroom activities and not to be associated with research). Instead we
conducted three indirect tests of implementation differences as explanations for differential
benefits between cohorts: changes in theorized features of implementation, changes in
implementing teachers, and changes in students’ written responses to the intervention.
First, we noted three theoretically important features of the self-affirmation writing
intervention design: that activities are administered during targeted times of potential stress,
especially early in the school year (Cook et al., 2012; Critcher et al., 2010), that activities are not
explicitly presented as externally imposed (Silverman et al., 2013), and that activities are not

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

34

presented as being beneficial to students (Sherman et al., 2009). We documented that that these
features of implementation did not vary (or improved) between cohorts. With respect to timing,
91% of classrooms for cohort 1 administered exercise 1 prior to the targeted first formative
standardized assessment of the year, and 81% administered exercise 2 prior to the state
standardized testing. The comparable numbers in cohort 2 were 91% and 97%, respectively.
Based on retrospective self-reports from teachers provided at the end of the school year, we also
found more faithful implementation for the second cohort. In cohort 1, 31.1% of students were
taught by a teacher who reported describing the activities as “good for” them, while 42.2% were
taught by a teacher who reported explaining the activities as connected to a research study. Both
figures improved for cohort 2: 13.9% for “good for” instructions and 24.6% for mention of a
research study. With the caveats outlined in the “Fidelity” section, these reports show no
indication of poorer implementation in cohort 2. In other words, while imperfect delivery of the
exercises may explain some of the attenuation of self-affirmation effects, these features did not
explain the difference in effects between the two studies here.
Second, we considered whether changes in implementing teachers accounted for the
decline in benefits. Due to staffing changes, 77% of the Black and Hispanic students in cohort 1
and 60% in cohort 2 completed the exercises with a teacher who implemented in both studies. If
teacher fatigue with the study adversely affected implementation, then impact declines should
have been largest among the “both-cohort” teachers. Conversely, if unique cohort 1 teachers
were especially effective, the declines should have been be largest among “single-cohort”
teachers. We found no evidence for either hypothesis (see Appendix Table A4). Treatment by
cohort interactions were substantively equivalent in both sub-populations (-0.196 grade points

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

35

for the both-cohort teachers; -0.188 for the single-cohort teachers) and these interactions were
statistically indistinguishable from one another (p = 0.99).
Finally, we tested whether students’ written responses differed across the two cohorts of
the study. While features of the written responses are imperfect proxies for the desired selfreflection, they provide an indication of whether the quantity or quality differed across cohorts.
The two most basic measures of overall engagement were comparable in both studies: exercise
completion and words written. A high proportion of students completed the activities, ranging
from 85-95% (Table A5, Column 1). Completion did not differ by experimental condition or
cohort. In supplementary analyses, we found that completers tended to have higher prior GPA
than non-completers—no other baseline covariate predicted completion—but this difference was
not distinguishable between cohorts.
The relative length of students’ responses was consistent across cohorts too, after
accounting for variation due to differences in prompts over time (Columns 2 and 3). The only
treatment-control difference between cohorts was in mean words written for exercise 1 (Panel
A), and this was completely explained by the randomly assigned “neutral” comparison group;
students were more prolific when writing about their summer (in cohort 2) than about an
unimportant value. Comparing students with the same, “original” prompts (Column 3), there
were no cohort differences. By these measures, basic engagement with the activities was
consistent across the two cohorts.
Analyses of the qualitative measure of students’ responses to the exercises (introduced in
the “Fidelity” section above) implied that treatment caused students to engage in much higher

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

36

rates of affirmation across all exercises in both studies.6 The estimates are based on linear
probability models, so the coefficient of 0.709 (Table A5, Panel B, Column 4) implies that the
chance of affirmation writing was 71 percentage points higher in the treatment group in cohort 1
for exercise 2. The interaction coefficient (0.0796) implies that this treatment effect was actually
higher in the second cohort, at a significance level of p < 0.1. Exercise 1 was again an exception,
but the difference was solely explained by the modifications to the control group (see Column 5).
Not surprisingly, the control group in cohort 2, including students who wrote about their
summer, was more likely to write affirming statements, which others have noted is a risk in
choosing that type of comparison activity (Cohen, Aronson, & Steele, 2000). Even so, treatment
impacts on self-affirming writing were greater than 40 percentage points (0.427=0.721-0.294) in
the second cohort overall.
On balance, analyses of implementation features, consistent teachers, and direct measures
of intervention responses did not support the hypothesis that declines in implementation quality
could explain lower benefits for cohort 2. In particular, responses to the exercises were strong
overall, and comparable between cohorts. These results cannot rule out the possibility of
differential psychological responses to the exercises in the two implementations, which deserves
attention in future research. However, for this possibility to be true, the association between key
psychological responses and the desired features of students’ written responses must have
changed between cohorts. The more parsimonious explanation is that declines in implementation
did not account for lower effectiveness.

6

Treatment effects are muted in exercise 3 for both cohorts because overall impacts include several schools
that opted out of this exercise, and therefore students had no opportunity to engage in affirmation.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

37

Individual Student Differences
The success of social-psychological interventions depends fundamentally on individual
characteristics. Self-affirmation is only hypothesized to help students who are subject to identity
threat, and students may also differ in how they respond to the specific reflective writing activity.
Meaningful individual differences between cohorts could have resulted from sampling variability
and/or because the second cohort study sample was larger, including 36% more potentially
threatened students (449 vs. 331 in cohort 1), and different in terms of mean individual
characteristics (see Table 1), due to more successful recruitment. We used three strategies to test
for individual-level explanations of cohort differences: effects in theoretically sensitive
subgroups, observable differences between the two cohorts, and the plausible influence of
unobserved heterogeneity.
One implication of theorized moderation of self-affirmation benefits by individual
characteristics is that results should be consistently stronger, and therefore less variable across
cohorts, in subpopulations where academic stereotype threats are hypothesized to be most
salient. We tested effects in two such subpopulations: students identified as only Black or
Hispanic (excluding multiracial students), who may identify more strongly with a stereotyped
identity, and Black/Hispanic Males, who may be subject to the most acute general academic
stereotypes in middle school (Purdie-Vaughns & Eibach, 2008). Results are summarized in
Panels C and D of Figure 3. Contrary to the individual difference hypotheses, differential effects
across cohorts were similar in both of these subpopulations, even though lower precision in the
male subgroup led similar size differences to be statistically insignificant.
We also tested all observed individual student characteristics as explanations of cohort
differences. For individual characteristics to explain the decline in treatment effects, differences

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

38

between the two samples must have been related to treatment effect heterogeneity. We did find
some descriptive differences between studies (see Table 1): the sample for cohort 2 had more
female students (52.6% vs. 49.8%; p = 0.03), lower 6th grade GPAs on average (2.78 vs. 2.85; p
= 0.11), and more students eligible for free or reduced price lunch (85.1% vs. 80.1%; p = 0.07).
However, we found no statistically significant interaction between treatment and individual
characteristics (grade 6 grade point average, gender, English proficiency, or Special Education
designation) in either cohort, suggesting little opportunity for individual observed characteristics
to explain different treatment effects. Not surprisingly, when we re-weighted individual cases in
each cohort to balance populations in terms of each of these observable characteristics (for
instance, giving greater weight to poor students in cohort 1, who were relatively underrepresented in that sample), the effect estimates in each cohort were substantively unchanged
(see Table A7).
More generally, we gauged how large total (including unobservable) sub-population
differences would need to be to explain the different estimates between the two cohorts,
assuming that individual-level treatment effects were constant over time. We considered a
thought experiment in which the population was composed of two types of students: strong selfaffirmation responders that benefit most from the intervention (type A), and weak selfaffirmation responders that benefit least (type B). Assuming the boundary case that the cohort 1
Black/Hispanic sample was populated solely by strong responders, then an estimate of the
average impact for this type of student (𝑑𝐴 ) on grade 8 GPA is 0.152. Assume the cohort 2
sample was comprised of a mixture of students of type A and B, with the effects for type B
students (𝑑𝐵 ) unknown. The total impact in cohort 2 would then be an average of the two typespecific effects, weighted by the share of teach type (𝑝𝐴 and 𝑝𝐵 , respectively):

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

39

𝑑𝑐𝑜ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑡 2 = 𝑝𝐴 (𝑑𝐴 ) + 𝑝𝐵 (𝑑𝐵 )
Based on the total effect estimate in cohort 2 (-0.072) and the fact that the proportions of
type A and type B students sum to 1, this implies:
𝑑𝑐𝑜ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑡 2 = −0.072 = (1 − 𝑝𝐵 )(0.152) + 𝑝𝐵 (𝑑𝐵 )
Rearranging algebraically:
𝑑𝐵 =

. 224
+ (. 152)
𝑝𝐵

The implication of this inverse relationship between the share and effect size for weakresponders is that cohort 2 null effects could only be explained by very large shares of weakresponders or by substantially negative effects for these students. For instance, if only the surplus
students in cohort 2 (25%) were weak responders, then the effect of the intervention among this
population of students must have been -0.74 (=-.224/.25 + .152) to explain the total cohort 2
impact; if half of the cohort 2 population was the second type of student, then effects for this
group would need to be -0.30 (=-.224/.5 + .152).7 Since such drastic changes in the underlying
population and such large negative effects of the intervention are not plausible, it is unlikely that
differences in the underlying student populations explain cohort differences.
Changes in Social Context
Social-psychological interventions are also theoretically sensitive to features of the social
environment in which they are implemented (Yeager & Walton, 2011). Since the studies for both
cohorts were conducted in the same classrooms, schools, and district, we expected there to be
relatively small differences in the relevant social conditions that students experienced across
cohorts. This intuition was not directly testable, as there are no definitive measures of the

7

Similar calculations using the upper bound of the 95% confidence interval for the treatment effect in
cohort 2 results in necessary effects for the new student population of -0.29 as a 25% share of cohort 2 and -0.07 as a
50% share.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

40

relevant contextual features, but we assessed several indirect indicators of contexts that may be
meaningful. We considered the demographic characteristics of the school population, differences
in aggregate achievement, and school-specific impact estimates.
Previous research using data from the cohort 1 study suggested that school contexts
moderated the self-affirmation treatment effect on 7th grade outcomes, with the greatest benefits
in schools with low minority populations and large prior achievement gaps (Hanselman et al.,
2014). In new analyses (summarized in the Figure 3, Panel E), we found that larger than average
treatment benefits in these schools in cohort 1 persisted into 8th grade; however, self-affirmation
benefits were no more consistent across cohorts in the population of “High Threat” schools,
suggesting that context moderation does not explain the overall decline.
In addition, we considered whether shifts in demographic context of all students in the
school (conceptually and empirically distinct from individual characteristics of the study samples
discussed above) plausibly explained the difference in effects between cohorts. We found no
evidence of this possibility, primarily because student characteristics did not change substantially
between studies. One proxy for broad context differences related to academics and racial/ethnic
identity is sub-group academic achievement and achievement gaps, which were similar for both
cohorts and consistent with historic patterns (Figure A2). At the school level, racial/ethnic cohort
composition was similar in both cohorts, while achievement gaps, which are one proxy for a
racialized academic school environment, were consistently large (Figure A3). Moreover,
controlling for either school-level racial/ethnic composition or prior achievement gaps did not
alter the core treatment-by-cohort interaction estimate, suggesting that these documented school
characteristics did not account for the decline in treatment effects in the second cohort.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

41

Finally, we estimated school-specific impacts for Black and Hispanic students using data
from both cohorts to assess whether patterns were consistent across these local contexts. Effects
in most schools were similar or slightly lower for the second cohort (Figure A4), suggesting
general consistency in lower impacts in cohort 2. However, dramatic changes from positive
estimates for cohort 1 to negative estimates for cohort 2 were apparent in two schools (labeled
points 5 and 11 in Figure A4). These differences may have been due to either drastic
consequential changes in the local context or sampling variation. The latter is a more
parsimonious explanation in light of the consistent demographic context discussed above, post
hoc qualitative checks (which revealed no substantial year-to-year differences at these schools),
and the implausibly large magnitude of the point estimate of the interaction for these schools
(0.4-0.5 standard deviations).
To assess whether individual schools drove the overall results, we re-estimated pooled
treatment effect models omitting each of the 55 unique pairs of schools in the study (see Figure
A5). The main results—small positive effects for cohort 1, slightly negative effects for cohort 2,
and therefore a consequential interaction—held in all omitted samples. One school (11) stood out
as an extreme case: omitting this school reduced the interaction effect by 20-40% (depending on
which additional school was also omitted), while the range for all other omitted pairs estimates
was within 15% of the overall estimate. Subsamples that excluded school 11 exhibited greater
similarity in estimates across cohorts (smaller interactions) due mostly to smaller estimated
benefits for cohort 1, but also due to somewhat smaller estimated negative effects for cohort 2.
On the whole, while a single school contributed the most to the decline in effectiveness between
cohorts, the differences were meaningfully large without it.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

42

Classroom and district context features may also have contributed to the difference in
treatment effects across cohorts. However, we did not have strong a priori predictions about the
importance of features at either level. To the extent that individual teachers shape the relevant
features of the classroom environment, the similarity in effects for consistent and inconsistent
teacher populations (reported above) suggests a small role for these factors. At the district level,
even substantial system-wide events are especially difficult to connect theoretically to
differences in the treatment effect. For instance, there was notable political and civic unrest
during the study surrounding legislation limiting public sector unions, rhetoric surrounding
teachers’ work, and school closures due to teacher protests. Schools in the district were closed
for four days in February during the cohort 1 study, and the associated gubernatorial recall
election occurred in June between the two self-affirmation studies. We do not have strong
theoretical predictions about whether these events translated to differences in school
environments that moderated self-affirmation effects, but it seems unlikely that the unrest and
missed days of regular schooling were critical to intervention success in cohort 1. More
generally, this example highlights that if self-affirmation effects are sensitive to context changes
such as public debate about education then they are fundamentally fragile in the sense that
relevant critical conditions are difficult to diagnose, and more importantly, to anticipate.
Discussion
The replication results reported in this paper provide new evidence concerning two
fundamental questions about the potential of self-affirmation interventions to improve academic
performance and close achievement gaps (Cohen et al., 2006; Yeager & Walton, 2011): 1) Are
there benefits of self-affirmation interventions for academic performance in middle school? and
2) Can we identify the necessary and sufficient preconditions for self-affirmation success? The

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

43

large-scale replication results reported here, coupled with extensive post hoc tests of
heterogeneous effects, provide disconfirming evidence on both counts: we found no effects of
the intervention for cohort 2, and we found no evidence that moderators from existing theory
explained why this result differed from those in a previous study in the same setting. These
results rule out important hypotheses about self-affirmation effects, both in terms of the
magnitude of benefits and the sufficiency of theorized moderators, which refines our
understanding of both fundamental questions. In closing, we elaborate these specific
contributions, highlighting the unique evidence provided by this multi-cohort large-scale
replication and implications for future research.
Are there benefits of self-affirmation interventions at scale for academic performance in
middle school?
An important contribution of this paper is that it reports on a new large-scale replication
of the promising self-affirmation writing interventions introduced by Cohen et al. (2006).
Comprehensive null results from this experiment provide no evidence of self-affirmation
benefits, and the precision of the impact estimates rules out benefits that are as large as one third
the size of those reported by Cohen et al. (2009). Like the recent replication by Dee (2015), our
results suggest that self-affirmation has at best modest benefits for minority students when
implemented at a large scale. Unlike that study, however, the current failure to replicate cannot
be plausibly attributed to idiosyncratic features of the research site or procedures, because a
similar prior replication in the same setting did find benefits (Borman et al., 2016). In this paper,
we reported persistent intervention benefits for the prior cohort and documented similarity in
implementation measures across cohorts, including features of students’ written responses.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

44

It is important to point out that low statistical power is only a likely explanation for the
null results in cohort 2 if the true effect of the intervention was smaller than estimated for cohort
1 and much smaller than in initial studies (Cohen et al., 2009; Sherman et al., 2013). Using the
post hoc power calculations suggested by Gelman and Carlin (2014), we investigated the power
of our cohort 2 study design for a range of true effect sizes (Figure 4). If the true benefit of selfaffirmation on grade 8 GPA was 0.30, similar to the initial study, then our power was above
0.99. If the true effect was 0.15, as estimated for cohort 1, then power was 0.68. However, if the
true effect size was 0.07, the average across the studies summarized in Figure 1, then this study
had only a 21% chance of detecting an effect and a type II inferential error was to be expected.
These power calculations highlight a more general possibility: the true impacts of these
brief self-affirmation interventions may be positive but relatively small when implemented at
scale and across heterogeneous contexts. As Bryk, Gomez, and Grunow (2011, p. 130) observe,
“the history of educational innovation is replete with stories that show how innovations work in
the hands of a few, but lose effectiveness in the hands of the many” (see also: Schneider &
McDonald, 2006). This could be true for self-affirmation due to implementation challenges or
differential effects across contexts. If so, then even very large field trials, such as the one
conducted by Dee (2015) and the current study, are underpowered and unlikely to detect effects
reliably. An important corollary implication, if the true effect size is small, is that significant
estimates in individual trials are expected to overstate the magnitude of the effect by a substantial
amount (Gelman & Carlin, 2014). If the true effect size is 0.07, then statistically significant
results from the current design would over-state this effect by a factor of 2.2 in expectation.8

8

Note that if the same scenario (true effect of 0.07) were true for the previous study (cohort 1), then our
results (estimated significant effect of 0.15) would make the correct inference about the existence of a positive effect

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

45

The plausible magnitude of self-affirmation effects is a crucial consideration for future
work in this field, including implications for study design. If the true self-affirmation effect size
for Black and Hispanic students when implemented on a large scale is 0.07, then we are aware of
no studies with adequate power to reliably detect the effect, and statistically significant published
results are likely to overstate the true impacts. The practical importance of such a small effect
may be debatable, but from a policy perspective even a small benefit at scale could justify the
negligible cost of this intervention. For instance, the benefits of the Tennessee STAR class size
reduction experiment have been estimated to be 0.07 standard deviations in student reading
achievement per $1,000 in per-pupil expenditure (Borman & Hewes, 2002, p. 258). A
comparable benefit for brief self-affirmation activities, which are orders of magnitude less costly,
would be very valuable for educators and policymakers. Therefore, more precise evidence about
even potentially small effects of self-affirmation are needed. However, we recognize that more
effective implementation of self-affirmation activities may be more expensive, especially if it
requires dynamic guidance from a dedicated “psychological engineer” (Yeager & Walton, 2011).
If this approach proved successful, then policy implications would then depend on the trade-off
between greater benefits and costs.
Can we identify the necessary and sufficient preconditions for self-affirmation success?
A second key contribution of this paper is our detailed analysis of the differential effects
of self-affirmation in two large-scale studies conducted in the same research setting. The results
are puzzling in their lack of definitive explanation for differences, but they are informative
because they demonstrate variation that cannot be explained by the moderators of selfaffirmation benefits that have been proposed in the literature (see summary in Table 3). Our

but overstate the magnitude of this effect by approximately the amount expected by a significant effect for this study
design.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

46

general conclusion is that the current hypotheses about variation in self-affirmation effects are
insufficient to explain the potentially subtle moderators of impacts. We highlight three specific
and related implications of the results.
First, our analyses demonstrate the value of tests of moderators to assess theory about
where, and ultimately how, specific interventions are successful. The tests conducted here
provide strong, if indirect, evidence about hypothesized differences due to implementation,
individual, and context characteristics. Our assessment of individual differences is notable in this
regard. Even though we did not directly measure all potential individual difference moderators,
we calculated that the offsetting negative impacts of self-affirmation required for an individual
difference moderator to explain the cohort differences were too large to be plausible. As a result,
theorized differences in individuals across the two cohorts are unlikely to explain the
heterogeneous results. In addition, our tests of moderators draw on the analytic leverage
provided by a within-research site comparison across multiple cohorts and on the collection of
relatively detailed implementation data, including students’ written responses. This demonstrates
the value of replication over time within a consistent research setting.
At the same time, unexplained variability highlights the need for additional inquiry into
the implementation of these activities in diverse educational settings. Our attention to teachers’
delivery of the activities and students’ responses in large-scale implementations provides a first
step in measuring variation in the implementation of self-affirmation exercises, but more work is
needed to identify the necessary components for success. One insight from the scale-up effort
reported here is the potential tension between fidelity to the scripted intervention and adaptation
to local classrooms. At scale, teachers are unlikely to have close, long-standing relationships
with researchers, and they are likely to respond to this tension in different ways. Some responses

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

47

may have undercut the potency of the intervention, even though they did not preclude benefits in
cohort 1 and they did not seem to explain the different results in cohort 2. One future direction
could be to remove teachers from delivery through computerized implementation. However, the
protocol might alternatively be modified to include teachers more fully. Our anecdotal
interactions suggest that teachers would implement much more organically if they were allowed
to read students’ responses. Future research could explore implications for implementation and
effectiveness.
Second, our results point to the need to develop the theory and evidence about how and
where self-affirmation works. Because we tested a comprehensive list of proposed moderators of
self-affirmation and failed to explain the variation in our findings between cohorts, we conclude
that the current cadre of moderators offered by the literature is insufficient. Future experimental
studies are needed to robustly assess the existing theorized moderators, and it may be that current
theory needs to expand to incorporate new potential explanations for self-affirmation effects.
Our results call more attention to the overall lack of empirical evidence about moderators
of self-affirmation effects, which makes it difficult to judge whether theory testing or expansion
is the more crucial next step for the field. For example, there is little relevant data and few
studies assessing whether awareness about the benefits of self-affirmation, one of the best
substantiated potential influences, moderates the effectiveness of the intervention. Sherman et al.
(2009) is frequently cited for this point, but this paper only shows a correlational relationship
between awareness and affirmation effects on task performance. More research is needed to
isolate to what extent this and other theorized components contribute to effectiveness.
Moreover, the unique challenges that arise at scale highlight the need for future research
to consider the necessary and sufficient conditions of self-affirmation in applied settings. Our

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

48

results point to two important avenues in future research: measures of features of implementation
and variations in protocol. First, future research needs to develop systematic measures of
implementation. This may include videos or observations of classrooms or, alternatively, getting
more detailed information from classroom teachers soon after implementation in the form of
interviews or surveys. Similarly, administrative data offer imperfect proxies for the social
context in which self-affirmation takes place. School climate instruments, including measures of
overt and subtle forms of bias and discrimination, should be tested as more direct indices of
context. A stronger measurement component would allow researchers to assess how potentially
relevant environmental changes, such as the political unrest that occurred during the research
reported here, did or did not translate into differences in schools.
Another suggestion for future self-affirmation research in applied settings is to
experiment with features of the delivery of the intervention. For instance, researchers might
contrast computerized delivery (Paunesku et al., 2015), which may help standardize the delivery
of the intervention, to delivery by classroom teachers who, alternatively, may play important
roles if their students believe that the values-affirming exercises are coming from them. If
teacher-based delivery is employed, our experiences suggest that teacher protocols are an
important area to focus on, since even with a script individual teachers may implement materials
differently. By systematically varying these protocols, future research should consider how
different instructions affect the activities being presented as beneficial, and whether this explains
differential benefits.
Third, our unexplained heterogeneity results imply practical limitations of selfaffirmation as a tool to improve student performance and close achievement gaps. The proposed
efficacy of brief social-psychological interventions to improve educational performance is

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

49

specific, requiring tailoring the right kind of program to the right kind of students in the right
kind of social environment (Walton, 2014; Yeager & Walton, 2011). If variability in impacts
cannot be predicted with the information available to educators, then the practical value of these
interventions is unclear. That said, short self-affirmation writing exercises in the classroom
remain a virtually costless approach to potentially addressing some of the racial disparities in
school. Students often participate in broadly similar writing activities in the classroom during the
school day, and targeted self-affirmation activities are unlikely to negatively impact students.
The impacts may well be positive, but they are likely small, and our results suggest that
challenges remain in predicting where exactly, and therefore how widely, the potential benefits
of self-affirmation writing activities will extend.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

50

References
Aronson, J., Lustina, M. J., Good, C., Keough, K., & Steele, C. M. (1999). When white men
can't do math: Necessary and sufficient factors in stereotype threat. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 35(1), 29-46. doi: 10.1006/jesp.1998.1371
Borman, G. D. (2002). Experiments for Educational Evaluation and Improvement. Peabody
Journal of Education, 77(4), 7-27.
Borman, G. D., Grigg, J., & Hanselman, P. (2016). An Effort to Close Achievement Gaps at
Scale through Self-Affirmation. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 38(1), 2142. doi: 10.3102/0162373715581709
Borman, G. D., & Hewes, G. M. (2002). The Long-Term Effects and Cost-Effectiveness of
Success for All. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 24(4), 243-266. doi:
10.3102/01623737024004243
Bowen, N. K., Wegmann, K. M., & Webber, K. C. (2013). Enhancing a brief writing
intervention to combat stereotype threat among middle-school students. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 105(2), 427-435. doi: 10.1037/a0031177
Brandt, M. J., Ijzerman, H., Dijksterhuis, A., Farach, F. J., Geller, J., Giner-Sorolla, R., . . . van 't
Veer, A. (2014). The Replication Recipe: What makes for a convincing replication?
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 50, 217-224. doi: 10.1016/j.jesp.2013.10.005
Bryk, A. S., Gomez, L. M., & Grunow, A. (2011). Getting ideas into action: Building networked
improvement communities in education Frontiers in sociology of education (pp. 127162): Springer.
Coburn, C. E. (2004). Beyond Decoupling: Rethinking the Relationship Between the
Institutional Environment and the Classroom. Sociology of Education, 77(3), 211-244.
Cohen, G. L., Aronson, J., & Steele, C. M. (2000). When beliefs yield to evidence: Reducing
biased evaluation by affirming the self. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
26(9), 1151-1164. doi: 10.1177/01461672002611011
Cohen, G. L., & Garcia, J. (2008). Identity, Belonging, and Achievement: A Model,
Interventions, Implications. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 17(6), 365-369.
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8721.2008.00607.x
Cohen, G. L., & Garcia, J. (2014). Educational Theory, Practice, and Policy and the Wisdom of
Social Psychology. Policy Insights from the Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 1(1), 13-20.
doi: 10.1177/2372732214551559
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., & Master, A. (2006). Reducing the racial achievement gap: A
social-psychological intervention. Science, 313(5791), 1307-1310. doi:
10.1126/science.1128317
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Apfel, N., & Brzustoski, P. (2009). Recursive
Processes in Self-Affirmation: Intervening to Close the Minority Achievement Gap.
Science, 324(5925), 400-403. doi: 10.1126/science.1170769
Cohen, G. L., & Sherman, D. K. (2014). The Psychology of Change: Self-Affirmation and Social
Psychological Intervention. Annual Review of Psychology, Vol 65, 65, 333-371. doi:
10.1146/annurev-psych-010213-115137
Cook, J. E., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (2012). Chronic Threat and
Contingent Belonging: Protective Benefits of Values Affirmation on Identity
Development. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102(3), 479-496. doi:
10.1037/a0026312

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

51

Critcher, C. R., & Dunning, D. (2015). Self-Affirmations Provide a Broader Perspective on SelfThreat. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 41(1), 3-18. doi:
10.1177/0146167214554956
Critcher, C. R., Dunning, D., & Armor, D. A. (2010). When Self-Affirmations Reduce
Defensiveness: Timing Is Key. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 36(7), 947959. doi: 10.1177/0146167210369557
Dasgupta, N., Scircle, M. M., & Hunsinger, M. (2015). Female peers in small work groups
enhance women's motivation, verbal participation, and career aspirations in engineering.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(16), 4988-4993. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1422822112
Dee, T. S. (2015). Social Identity and Achievement Gaps: Evidence from an Affirmation
Intervention. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 8(2), 149-168. doi:
10.1080/19345747.2014.906009
Eagly, A. H., & Kite, M. E. (1987). Are stereotypes of nationalities applied to both women and
men? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53(3), 451-462. doi: 10.1037/00223514.53.3.451
Gelman, A., & Carlin, J. (2014). Beyond Power Calculations: Assessing Type S (Sign) and Type
M (Magnitude) Errors. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 9(6), 641-651. doi:
10.1177/1745691614551642
Hanselman, P., Bruch, S. K., Gamoran, A., & Borman, G. D. (2014). Threat in Context: School
Moderation of the Impact of Social Identity Threat on Racial/Ethnic Achievement Gaps.
Sociology of Education, 87(2), 106-124. doi: 10.1177/0038040714525970
Harackiewicz, J. M., Canning, E. A., Tibbetts, Y., Giffen, C. J., Blair, S. S., Rouse, D. I., &
Hyde, J. S. (2014). Closing the social class achievement gap for first-generation students
in undergraduate biology. Journal of Educational Psychology, 106(2), 375-389. doi:
10.1037/a0034679
Harackiewicz, J. M., Canning, E. A., Tibbetts, Y., Priniski, S. J., & Hyde, J. S. (in press).
Closing Achievement Gaps with a Utility-Value Intervention: Disentangling Race and
Class. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. doi: 10.1037/pspp0000075
Inzlicht, M., & Ben-Zeev, T. (2000). A threatening intellectual environment: Why females are
susceptible to experiencing problem-solving deficits in the presence of males.
Psychological Science, 11(5), 365-371. doi: 10.1111/1467-9280.00272
Ioannidis, J. P. A. (2005). Why most published research findings are false. Plos Medicine, 2(8),
696-701. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0020124
Ioannidis, J. P. A. (2012). Why Science Is Not Necessarily Self-Correcting. Perspectives on
Psychological Science, 7(6), 645-654. doi: 10.1177/1745691612464056
Kost-Smith, L. E., Pollock, S. J., Finkelstein, N. D., Cohen, G. L., Ito, T. A., & Miyake, A.
(2012). Replicating a self-affirmation intervention to address gender differences:
Successes and challenges. AIP Conference Proceedings, 1413(1), 231-234. doi:
10.1063/1.3680037
Lauer, S., Momsen, J., Offerdahl, E., Kryjevskaia, M., Christensen, W., & Montplaisir, L.
(2013). Stereotyped: Investigating Gender in Introductory Science Courses. CBE-Life
Sciences Education, 12(1), 30-38. doi: 10.1187/cbe.12-08-0133
McQueen, A., & Klein, W. M. P. (2006). Experimental manipulations of self-affirmation: A
systematic review. Self and Identity, 5(4), 289-354. doi: 10.1080/15298860600805325

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

52

Miyake, A., Kost-Smith, L. E., Finkelstein, N. D., Pollock, S. J., Cohen, G. L., & Ito, T. A.
(2010). Reducing the Gender Achievement Gap in College Science: A Classroom Study
of Values Affirmation. Science, 330(6008), 1234-1237. doi: 10.1126/science.1195996
Murphy, M. C., Steele, C. M., & Gross, J. J. (2007). Signaling threat: How situational cues affect
women in math, science, and engineering settings. Psychological Science, 18(10), 879885. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.01995.x
Pashler, H., & Harris, C. R. (2012). Is the Replicability Crisis Overblown? Three Arguments
Examined. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7(6), 531-536. doi:
10.1177/1745691612463401
Paunesku, D., Walton, G. M., Romero, C., Smith, E. N., Yeager, D. S., & Dweck, C. S. (2015).
Mind-Set Interventions Are a Scalable Treatment for Academic Underachievement.
Psychological Science, 26(6), 784-793. doi: 10.1177/0956797615571017
Purdie-Vaughns, V., Cohen, G., Garcia, J., Sumner, R., Cook, J., & Apfel, N. (2009). Improving
minority academic performance: How a values-affirmation intervention works. The
Teachers College Record.
Purdie-Vaughns, V., & Eibach, R. (2008). Intersectional Invisibility: The Distinctive Advantages
and Disadvantages of Multiple Subordinate-Group Identities. Sex Roles, 59(5/6), 377391. doi: 10.1007/s11199-008-9424-4
Schmader, T., Johns, M., & Forbes, C. (2008). An integrated process model of stereotype threat
effects on performance. Psychological Review, 115(2), 336-356. doi: 10.1037/0033295x.115.2.336
Schneider, B., & McDonald, S.-K. (2006). Scale-up in education: Ideas in principle (Vol. 1):
Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.
Shapiro, J. A., & Neuberg, S. L. (2007). From Stereotype Threat to Stereotype Threats:
Implications of a Multi-Threat Framework for Causes, Moderators, Mediators,
Consequences, and Interventions. Personality & Social Psychology Review (Sage
Publications Inc.), 11(2), 107-130. doi: 10.1177/1088868306294790
Sherman, D. K., & Cohen, G. L. (2006). The psychology of self-defense: Self-affirmation theory.
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 183.
Sherman, D. K., Cohen, G. L., Nelson, L. D., Nussbaum, A. D., Bunyan, D. P., & Garcia, J.
(2009). Affirmed Yet Unaware: Exploring the Role of Awareness in the Process of SelfAffirmation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 97(5), 745-764. doi:
10.1037/a0015451
Sherman, D. K., Hartson, K. A., Binning, K. R., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., Taborsky-Barba,
S., . . . Cohen, G. L. (2013). Deflecting the Trajectory and Changing the Narrative: How
Self-Affirmation Affects Academic Performance and Motivation Under Identity Threat.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 104(4), 591-618. doi: 10.1037/a0031495
Shnabel, N., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Cook, J. E., Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (2013). Demystifying
Values-Affirmation Interventions: Writing About Social Belonging Is a Key to Buffering
Against Identity Threat. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 39(5), 663-676. doi:
10.1177/0146167213480816
Sidanius, J., & Pratto, F. (1999). Social dominance : an intergroup theory of social hierarchy
and oppression. Cambridge, UK; New York: Cambridge University Press.
Silverman, A., Logel, C., & Cohen, G. L. (2013). Self-affirmation as a deliberate coping
strategy: The moderating role of choice. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
49(1), 93-98. doi: 10.1016/j.jesp.2012.08.005

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

53

Steele, C. M. (1988). The psychology of self-affirmation: Sustaining the integrity of the self.
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 21(2), 261-302.
Steele, C. M. (1997). A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape intellectual identity and
performance. American Psychologist, 52(6), 613-629. doi: 10.1037/0003-066X.52.6.613
Steele, C. M., & Aronson, J. (1995). Stereotype Threat and the Intellectual Test-Performance of
African-Americans. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69(5), 797-811.
Steele, C. M., Spencer, S. J., & Aronson, J. (2002). Contending with group image: The
psychology of stereotype and social identity threat. Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology, 34, 379-440. doi: 10.1016/s0065-2601(02)80009-0
Taylor, V. J., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Stereotype Threat Undermines Academic Learning.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 37(8), 1055-1067. doi:
10.1177/0146167211406506
Tibbetts, Y., Harackiewicz, J. M., Canning, E. A., Boston, J. S., Priniski, S. J., & Hyde, J. S. (in
press). Affirming independence: Exploring mechanisms underlying a values affirmation
intervention for first-generation students. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology.
Walton, G. M. (2014). The New Science of Wise Psychological Interventions. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 23(1), 73-82. doi: 10.1177/0963721413512856
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2003). Stereotype Lift. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 39(5), 456-467. doi: 10.1016/S0022-1031(03)00019-2
Walton, G. M., Paunesku, D., & Dweck, C. S. (2012). Expandable selves. In M. R. Leary & J.
Tangney (Eds.), Handbook of self and identity (2nd ed.) (pp. 141-154). New York, NY:
Guilford Press.
Weick, K. E. (1976). Educational Organizations as Loosely Coupled Systems. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 21(1), 1-19. doi: 10.2307/2391875
Wilson, T. D. (2011). Redirect : the surprising new science of psychological change. New York,
NY: Little, Brown and Company.
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-Psychological Interventions in Education:
They're Not Magic. Review of Educational Research, 81(2), 267-301. doi:
10.3102/0034654311405999

Running head: SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

54

Table 1. Descriptive Statistics and Experimental Balance by Study, Overall and for Potentially Threatened Students (Black/Hispanic)
Cohort 1
Sample
Variable
All Students
Female
Potentially Threatened
American Indian
Asian
Black
White
Limited English Proficiency
Free/Reduced Lunch
Grade 6 GPA
Grade 6 WKCE Math
Grade 6 WKCE Reading

Black/Hispanic Students
Female
Potentially Threatened
American Indian
Asian
Black
White
Limited English Proficiency
Free/Reduced Lunch
Grade 6 GPA

Mean
[939]
0.502
0.353
0.039
0.106
0.183
0.757
0.144
0.411
3.27
(0.64)
525.3
(57.5)
510.8
(56.4)

C
Mean
[465]
0.520
0.357
0.047
0.092
0.163
0.768
0.159
0.413
3.28
(0.65)
522.2
(57.8)
508.0
(56.7)

T
Mean
[474]
0.483
0.348
0.032
0.120
0.203
0.747
0.129
0.409
3.27
(0.63)
528.4
(57.1)
513.6
(56.0)

[331]
0.489
1
0.112
0.009
0.520
0.568
0.293
0.801
2.85

[166]
0.512
1
0.133
0.006
0.458
0.584
0.343
0.819
2.83

[165]
0.467
1
0.091
0.012
0.582
0.552
0.242
0.782
2.87

Cohort 2
Std
Diff.
(C-T)

p

0.075
0.019
0.080
-0.090
-0.101
0.049
0.087
0.007
0.009

0.253
0.776
0.218
0.168
0.122
0.456
0.184
0.910
0.896

-0.108

0.098

-0.100

0.127

0.091

0.410

0.132 0.231
-0.064 0.560
-0.248 0.024
0.066 0.548
0.221 0.044
0.094 0.395
-0.061 0.583

Mean
[1170]
0.499
0.384
0.032
0.142
0.230
0.702
0.170
0.463
3.19
(0.67)
516.8
(51.7)
504.8
(57.1)

C
Mean
[580]
0.498
0.367
0.028
0.147
0.209
0.712
0.167
0.459
3.21
(0.68)
515.0
(51.1)
505.0
(57.4)

T
Mean
[590]
0.500
0.400
0.036
0.137
0.251
0.692
0.173
0.468
3.18
(0.67)
518.6
(52.3)
504.5
(56.9)

[449]
0.566
1
0.082
0.020
0.599
0.519
0.294
0.851
2.78

[213]
0.568
1
0.075
0.028
0.568
0.521
0.300
0.864
2.75

[236]
0.564
1
0.089
0.013
0.627
0.517
0.288
0.839
2.80

Std
Diff.
(C-T)

p

-0.003
-0.067
-0.046
0.027
-0.100
0.045
-0.015
-0.018
0.042

0.953
0.250
0.434
0.650
0.086
0.443
0.798
0.753
0.477

-0.071

0.227

0.009

0.872

0.009

0.923

-0.050
0.110
-0.120
0.008
0.027
0.070
-0.076

0.595
0.244
0.203
0.930
0.775
0.461
0.420

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

55

(0.65)
(2.83)
(0.61)
(0.65)
(0.63)
(0.66)
Grade 6 WKCE Math
491.3
488.9
493.8
-0.092 0.406
486.1
482.6
489.3
-0.149 0.114
(53.1)
(55.2)
(51.1)
(44.7)
(44.7)
(44.6)
Grade 6 WKCE Reading
477.9
475.9
480.0
-0.076 0.490
471.9
471.3
472.4
-0.021 0.823
(53.3)
(51.9)
(54.8)
(52.1)
(52.5)
(51.9)
T = Treatment, C = Control, Std Diff. = Treatment-control in standardized units, p = p-value for test of the null hypothesis that the
difference (C-T) is equal to zero.
Standard deviations in parentheses; sample sizes in brackets
Notes: Racial/ethnic indicators are not mutually exclusive and do not sum to 1 across groups. This table includes multiracial and
White Hispanic students with potentially threatened students, as in our main specifications.

Running head: SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

56

Table 2. Standardized Self-affirmation Treatment Impact Estimates for Black and Hispanic
Students
Cohort 1
Cohort 2
p-value
(N = 331)
(N = 449)
for
Outcome
Estimate
SE
Estimate
SE
Difference
GPA, Grade 7
0.062
0.057
-0.002
0.043
0.363
GPA, Grade 8
0.152
0.070
-0.072
0.058
0.013
WKCE Mathematics, Grade 7
0.072
0.059
-0.085
0.047
0.037
WKCE Mathematics, Grade 8
0.101
0.070
-0.080
0.044
0.023
WKCE Reading, Grade 7
-0.034
0.069
-0.005
0.055
0.737
WKCE Reading, Grade 8
-0.030
0.071
-0.005
0.056
0.781
SE = Standard Error; GPA = Overall grade point average; WKCE = Wisconsin Knowledge and
Concepts Examination
Note: All estimates are based on models including controls for pre-treatment measures of the
outcome and baseline student characteristics (gender, special education status, Limited English
Proficiency designation, and eligibility for free or reduced price lunch). See Table A3 for full
pooled model results.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

57

Table 3. Summary of Tested Hypotheses
Hypothesized Explanation for
Difference in Effects
Different effects due to features of the
intervention delivery/implementation
Providers

Control group

Stealth

Awareness of Purported benefits

Timing
Engagement with the prompt

Empirical Tests of Consistency between
Cohorts

Consistent benefits for teachers
implementing in both cohorts?
All changes in benefits are due to teachers
implementing in both cohorts (due to
fatigue)?
Consistent benefits when compared to
students in the original control
condition?
Teachers report more violations of
protocol in second cohort: describing the
activity as externally imposed research?
Teachers report more violations of
protocol in second cohort: describing the
activity as “good for you”?
Intervention more likely to miss key
stressful periods in second cohort?

Result

No
No

No

No

No
No

Students complete fewer exercises in
second cohort?

No

Students write fewer words in second
cohort?

No

Impact on self-affirming writing is
different in second cohort?

No

Consistent benefits for all Black and
Hispanic students?

No

Consistent benefits for non-multiracial
Black and Hispanic students?

No

Different effects due to individual
characteristics
Racial group

Race and gender
Prior achievement and other
administrative characteristics
Unobserved receptivity to selfaffirmation
Social context differences

Consistent benefits for male minority
students?
Consistent benefits when populations are
re-weighted across cohorts on
observable characteristics?
Magnitude of different benefits for
unobserved populations are plausible?

No
No
No

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

58

Broad (district) racial and academic
climate

No

School racial and academic climate

Different representation of racial
minorities for the second cohort?
Lower racial achievement differences for
the second cohort?
More consistent benefits in “high threat”
schools with few minority students and
large gaps?
Differential benefits explained by one or
two schools?

No
No
No

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

59

Figure 1. Estimated Effects of Self-affirmation Writing Exercises on Middle School Grade Point
Average

Source: Authors’ calculations; see Table A1 for specific references.
Notes: Symbols plot reported effect sizes for potentially stereotyped groups (African American
and/or Hispanic students) for the first year of the self-affirmation intervention, and lines
represent 95% confidence intervals (+/- 1.96 standard errors). Shapes represent distinct school or
district contexts. For instance, Sherman et al. (2013) studies 1 and 2 were conducted in different
schools in different states. Dee (2015) reports subgroup results from the same sample of
Philadelphia-area schools. The dashed line represents the overall mean effect size (0.07),
calculated by weighting individual estimates according to the inverse of their squared standard
error. The impact estimates are lower in the large-scale replication studies (Dee 2015, Borman et
al. 2016, and Current Study), but these differences could reflect heterogeneous effects across
local context, research team, and implementation. This paper investigates two effects observed
within the trial conducted in a single school district (represented by circles), for which context
and procedures were consistent.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

60

Figure 2. Yearly Grade Point Average (with 95% Confidence Intervals) by Race/ethnicity and
Experimental Condition

Notes: Randomly assigned self-affirmation writing interventions were administered throughout
the 7th grade year. No effects of the treatment are hypothesized for Asian and White students,
who are not subject to general negative stereotypes about academic ability. Raw treatment vs.
control differences are statistically different from zero only for Black and Hispanic students in
Grade 8 in cohort 1. The treatment benefits in that cohort are statistically different than the small
negative effect observed in cohort 2. See Table 2 for standardized estimates and Table A3 for
results from a pooled treatment effects model.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

61

Figure 3. Estimated Self-affirmation Treatment Effects on Grade 8 GPA by Cohort, Sample,
Comparison Group, and Included Covariates

GPA = Overall Grade Point Average; CI = Confidence Interval

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

62

Note: Each estimate was calculated from a separate multilevel model (students nested within
schools) of intention to treat effect of the self-affirmation writing activities. Full covariates
specifications include: grade 6 GPA, gender, special education status, Limited English
Proficiency designation, and eligibility for free or reduced price lunch. Prior outcome is grade 6
GPA. In the “Original Control” condition, students wrote about a least important value in each of
the first two interventions. The “Combined Control” group includes these students as well as
those who were assigned at least one writing prompt that did not explicitly mention values. For
readability, the displayed range is restricted to effect sizes of absolute value 0.3 or less. Asterisks
indicate that the estimated effects are statistically significantly different between cohorts (p <
0.05), based on a pooled model. The primary result, reported in Table 2, is the estimate for
Black/Hispanic sample with combined control condition and full covariates (Panel B1 circles).
Other results assess whether patterns were different for subpopulations and comparisons where
self-affirmation benefits are hypothesized to be stronger and more consistent, as described in the
text. Because the cohort difference persists across all specifications (although less precise in
smaller subsamples), these tests provide no evidence that hypothesized moderators explain the
difference.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

63

Figure 4. Power Calculations for Range of True Effect Sizes of Self-affirmation Intervention
Effects

Notes: Curves represent power (left panel) and expected exaggeration of a treatment effect
estimate significant at the 0.05 level (right panel) for self-affirmation effects in grade 8, given the
design for new study (cohort 2) reported here. Calculations are based on the procedure suggested
by Gelman and Carlin (2014). Diamonds represent an effect size of 0.3, consistent with the initial
study of self-affirmation interventions (Cohen et al. 2006); if true effects are this large, then
power is virtually 1.0 and expected exaggeration is minimal. Circles represent the estimated
effect size for the first cohort of students (d = 0.15). If the true effect were this large, then cohort
2 power would be 0.68 and expected exaggeration would be 1.21. Xs represent the mean effect
size calculated in Figure 1 (d = 0.07). If the true effect were this large, power would be 0.21 and
significant values would exaggerate the true effect by 2.22 times on average.

Running head: SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

64

SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIALS INTENDED FOR ONLINE DISTRIBUTION
Appendix
Table A1. Source of Standardized Impact Estimates Displayed in Figure 1
Citation
Cohen et al.
(2006)

Grade(s) N
N Source
7
119 p. 1307

D
SE Impact Source
0.31 0.12 "African American students in the
affirmation condition earned a higher grade
point average (GPA) in these nontargeted
courses than did those in the control
condition [experiment 1: B = 0.31, t(40) =
2.63, P < 0.02; experiment 2: B = 0.21,
t(58) = 1.70, P < 0.10 two-tailed test, P <
0.05 one-tailed test]. Pooling data from both
experiments yielded a significant effect [B
= 0.23, t(108) = 2.51, P = 0.02]." (p. 1308)
81 p. 596
0.29 0.10 "Affirmed Latino American students (M =
2.62, SE = 0.06) had a higher GPA than
unaffirmed Latino American students (M =
2.40, SE = .06), F(1, 177) = 8.18, p =
.005, d = 0.29." (p. 600)
55 p. 602
0.45 0.18 "Affirmed Latino American students (M =
2.84, SE = 0.12) had a higher GPA than
unaffirmed Latino American students (M =
2.46, SE = 0.11), F(1, 146) = 5.05, p = .026,
d = 0.45." (p. 605)
994 Calculated 0.02 0.06 Raw impact estimate reported in Table 5;
from
SD of outcome reported in Table 3.
Table 2

Additional Notes
SE calculated from
reported t statistic and
estimate. Effect size
calculated assuming
GPA standard deviation
of 0.75.

Sherman et
al. (2013)
Study 1

6,7,8

Sherman et
al. (2013)
Study 2

7

Dee (2015):
Black
Students

7

Dee (2015):

7

SE calculated from
derived t statistic
(square root of F
statistic) and reported
estimate.
SE calculated from
derived t statistic
(square root of F
statistic) and reported
estimate.
Overall GPA not
reported. Estimate
reflects targeted class
only.
Overall GPA not

495 Calculated 0.05 0.10 Raw impact estimate reported in Table 5;

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS
Hispanic
Students
Borman et
al. (2016)

from
Table 2
7

65

SD of outcome reported in Table 3.

374 Calculated 0.09 0.04 "To illustrate, the estimated interaction term
from
(0.082) and marginal effect (0.065) for the
Table 1
cumulative GPA outcome correspond to
effect sizes of 0.11 and 0.09, respectively."
(35)
449 Table 1
0.00 0.04 Table 2

reported. Estimate
reflects targeted class
only.
SE is calculated from CI
for raw estimate
reported in Table A5.

Current
7
Study
D = Standardized Treatment Effect, SE = Standard Error, CI = 95% Confidence Interval
Notes: All estimates reflect standardized impacts on grade point average (overall if reported) during the year of implementation. A
spreadsheet with all calculations is available upon request.

Running head: EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS
Table A2. Summary of the Madison Writing and Achievement Project Self-affirmation
Randomized Control Trial in Two Cohorts
Cohort 1
Cohort 2
Overview

Recruitment

7th Grade Year

2011-2012

2012-2013

Treatment
Implementation

Conducted by Language
Arts or Homeroom
Teachers 3-4 times during
year

Conducted by Language
Arts or Homeroom
Teachers 3-4 times during
year

Experimental
Groups

Treatment (50%), Control
A (25%), and Control B
(25%)

Treatment (50%), Control
A (25%), and Control B
(25%)

Parental Consent

Collected at school
registration days (August)
and follow-up via
permission slips
distributed in school
(September)

Collected at school
registration days (August)
and follow-up via
permission slips
distributed in school
(September)

Student Assent

Conducted in classrooms
at the beginning of the
school year (September)

Collected at school
registration days (August)
and individual follow-up
in school (September)

Consent Rate

63.6%

72.8%

Students select from a list
and write about their
important values

Students select from a list
and write about their
important values

"Original" control:
students select nonimportant values and write
about their potential
importance to someone
else

"Original" control:
students select nonimportant values and write
about their potential
importance to someone
else

Intervention
Details
Treatment
Ex 1
(September or
October)
Control A

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS

Ex 2
(November)

Ex 3 (January
or February)

Ex 4 (April or
May)

67

Control B

"Original" control:
students select nonimportant values and write
about their potential
importance to someone
else

"Neutral" Control:
Students respond to a
writing prompt about their
summer that does not
explicitly mention values

Treatment

Students select from a list
and write about their
important values

Students select from a list
and write about their
important values

Control A

"Original" control:
students select nonimportant values and write
about their potential
importance to someone
else

"Original" control:
students select nonimportant values and write
about their potential
importance to someone
else

Control B

"Neutral" Control:
students respond to a
procedural writing
prompt, such as
explaining how to open a
locker

"Neutral" Control:
students respond to a
procedural writing
prompt, such as
explaining how to open a
locker

Treatment

Students write freeresponse about important
values

Students write freeresponse about important
values

Control (A and B) Students respond to a
procedural writing prompt
about their morning
routine

Students respond to a
procedural writing prompt
about their morning
routine

Treatment

Students write about how
a previously selected
value is important now

Students write about how
a previously selected
value is important now

Control (A and B) Students respond to a
procedural writing prompt
about their after-school
routine

Students respond to a
procedural writing prompt
about their after-school
routine

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS
Other In
Class
Activities

68

In-class assent

Conducted by researchers
in classrooms at the
beginning of the school
year (September) with no
specific reference to selfaffirmation activities

None

In-class survey

None

Conducted by researchers
at beginning (September)
and end (May) of 7th
grade with no specific
reference to selfaffirmation activities

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS

69

Table A3. Regression Estimates from Pooled Multilevel Models of Treatment Impacts on each
Outcome for Potentially Threatened Students (Black and Hispanic)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Grade 7 Grade 8
Grade 7
Grade 8 Grade 7 Grade 8
GPA
GPA
Math
Math
Read
Read
Treatment
0.044
0.124*
2.996
4.954+
-2.035
-1.336
(0.041)
(0.054)
(2.573)
(2.905)
(3.432)
(3.445)
Cohort 2
0.185
0.535*
7.065
8.338
51.166+ 11.904
(0.179)
(0.235)
(23.358)
(26.375) (28.740) (28.860)
Treatment * Cohort
-0.046
-0.180*
-6.893*
-8.850*
1.589
0.872
(0.054)
(0.071)
(3.386)
(3.823)
(4.512)
(4.530)
6th Grade Outcome
Measure

0.935*

0.864*

0.722*

0.754*

0.811*

0.750*

(0.037)
0.089*
(0.041)
0.063

(0.049)
0.112*
(0.054)
0.163*

(0.032)
2.395
(2.565)
-2.262

(0.036)
-2.074
(2.896)
-0.437

(0.042)
5.805+
(3.420)
-6.495

(0.042)
9.925*
(3.433)
2.262

(0.048)
-0.012
(0.056)
-0.207*
(0.057)
-0.027

(0.063)
0.001
(0.073)
-0.187*
(0.075)
-0.086

(3.060)
-7.653*
(3.863)
-6.935+
(3.594)
0.014

(3.455)
-16.141*
(4.362)
-10.572*
(4.058)
-0.018

(4.212)
-11.394*
(4.986)
-18.284*
(4.766)
-0.107*

(4.227)
-17.482*
(5.005)
-17.924*
(4.772)
-0.044

(0.049)
Cohort 2 * Female
-0.073
(0.055)
Cohort 2 * Limited English 0.008
Proficiency
(0.063)
Cohort 2 * Special
0.128+
Education
(0.074)
Cohort 2 * Free/reduced
-0.019
Price Lunch
(0.078)
Constant
0.082
(0.148)
Variance Component
Estimates
var(School)
0.036*

(0.064)
0.005
(0.072)
-0.003

(0.042)
-3.337
(3.413)
5.383

(0.048)
1.132
(3.854)
3.558

(0.053)
-5.676
(4.555)
6.442

(0.053)
-9.961*
(4.572)
-2.177

(0.082)
0.074

(3.947)
-7.312

(4.456)
1.176

(5.409)
-4.201

(5.423)
1.942

(0.098)
-0.183+

(5.013)
-6.558

(5.660)
-2.920

(6.592)
2.487

(6.617)
2.110

(0.103)
0.185
(0.189)

(4.891)
160.789*
(17.710)

(5.523)
(6.479)
(6.503)
159.516* 120.567* 159.464*
(19.997) (22.613) (22.689)

0.036*

0.000

0.000

Female
Limited English
Proficiency
Special Education
Free/reduced Price Lunch
Cohort 2 * 6th Grade
Outcome Measure

10.671*

5.544

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS
(0.016)
var(Residual)
0.137*
(0.007)
N
780
Schools
11
Standard errors in parentheses
+ p<.1, * p<.05

(0.017)
0.236*
(0.012)
780
11

(0.001)
539.207*
(27.306)
780
11

70
(0.000)
687.458*
(34.811)
780
11

(10.845)
956.376*
(48.790)
780
11

(8.492)
964.651*
(49.205)
780
11

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS

71

Table A4. Estimates for Treatment Impacts on Grade 8 GPA by Cohort and Teacher Type (bothcohort versus single-cohort) for Potentially Threatened Students (Black and Hispanic)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
All
BothSingleAll
Teachers cohort
cohort
Teachers
Teachers Teachers
Treatment
0.122*
0.109+
0.158
0.168
(0.055)
(0.061)
(0.120)
(0.114)
Cohort 2
0.149*
0.165*
0.098
0.110
(0.052)
(0.062)
(0.108)
(0.099)
Treatment * Cohort 2
-0.188* -0.196*
-0.188
-0.199
(0.073)
(0.086)
(0.144)
(0.137)
Both-cohort Teacher
0.010
(0.096)
Treatment * Both-cohort Teacher
-0.060
(0.130)
Cohort 2 * Both-cohort Teacher
0.066
(0.118)
Treatment * Cohort 2 * Both-cohort
0.003
Teacher
(0.163)
Grade 6 GPA
Female
Limited English Proficiency
Special Education
Free/reduced Lunch
Intercept
Variance Component Estimates
var(School)
var(Residual)
N
Schools

0.831*
(0.033)
0.102*
(0.037)
0.152*
(0.042)
0.041
(0.051)
-0.272*
(0.055)
0.353*
(0.137)

0.806*
(0.040)
0.077+
(0.044)
0.189*
(0.051)
0.023
(0.057)
-0.259*
(0.064)
0.465*
(0.160)

0.871*
(0.060)
0.155*
(0.071)
0.090
(0.075)
0.074
(0.109)
-0.293*
(0.104)
0.275
(0.248)

0.832*
(0.033)
0.103*
(0.037)
0.151*
(0.042)
0.038
(0.051)
-0.272*
(0.055)
0.342*
(0.155)

0.034*
(0.016)
0.242*
(0.013)
744
11

0.030*
(0.016)
0.229*
(0.015)
501
9

0.051*
(0.031)
0.262*
(0.024)
243
9

0.034*
(0.016)
0.242*
(0.013)
744
11

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS

Standard errors in parentheses
+ p<.1; * p<.05

72

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS

73

Table A5. OLS Estimates of Implementation Measures for each Exercise by Treatment Group
and Cohort for Black and Hispanic Students
Model
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Outcome
Returned
Words
Words
SelfSelfAssigned
Written
Written
affirmation affirmation
Exercise
Writing
Writing
Control Group
Both
Both
Original
Both
Original
Only
Only
A. Exercise 1
Treatment (in Cohort 1)
Cohort 2 (among control
students)
Treatment x Cohort 2
N
Outcome mean
B. Exercise 2
Treatment (in Cohort 1)
Cohort 2 (among control
students)
Treatment x Cohort 2
N
Outcome mean
C. Exercise 3
Treatment (in Cohort 1)
Cohort 2 (among control
students)
Treatment x Cohort 2
N
Outcome mean
D. Exercise 4

-0.0004
(0.0346)
0.0242

10.94+
(5.929)
13.46*

9.169
(6.474)
-1.911

0.721*
(0.0321)
0.330*

0.724*
(0.0367)
0.0431

(0.0276)
-0.0446
(0.0465)
780
0.931

(4.186)
-16.38+
(7.563)
741
71.8

(4.800)
-0.630
(6.981)
586
69.3

(0.0367)
-0.294*
(0.0433)
780
0.587

(0.0543)
-0.0105
(0.0476)
619
0.601

0.0354
(0.0258)
0.0134

7.304
(5.383)
6.652

15.47*
(6.202)
5.236

0.709*
(0.0423)
0.00792

0.669*
(0.0473)
-0.0436

(0.0556)
0.00480
(0.0472)
780
0.879

(3.766)
-4.941
(6.702)
705
70.8

(4.656)
-2.590
(7.070)
561
67.9

(0.0229)
0.0796+
(0.0413)
780
0.442

(0.0446)
0.129*
(0.0568)
619
0.546

-0.0912
(0.0555)
0.0952

14.33
(9.707)
-1.364

9.952
(11.40)
-16.13

0.370*
(0.125)
-0.0177

0.334*
(0.140)
-0.0473

(0.181)
0.0800
(0.0651)
780
0.597(a)

(10.28)
-6.801
(11.45)
464
77.6

(13.11)
8.553
(14.26)
356
77.6

(0.0121)
0.273+
(0.131)
780
0.282

(0.0263)
0.297+
(0.135)
619
0.354

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS
Treatment (in Cohort 1)
Cohort 2 (among control
students)
Treatment x Cohort 2

74

0.00791
(0.0506)
0.0458

-5.118
(6.927)
-10.48

-6.270
(7.650)
-13.11

0.611*
(0.0386)
0.0215

0.601*
(0.0403)
0.0195

(0.0384)
-0.0313
(0.0725)
780
0.868

(8.462)
4.243
(6.838)
695
82.4

(11.45)
7.705
(8.874)
547
82.1

(0.0219)
0.0795
(0.0631)
780
0.362

(0.0359)
0.0821
(0.0693)
619
0.451

N
Outcome mean
+ p < .1; * p< .05
(a) Lower exercise completion rates in exercise 3 reflect the inclusion of students in several
schools that opted out of this implementation.
Notes: Each panel presents selected results of one of 20 separate Ordinary Least Squares
regression models, defined by the model specification listed in the column heading (1-5) for the
exercise listed in the row (A-D). All models include indicators for randomization block (school)
and intercept (not shown). Standards errors (adjusted for clustering within schools) reported in
parentheses.

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS

75

Table A6. Logistic Regression Estimates of Predictors of Membership in Cohort 1 among Black
and Hispanic Students (N=780)
Coef.
Std.
P-value
Err.
Treatment
-0.071 0.152
0.639
Female
-0.327 0.156
0.036
Limited English
0.121
0.182
0.507
Proficiency
Special Education
0.136
0.224
0.545
Free/Reduced Lunch
-0.301 0.234
0.198
Grade 6 GPA Quintiles
2
0.076
0.249
0.761
3
0.233
0.266
0.380
4
0.352
0.290
0.225
5
0.399
0.348
0.252
Grade 6 Math Achievement Quintiles
2
-0.556 0.262
0.034
3
-0.872 0.294
0.003
4
-0.662 0.313
0.034
5
-0.083 0.367
0.821
Grade 6 Reading Achievement Quintiles
2
0.344
0.254
0.175
3
0.400
0.282
0.155
4
0.584
0.302
0.054
5
0.033
0.369
0.929
School Indicators
2
0.508
0.300
0.091
3
0.158
0.339
0.641
4
-0.326 0.440
0.458
5
0.077
0.347
0.825
6
-0.006 0.373
0.987
7
0.669
0.351
0.057
8
-0.061 0.397
0.878
9
0.256
0.331
0.441
10
-0.750 0.385
0.051
11
-0.051 0.332
0.879
Intercept
-0.081 0.446
0.856

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS

76

Table A7. Ordinary Least Squares Estimates of Self-affirmation Treatment Effects on Grade 8
GPA (4 point scale) for Black and Hispanic Students by Cohort, with and without Weights for
Cohort Membership
Cohort 1 Cohort 2
N
331
449
Unweighted 0.118
-0.056
(0.055)
(0.046)
Weighted
0.117
-0.041
(0.058)
(0.044)
Standard errors in parentheses.
Note: All estimates are based on models including controls for randomization block (school),
grade 6 GPA, and baseline student characteristics (gender, special education status, Limited
English Proficiency designation, and eligibility for free or reduced price lunch). Weighted
models are weighted by the inverse of the estimated probability of inclusion in the cohort. For
example, the weights for cohort 2 members are defined as:
1
𝑤𝑖 =
Pr(𝐶𝑜ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑖 = 2)
We estimated the probability of inclusion in a cohort with a logistic regression of group
membership on student characteristics, estimates reported in Table A6.

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS

77

Figure A1. Estimated Self-affirmation Treatment Effects on Grade 7 GPA by Cohort, Sample,
Comparison Group, and Included Covariates

GPA = Overall Grade Point Average; CI = Confidence Interval
Note: Each estimate was calculated from a separate multilevel model (students nested within
schools) of intention to treat effect of the self-affirmation writing activities. Full covariates

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS

78

specifications include: grade 6 GPA, gender, special education status, Limited English
Proficiency designation, and eligibility for free or reduced price lunch. Prior outcome is grade 6
GPA. In the “Original Control” condition, students wrote about a least important value in each of
the first two interventions. The “Combined Control” group includes these students as well as
those who were assigned at least one writing prompt that did not explicitly mention values. For
readability, the displayed range is restricted to effect sizes of absolute value 0.3 or less. Asterisks
indicate that the estimated effects are statistically significantly different between cohorts (p <
0.05), based on a pooled model. The main result is the Black/Hispanic sample with combined
control condition and full covariates (Panel B1 circles). Other results assess whether patterns
were different for subpopulations and comparisons where self-affirmation benefits are
hypothesized to be stronger and more consistent, as described in the text. Because the cohort
difference persists across all specifications (although less precise in smaller subsamples), these
tests provide no evidence that hypothesized moderators explain the difference.

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS

79

Figure A2. Racial/ethnic Achievement Gap in 6th Grade Mathematics, 2007-2013

450

470

490

510

530

550

6th Grade WKCE Math Gap Across Years, By Threat Status

2007

2008

2009

2010
Year

Non-Threatened

2011

2012

2013

Threatened

WKCE = Wisconsin Knowledge and Concepts Evaluation
Notes: Non-threatened students include White and Asian students. Threatened students are Black
and Hispanic.

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS

80

Figure A3. Demographic Consistency between the Two Cohorts: Racial Composition and
Standardized Achievement Gaps Prior to the Intervention
Proportion of Threatened Students in Each Cohort, By School

-1

.1

-1.6

.2

-1.4

.3

.4

-1.2

.5

.6

WKCE Math Gap

-.8

.7

.8

-.6

.9

-.4

1

WKCE Math Gap in Each Cohort, By School

1

2
Cohort

1

2
Cohort

Notes: Each line represents one school. Horizontal slopes indicate no absolute change in the
demographic characteristic between each cohort. Racial achievement gaps are calculated as the
standardized difference in Wisconsin Knowledge and Concepts Examination (WKCE)
mathematics scale scores in 6th grade for Black and Hispanic students compared to Whites and
Asians.

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS

81

Figure A4. Treatment Impact Estimates for Black/Hispanic Students in Cohort 1 and 2 by School

Notes: Each point represents the two cohort treatment effect estimates for grade 8 GPA for a
each school (among Black and Hispanic students), including controls for grade 6 GPA, gender,
special education status, Limited English Proficiency designation, and eligibility for free or
reduced price lunch. The line y=x is plotted, representing equal estimates in both cohorts.

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS

82

Figure A5. Distribution of Self-affirmation Treatment Estimates in each Cohort and Interaction,
Omitting Pairs of Schools

Each boxplot represents the distribution of estimates omitting 10 school pairs, grouped by the 11
schools. The top boxplot in each panel reflects estimates from all pairs omitting school 1 (1 and
2, 1 and 3, …, 1 and 11). The next reflects all estimates omitting school 2 (2and 1, 2 and 3, … , 2
and 11). Note that each pair of schools is therefore represented twice (the 1-2 pair is represented
in the distribution for school 1 and for school 2, for instance). The dashed lines represent the
overall estimate (omitting no schools).

