See	discussions,	stats,	and	author	profiles	for	this	publication	at:	https://www.researchgate.net/publication/265649028

Boring	but	Important:	A	Self-Transcendent
Purpose	for	Learning	Fosters	Academic	SelfRegulation
Article		in		Journal	of	Personality	and	Social	Psychology	·	October	2014
DOI:	10.1037/a0037637	·	Source:	PubMed

CITATIONS

READS

51

374

7	authors,	including:
Marlone	D	Henderson

Brian	Spitzer

University	of	Texas	at	Austin

New	York	University

28	PUBLICATIONS			888	CITATIONS			

3	PUBLICATIONS			102	CITATIONS			

SEE	PROFILE

SEE	PROFILE

Angela	Duckworth
University	of	Pennsylvania
74	PUBLICATIONS			6,105	CITATIONS			
SEE	PROFILE

Some	of	the	authors	of	this	publication	are	also	working	on	these	related	projects:

Online	panels	data	quality	View	project

All	content	following	this	page	was	uploaded	by	Angela	Duckworth	on	28	July	2015.
The	user	has	requested	enhancement	of	the	downloaded	file.

ATTITUDES AND SOCIAL COGNITION

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Boring but Important: A Self-Transcendent Purpose for Learning Fosters
Academic Self-Regulation
David S. Yeager and Marlone D. Henderson

David Paunesku and Gregory M. Walton

University of Texas at Austin

Stanford University

Sidney D’Mello

Brian J. Spitzer

University of Notre Dame

New York University

Angela Lee Duckworth
University of Pennsylvania
Many important learning tasks feel uninteresting and tedious to learners. This research proposed that
promoting a prosocial, self-transcendent purpose could improve academic self-regulation on such
tasks. This proposal was supported in 4 studies with over 2,000 adolescents and young adults. Study
1 documented a correlation between a self-transcendent purpose for learning and self-reported trait
measures of academic self-regulation. Those with more of a purpose for learning also persisted
longer on a boring task rather than giving in to a tempting alternative and, many months later, were
less likely to drop out of college. Study 2 addressed causality. It showed that a brief, one-time
psychological intervention promoting a self-transcendent purpose for learning could improve high
school science and math grade point average (GPA) over several months. Studies 3 and 4 were
short-term experiments that explored possible mechanisms. They showed that the self-transcendent
purpose manipulation could increase deeper learning behavior on tedious test review materials
(Study 3), and sustain self-regulation over the course of an increasingly boring task (Study 4). More
self-oriented motives for learning—such as the desire to have an interesting or enjoyable career—
did not, on their own, consistently produce these benefits (Studies 1 and 4).
Keywords: self-regulation, motivation, purpose, meaning, psychological intervention
Supplemental materials: http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0037637.supp

Many of the tasks that contribute most to the development of
valuable skills are also, unfortunately, commonly experienced as

tedious and unpleasant (Duckworth, Kirby, Tsukayama, Berstein,
& Ericsson, 2011; also see Ericsson, 2006, 2007, 2009; Ericsson &
Ward, 2007; Ericsson, Krampe, & Tesch-Romer, 1993). For example, skills in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) are in high demand, and, according to some estimates, jobs
in the STEM sector will grow by more than 20% in the next few
decades (U.S. Congress Joint Economic Committee, 2012). Yet in a

David S. Yeager and Marlone D. Henderson, Department of Psychology,
University of Texas at Austin; David Paunesku and Gregory M. Walton,
Department of Psychology, Stanford University; Sidney D’Mello, Department of Psychology and Department of Computer Science, University of
Notre Dame; Brian J. Spitzer, Department of Applied Psychology, New
York University; Angela Lee Duckworth, Department of Psychology,
University of Pennsylvania.
This research was supported by funding from the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation, the Raikes Foundation, the National Science Foundation
(HCC 0834847, DRL 1235958, to Sidney D’Mello), the National Institutes
of Health (5-K01-AG033182-02, to Angela Lee Duckworth), the New
Paths to Purpose project at the Booth Center for Decision Research, and a

University of Texas Summer Research Assignment grant. Any opinions,
findings and conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this article are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the funding
agencies. The ideas in this research benefitted from discussions with
Matthew Andrews and Matthew Bundick. The authors are grateful to the
students, teachers, and school administrators who participated in this
research. We are also grateful to Bill Swann, Christopher Hulleman, Judy
Harackiewicz, Robin Vallacher, Geoffrey Cohen, and Carol Dweck for
their helpful feedback. Any remaining errors are the authors’.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to David S.
Yeager, 108 East Dean Keeton, Stop A8000, Austin, TX 78712-104.
E-mail: dyeager@utexas.edu

It’s only when you hitch your wagon to something larger than yourself
that you realize your true potential and discover the role that you’ll
play in writing the next great chapter in the American story.
—President Barack Obama, Wesleyan University
Commencement Speech, 2008

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2014, Vol. 107, No. 4, 559 –580
© 2014 American Psychological Association 0022-3514/14/$12.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0037637

559

YEAGER ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

560

representative sample survey, over half of middle school students said
they would rather eat broccoli than do their math homework; 44%
would rather take out the trash (Raytheon Company, 2012).
To achieve longer-term aims, learners must sometimes regulate
attention, emotion, and behavior in the face of tempting alternatives
(Duckworth & Carlson, 2013; Fujita, 2011; Mischel, Shoda, & Rodriguez, 1989). Indeed, individual differences in factors such as “grit”
and self-control are predictive of eventual skill acquisition and expert
performance, controlling for cognitive ability (Duckworth, Peterson,
Matthews, & Kelly, 2007; Duckworth, Tsukayama, & Kirby, 2013;
Moffitt et al., 2011). Where do these factors come from? Individuals
are known to marshal self-discipline more when they are pursuing
personally meaningful goals (see Fishbach & Trope, 2005; Fishbach,
Zhang, & Trope, 2010; Loewenstein, 1996; Mischel, Cantor, & Feldman, 1996; Rachlin, Brown, & Cross, 2000; Thaler & Shefrin, 1981;
Trope & Fishbach, 2000; also see Eccles, 2009; Marshall, 2001). In
the present research we propose that what has been called a purpose
for learning (Andrews, 2011; Yeager, Bundick, & Johnson, 2012) can
foster greater meaning in schoolwork and promote academic selfregulation as students take on tedious learning tasks.

Defining a “Purpose for Learning”
An enormous amount of research has focused on the wide variety
of possible motives for engaging in and succeeding at learning tasks
(e.g., Ames, 1992; Atkinson, 1957; Carver & Scheier, 1981; Eccles &
Wigfield, 2002; Elliot, Conroy, Barron, & Murayama, 2010; Emmons, 1986; Ford & Nichols, 1987; Harackiewicz & Sansone, 1991;
Higgins, 2005; Lepper, Corpus, & Iyengar, 2005; Little, 1983;
Markus & Nurius, 1986; Nicholls, 1984; Oyserman & Destin, 2010;
Ryan & Deci, 2000). Here we focus on only one distinction—that
between self-interest and self-transcendence. Learners may view a
task as likely to benefit the self, believing it will be intrinsically
enjoyable or lead to a personally fulfilling career (see Eccles &
Wigfield, 1995). Learners may also have motives that transcend
self-interest. These may involve service to other individuals, to an
ideal, to a social justice cause, or to a spiritual entity (Damon, Menon,
& Bronk, 2003; Frankl, 1963; Koltko-Rivera, 2006; Maslow, 1969;
Schwartz, 1992; also see Eccles, 2009).
We define a purpose for learning as a goal that is motivated
both by an opportunity to benefit the self and by the potential to
have some effect on or connection to the world beyond the self
(Yeager & Bundick, 2009; Yeager et al., 2012; see Burrow & Hill,
2011; Damon et al., 2003). Embedded in this definition is a focus
on the motive or rationale for the goal (e.g., “helping people”)
rather than on content of a goal (e.g., “being an engineer”; Massey,
Gebhardt, & Garnefski, 2008). For example, a purpose for learning
in a high school science class might be that a student would one
day like to use the acquired knowledge to build bridges that help
people (a self-transcendent component). The same student might
also believe that engineering would be a fulfilling, interesting, and
enjoyable career (a self-oriented component). Both of these types
of motives—self-oriented and self-transcendent— can be important for learners and can motivate task persistence (Eccles, 2009;
Eccles & Wigfield, 2002). These different motives also frequently
coexist (Batson, 1998; also see Feiler, Tost, & Grant, 2012). In
fact, in a series of qualitative interviews conducted with a diverse
group of high school adolescents, it was common for teens to pair
self-transcendent motives with self-oriented motives—much more

common in fact than having only a self-transcendent motive (Yeager & Bundick, 2009; Yeager et al., 2012). Here we examine
whether adding self-transcendent motives to self-oriented ones—
what we call a “purpose for learning”— could produce benefits
that self-oriented motives alone could not achieve.

Purpose, Meaning, and Persistence
There is good reason to believe that a purpose for learning could
promote the view that a task is personally meaningful (e.g., Grant,
2007, 2013; Olivola & Shafir, 2013; also see Duffy & Dik, 2009;
Steger, 2012; Steger, Kashdan, & Oishi, 2008).1 A classic example
comes from Viktor Frankl (1963). In writing about the psychology
of surviving a concentration camp, he describes how a selftranscendent purpose in life creates a feeling that one’s actions are
important for the world, empowering a person to persist even in the
most appalling circumstances. He wrote “A [person] who becomes
conscious of the responsibility he bears toward a human being who
affectionately waits for him, or to an unfinished work, will never
be able to throw away his life” (p. 80). Channeling Neitzche,
Frankl stated “He knows the ‘why’ for his existence and will be
able to bear almost any ‘how’” (1963, p. 80).
Further support comes from observational research of people
working in “dirty” jobs—jobs with low status and requiring extremely repetitive tasks (e.g., trash collectors, hospital orderlies,
prison guards). Individuals with these jobs find their work more
meaningful and carry it out more effectively when they focus on
the benefit of these tasks for helping others or society at large
(Ashforth & Kreiner, 1999; Hughes, 1958, 1962; also see Dutton,
Roberts, & Bednar, 2010; Wrzesniewski, Dutton, & Debebe, 2003;
cf. Olivola & Shafir, 2013). Altogether, highly aversive experiences may become more bearable when they are viewed as having
consequences that transcend the self.
More directly relevant, Yeager et al. (2012) found that some high
school-aged adolescents spontaneously generated a purpose for learning during interviews—mentioning both a self-transcendent motive
and an intrinsic, self-oriented motive for their future work, such as
“being a doctor to help people and because it would be enjoyable.”
Students with a purpose rated their schoolwork in general as more
personally meaningful than adolescents with no career goal or only
extrinsic motives (making money, gaining respect), even at a
2-year follow-up (also see Lepper et al., 2005; Ryan & Deci,
2000). Other high school students discussed only typical interestbased, self-oriented motives. This group rated their schoolwork as
no more meaningful compared to students with no future work
goals or only extrinsic motives (Yeager et al., 2012). However, this
study was limited in that it did not directly assess perceptions of
tedious, skill-building tasks. Nor did it assess behavior or address
causality with experimental designs. These limitations are addressed in the present research.
Some past experiments have linked prosocial, selftranscendent motives to behavioral persistence on tasks at work,
not school. For example, telemarketers raised more money
1
A purpose is distinct from but related to personal meaning. The former
includes a person’s goal and his or her motives for pursuing it. The latter
refers to the sense that something matters and makes sense in the context
of one’s life or worldview (Steger, Kashdan, & Oishi, 2008; Yeager &
Bundick, 2009).

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION

when they were asked to focus on the benefits of their efforts
for poor children compared to benefits for the self, while
medical professionals were more likely to stop and wash their
hands when they focused on others’ health as opposed to their
own health (Grant, 2008; Grant & Hofmann, 2011; also see
Feiler et al., 2012; for findings from other workplaces see,
Grant & Rothbard, 2013; cf. Sansone, Weir, Harpster, & Morgan, 1992). Note that a self-transcendent motive makes aversive
experiences more bearable, not more enjoyable; prosocial motives diminish the correlation between feeling bad during a task
and the reduced motivation to complete it (Grant & Sonnentag,
2010; also see Grant & Campbell, 2007). Prosocial trash men do
not find trash more appealing, but they collect it more effectively (Hughes, 1958, 1962).
The present research is among the first to test whether students with more of a self-transcendent purpose for learning can
show greater persistence even on tedious learning activities that
provide a foundation for uncertain future contributions to the
world beyond the self (see Harackiewicz & Sansone, 1991).
Some past studies investigated, for instance, raising money for
poor children (Grant, 2008; also see Dunn, Aknin, & Norton,
2008) or preventing infection (Grant & Hofmann, 2011). It is
easy to see how these actions help others. But when high school
students engage in a learning task such as factoring trinomials
in algebra, or balancing stoichiometric equations in chemistry,
it can be difficult to see the steps through which deeply learning
from these tasks can help them benefit others. That is, raising
money for poor people is directly prosocial, but learning fractions must be construed as such.
Other past research has found that providing intrinsic versus
extrinsic motives for learning tasks (e.g., becoming healthy vs.
looking physically attractive) can lead to greater task persistence and deeper processing of information (e.g., Vansteenkiste, Simons, Lens, Sheldon, & Deci, 2004; also see Jang, 2008;
for a review, see Vansteenkiste, Lens, & Deci, 2006, or Patall,
Cooper, & Robinson, 2008). Similarly, some research has found
that asking students to generate reasons why a learning task
could be relevant to their daily lives and future goals could
improve course performance among low-performers, by enhancing the perceived utility value of a task (Hulleman, Godes,
Hendricks, & Harackiewicz, 2010; Hulleman & Harackiewicz,
2009). These studies were foundational to the present research.
However they were not designed to distinguish the intended
beneficiary of the learning—the self versus something that
transcends the self—as the present research seeks to do.
In addition, past studies have focused on the perceived prosocial value of completing a given task or learning objective
(Eccles & Wigfield, 1995)—for instance, learning about correlation coefficients to interpret education research (Jang, 2008),
or using the week’s science class lessons to help out on the
family farm (Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009; see Eccles,
2009; Eccles et al., 1983). However, an important skill for
self-regulation is to abstract up a level from the task at hand to
one’s motives for being involved in an educational enterprise
more generally— e.g., “science” or “math” or even “school.” It
is often uncertain whether or how one will use the knowledge
gained from a given learning objective or task. Indeed, teachers
very rarely provide any rationale for mastering a learning objective
(Stipek, 2004; also see Eccles, 2009), let alone a self-transcendent ratio-

561

nale. This is especially true in STEM courses, where many tasks are
unexplained (Carnevale & Desrochers, 2003; also see Diekman, Clark,
Johnston, Brown, & Steinberg, 2011). It may be helpful to reconstrue a
foundational task—such as practicing math facts—more generally in
terms of their relation to one’s broader, self-transcendent motives for
working hard in school or in a subject area.

The Present Research
Four studies investigated the hypothesis that a higher order,
self-transcendent purpose for learning in school would promote
academic self-regulation on tedious schoolwork. In Study 1 we
hypothesized that a self-transcendent purpose for learning would
be correlated with indicators of academic self-regulation both at
the trait level (self-reported grit and self-control) and at the behavioral level (short-term persistence on a boring math task and
longitudinal persistence in college). We further hypothesized that
these relations would be found above and beyond the effects of
more intrinsic, self-oriented motives (e.g., following one’s intellectual interests), and of cognitive ability.
Study 2 examined a possible causal effect of a self-transcendent
purpose for learning. In order to do so it was necessary to create an
exercise to adjust adolescents’ purposes for learning, which past
research has had difficulty doing (Dik, Steger, Gibson, & Peisner,
2011). Indeed, a purpose is likely to be highly personal and represent
the product of a large number of influences in life, including teachers,
parents, friends and the media, perhaps making it difficult to manipulate (e.g., Damon, 2008; Harackiewicz, Rozek, Hulleman, & Hydes,
2012; Moran, Bundick, Malin, & Reilly, 2013; Steger, Bundick, &
Yeager, 2012). Yet advances have been made in recent years in the
optimal design of psychological interventions in educational settings
(e.g., Blackwell, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2007; G. L. Cohen &
Sherman, 2014; Garcia & Cohen, 2012; Hulleman & Harackiewicz,
2009; Walton & Cohen, 2011; also see Walton, 2014; Wilson &
Linville, 1982). We were informed by these. We hypothesized that a
novel self-transcendent purpose for learning intervention could improve grades in subject areas likely to be seen as tedious, such as high
school math and science classes.
Studies 3 and 4 examined potential behavioral antecedents to
the outcomes studies in Studies 1 and 2. Specifically, Study 3
examined effects of the novel intervention on behavior on a
shorter time-course, testing the hypothesis that a selftranscendent purpose for learning could lead students to learn
more deeply from an immediate, real-world academic task.
Study 4 sought to isolate the effect of a purpose for learning
manipulation on self-regulation more precisely by administering a dependent measure that pitted a boring math activity
directly against tempting alternatives.

Study 1: An Initial Correlational Investigation
Study 1 was a correlational study among a low socioeconomic status (SES) group of high school seniors. Based on prior
research, they might have significant difficulty regulating immediate motivations in the service of long-term goals (Evans &
Rosenbaum, 2008; Vohs, 2013). We hypothesized that in this
population a self-transcendent purpose would correlate with
indicators of self-discipline— both self-reported and behavioral—assessed at the same measurement time. We further hypoth-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

562

YEAGER ET AL.

esized that, in a multiple regression controlling for more selforiented motives— even intrinsic-interest-focused ones—a
purpose for learning would continue to predict greater success
at self-regulation.
We also examined longitudinal relations with goal persistence.
This was done by collecting data on whether students were enrolled in college in the Fall semester following high school graduation, as they intended to do. Low-income students of color more
commonly drop out of the college pipeline in the summer after
college or during their first Fall semester, even when they have
successfully graduated high school and been admitted to a college
of their choice (Ryu, 2012). We hypothesized that a selftranscendent purpose would predict college persistence over
time—a potential indicator of successfully regulating competing
demands for time and attention in this low-income population. We
also hypothesized that this relation would be found when controlling for self-oriented motives in a multiple regression.

Method
Participants. Participants were N ⫽ 1,364 seniors in their
final semester at one of 17 participating urban public high schools
(eight charters and two district schools). Ninety-nine percent said
that they had applied for college and were planning on attending
college in the Fall semester. They were located in Los Angeles,
CA; Oakland, CA; New York, NY; Austin, TX; Houston, TX; or
Little Rock, AR. They were from low socioeconomic backgrounds: over 90% received free or reduced-price lunch, a measure
of low socioeconomic status, and only 9% had one parent who had
completed a 2 or 4-year degree; by contrast, 25% of parents did not
have a high school diploma. The sample overall was nearly evenly
split on gender (57% female) and had a large proportion of
students that are typically underrepresented in higher education in
the United States, 38% African American, 48% Hispanic/Latino,
5% Asian, 4% White. Some participants did not provide data on
some measures, and so degrees of freedom varied across analyses.
No other participants were excluded from analyses. There was no
stopping rule for data collection because all college-going students
in each school were invited to participate.
Procedures. Participants completed a web-based survey in the
school’s computer lab during the school day in the Spring semester
(February to May) of senior year. Teachers directed students to a
website (http://www.perts.net) that delivered the survey session,
which lasted one class period. Many months later, toward the end of
what was the Fall semester for students in college, college persistence
data were collected from the National Student Clearinghouse (NSC).
Measures.
Motives for going to college. The primary predictor variables
were self-transcendent motives, intrinsic self-oriented motives,
and extrinsic self-oriented motives. The preface for the items
assessing these motives was: “How true for you personally are
each of the following reasons for going to college?” Each was
rated on a 5-point scale (1 ⫽ Not at all true, 2 ⫽ Slightly true, 3 ⫽
Somewhat true, 4 ⫽ Very true, 5 ⫽ Completely true).
Self-transcendent motives (purpose for learning). We averaged
across the following three items to assess students’ self-transcendent
motives for going to college (a purpose for learning), operationalized
as a personally relevant desire to learn in order to make a contribution
to the world beyond the self: “I want to learn things that will help me

make a positive impact on the world,” “I want to gain skills that I can
use in a job that help others,” and “I want to become an educated
citizen that can contribute to society” (␣ ⫽ .75).
Self-oriented motives. We averaged across the following three
items adapted from Stephens, Fryberg, Markus, Johnson, and
Covarrubias’s (2012) assessment of self-oriented, interest-driven
motives for going to college: “I want to expand my knowledge of
the world,” “I want to become an independent thinker,” and “I
want to learn more about my interests” (␣ ⫽ .70). Note that these
are still personally important intrinsic motives for learning, and
might be expected to predict greater self-regulation, thus providing
a high standard of comparison for the self-transcendent motives.
Extrinsic motives. Finally, we measured typical extrinsic, selforiented motives for going to college: “I want to get a good job,”
“I want to leave my parents’ house,” “I want to earn more money,”
and “I want to have fun and make new friends.” We wrote these
items in collaboration with college counselors at the participating
high schools. They were designed to reflect the counselors’ perceptions of why students want to go to college. Although the
internal consistency reliability for these items was somewhat low
(␣ ⫽ .50), they were face-valid. Below we show that a composite
of these items produced relations with each of the constructs
measured that replicates past research (Lee, McInerney, Liem, &
Ortiga, 2010), supporting the validity of the composite despite low
internal consistency. The same findings emerged when analyzing
these items separately.
Meaningfulness of schoolwork. To assess individual differences in the meaningfulness of everyday academic tasks, we
adapted a measure commonly used in research on actionidentification theory: the Behavioral Identification Form (BIF;
Vallacher & Wegner, 1989). The standard BIF asks participants to
view a task and choose a description of it that either aligns with
personally meaningful values or goals, or with concrete actions
required to complete the task. In the present research, we treat the
choice of the former, more goal-directed description as an indication that a person is viewing it more meaningfully. Indeed, Michaels, Parkin, and Vallacher (2013) stated that “people take
meaning from their goals and values rather than the details of their
actions” (p. 109).
We created a four-item version of the BIF that was tailored to
assess whether students chronically make meaning out of boring
and uninteresting everyday academic tasks in high school. See
Figure 1 for an example. The measure presented participants with
a description of each behavior, accompanied by a picture, and
asked participants to select which of two action identifications best
matched how they thought about the behavior. The four behaviors
were “Taking the SAT,” “Doing your math homework,” “Writing
an essay,” and “Using a planner to record upcoming tasks” (for
pictures and response options, see the online supplement). In
pretesting focus groups with high school students, all four behaviors were evaluated as very tedious and very common. For each of
the behaviors (e.g., taking the SAT), we asked students whether a
2
Pilot research confirmed that the present measure indicated greater
personal meaning as expected by theory (Michaels, Parkin, & Vallacher,
2013). In a pilot survey with N ⫽ 151 high school students, our measure
correlated with the presence of meaning in life scale (e.g., “I have a good
sense of what makes my life meaningful”; Steger, Frazier, Oishi, & Kaler,
2006) at r ⫽ .30, p ⬍ .001.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION

563

Figure 1. Sample item for assessing the meaningfulness of schoolwork. Image from “File:Ti83plus.jpg,” by
Westernelectric555, 2008 (http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ti83plus.jpg). In the public domain. See the
online article for the color version of this figure.

more concrete, lower level statement (a description that emphasizes the means by which the action is performed, e.g., “Filling out
bubbles on the SAT”) or a more goal-directed, personally meaningful statement (a description emphasizing the meaning the action
can have for a person’s pursuits in life, e.g., “Taking steps toward
a college degree”) best described that behavior. The latter was our
operationalization of whether the task was seen as more personally
meaningful. We summed across the items, so that higher values
corresponded to a greater tendency to see schoolwork as meaningful (Range: 0 to 4).2
Grit scale. Participants completed an abbreviated version of
the validated grit scale (Duckworth & Quinn, 2009), a measure
that signals strong self-regulation in a number of past studies. The
scale includes the following: “I finish whatever I begin”; “I work
very hard. I keep working when others stop to take a break”; “I
stay interested in my goals, even if they take a long time (months
or years) to complete”; and “I am diligent. I never give up.”
Participants answered all items on 5-point fully labeled scales (1 ⫽
Not at all like me, 2 ⫽ Not much like me, 3 ⫽ Somewhat like me,
4 ⫽ Mostly like me, 5 ⫽ Very much like me). We averaged across
the responses, with higher values corresponding to higher levels of
grit (␣ ⫽ .78).
Self-control scale. Participants completed a validated measure of self-control when completing academic work (Patrick &
Duckworth, 2013; Tsukayama, Duckworth, & Kim, 2013).
Items were “I come to class prepared,” “I pay attention and
resist distractions in class,” “I remember and follow directions,”
and “I get to work right away rather than procrastinating” (1 ⫽
Not at all like me, 2 ⫽ Not much like me, 3 ⫽ Somewhat like me,
4 ⫽ Mostly like me, 5 ⫽ Very much like me). We averaged
across these items, with higher values corresponding to greater
academic self-control (␣ ⫽ .71). Past research has shown that

these items are correlated with other measures of self-regulation
(such as grit; e.g., Table 1) but demonstrate divergent validity
from them (Duckworth et al., 2007).
The “diligence task”: A behavioral measure of academic
self-regulation. At the end of the survey, participants completed
a novel standardized behavioral measure of self-regulation, called
“the diligence task” (Galla et al., 2014). This task was designed to
mirror the real-world choices students confront when completing
homework and being tempted by the distractions of the digital age.
Specifically, this task involved the choice of completing boring
math problems (single-digit subtraction) or consuming captivating
but time-wasting media (watching one or several entertaining,
brief, viral videos [lasting 20 – 60 s] or playing the video game
Tetris). At any time, participants could click on the left side of the
screen and complete math problems (“Do Math”) or click on the
right side of the screen and consume media (“Play game or watch
movie”). Participants were told there were no negative consequences for their choices and that they could do whatever they
preferred. See Figure 2. The software (unknown to the participant)
tracked the number of math problems completed successfully,
producing our focal dependent measure.
To make the math problems potentially meaningful in students’
eyes—and worth completing—we told participants that successfully completing the tasks could possibly help them sharpen their
math skills and stay prepared for their future careers. As a part of
this cover story, we presented participants with summaries of
actual scientific studies showing that increasingly as people rely on
technology to do simple tasks, their grasp of basic skills can
atrophy. As a result, all participants could plausibly see the successful completion of boring math problems as preparatory for a
future career, if they so desired.

YEAGER ET AL.

564
Table 1
Zero-Order Correlations for Study 1 Measures
Variable

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Self-transcendent motives
(“Purpose for learning”)
Self-oriented, intrinsic motives
Extrinsic motives
Meaningfulness of schoolwork
Self-reported grit
Self-reported self-control
No. of boring math problems solved
during the diligence task
ⴱ

p ⬍ .05.

ⴱⴱ

p ⬍ .01.

ⴱⴱⴱ

Self-transcendent motives
(“Purpose for learning”)

Self-oriented,
intrinsic motives

—
.66ⴱⴱⴱ
.61ⴱⴱⴱ
.23ⴱⴱⴱ
.39ⴱⴱⴱ
.33ⴱⴱⴱ

—
.48ⴱⴱⴱ
.20ⴱⴱⴱ
.32ⴱⴱⴱ
.26ⴱⴱⴱ

.09ⴱⴱ

.04

Extrinsic
motives

—
.19ⴱⴱⴱ
.32ⴱⴱⴱ
.21ⴱⴱⴱ
⫺.09ⴱⴱ

Meaningfulness
of schoolwork

Self-reported
grit

Self-reported
self-control

—
.26ⴱⴱⴱ
.22ⴱⴱⴱ

—
.58ⴱⴱⴱ

—

.09ⴱⴱ

.07ⴱ

.16ⴱⴱⴱ

p ⬍ .001.

The task itself involved three blocks. Block 0 was a warm-up
block to become familiar with the layout of the task. It involved a
brief (1-min) set of math problems, but without the option to play
videos or video games. It is not discussed further. Blocks 1 and 2
lasted 4 min each and involved the key behavioral choice: toggling
between the math problems and the media (videos or Tetris). See
Figure 2. We totaled the number of correct math responses in each
block. In a separate validation study, five blocks were administered and boredom was assessed after each. A large increase in
self-reported boredom occurred between the first block and the
second, a significant difference, t(1019) ⫽ 4.69, p ⬍ .001, and
boredom appeared to level-off after that. Therefore in the present
study, values from Block 2, the more boring of the two blocks,
were used in analyses. The same overall pattern of results and level
of statistical significance was found when Blocks 1 and 2 were
averaged and analyzed as a single metric.3
Finally, to ensure that the task elicited boredom as expected, one
question assessed boredom on the math problems, immediately
after Block 2: “How bored were you when working on the math
problems?” (1 ⫽ Not bored at all, 2 ⫽ A little bored, 3 ⫽
Somewhat bored, 4 ⫽ Very bored, 5 ⫽ Extremely bored).
College persistence. College enrollment data were obtained
from the NSC, which is a nonprofit database that reports on
students receiving financial aid to both private and federal loan
providers (Dynarski, Scott-Clayton, & Wiederspan, 2013). Colleges submit student names to this database, and so it allows for
objective, longitudinal assessment of student behavior with little or
no missing data. In the present study, a value of 1 indicates that
students were still enrolled at a 4-year college during the Fall of
2013 after the “census date” (the date after which students owe
tuition, normally 4 – 8 weeks into the term). A value of 0 means
that they did not have an official enrollment value in the database
at that time. Possible reasons for not being enrolled in the Fall
include students who were admitted to a college but did not ever
appear at their college in the Fall, or students who appeared at their
college but withdrew during the semester.4
Initial analyses support the interpretation that college persistence was indeed meaningfully affected by self-regulation. The
number of boring math problems solved during the diligence task
positively predicted college persistence six to 10 months later
(odds ratio [OR] ⫽ 1.006, Z ⫽ 4.05, p ⬍ .001, r ⫽ .14), and the
number of tempting videos or games consumed negatively did so
(OR ⫽ .91, Z ⫽ 2.09, p ⫽ .036, r ⫽ ⫺.08). This was true even

controlling for cognitive ability (measure described below). Thus
college persistence was at least one informative variable for assessing theory regarding longitudinal behavioral self-regulation.
Cognitive ability. To rule out the alternative hypothesis that
observed correlations between variables were due to shared variance in cognitive ability, we administered a brief (10-item) set of
moderately challenging problems from Raven’s progressive matrices (Raven, Raven, & Court, 1998). We used a subset of items
rather than the full battery due to time limitations in the school
setting. Although brief, this set of items showed substantial convergent validity with other measures of cognitive ability in a
validation study that administered a full battery of IQ measures to
a subsample of the present study’s participants (see online supplemental materials).

Results
Our primary hypothesis was that a greater endorsement of
self-transcendent motives for going to college would predict (a)
the tendency to view tedious academic tasks in a more personally
meaningful fashion and (b) the tendency to display greater academic self-regulation. Analyses focus first on the concurrently
measured variables, followed by the analysis of the longitudinal
3
There were some missing data for Block 2 because some participants
(10%) did not even begin the block and instead waited for the browser to
advance, without playing games or watching videos. Reports from teachers
administering the task suggested that this was likely because students found
Block 1 so aversive that they gave up on the task. Thus, rather than treating
these participants’ performance on Block 2 as missing data— effectively
dropping participants—they were instead coded as having completed zero
problems. We found that doing this and retaining all participants for analysis
did not sacrifice validity—for instance, the correlation of boring math problems solved and self-reported trait self-control was r ⫽ .15, p ⬍ .001, both
when we counted these students’ Block 2 performance as missing data and
when we counted the students as having completed zero problems. All conclusions about the significance of the predictors of diligence task data remained the same regardless of the missing data technique.
4
The large majority of students said that their goal was to attend and
graduate from a 4-year college (85%), while the remaining students said their
goal was to attend a 2-year college. Interestingly, many students who said in
May they would attend a 2-year college ended up at a 4-year college in the
Fall, and so, to be conservative, our primary analyses included all participants
regardless of their stated goal during senior year. However, we conducted
supplemental analyses of the college persistence outcomes that were limited
only to the subgroup who said they were planning on attending a 4-year
college. The significance tests for the focal variables were no different.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION

565

Figure 2. The “diligence task”: a behavioral measure of academic self-regulation. See the online article for the
color version of this figure.

behavioral outcome: college persistence. Our secondary hypothesis was whether individual differences in the endorsement of the
self-oriented motives showed the same pattern as the selftranscendent motives.
Concurrent measures. When inspecting zero-order correlations (Table 1), students who reported more of a selftranscendent purpose for learning also scored higher on the
meaningfulness of schoolwork measure (r ⫽ .23, p ⬍ .001),
conceptually replicating past research (Yeager & Bundick,
2009) but with a novel and more theoretically precise measure.
A self-transcendent purpose for learning also predicted more
grit (r ⫽ .39, p ⬍ .001) and more academic self-control (r ⫽
.33, p ⬍ .001) and showed a modest correlation with a greater
number of boring math problems solved in the face of tempting
media (r ⫽ .09, p ⬍ .01).
Supplemental analyses of survey questions asked after the diligence task help clarify those results. Students who endorsed a
self-transcendent purpose for learning did not perceive the single-

digit subtraction problems as less boring (r ⫽ ⫺.02, p ⫽ .47).
Furthermore, 91% of participants reported at least some boredom,
and 72% were “Extremely,” “Very,” or “Somewhat” bored. Thus
the task was indeed boring. Yet those with more of a purpose
solved somewhat more math problems despite the boredom (also
see Grant & Sonnentag, 2010).
The overall correlations with measures of self-regulation
were maintained when controlling for potential confounding
variables in a multiple regression: self-oriented, intrinsic motives for learning (e.g., exploring your interests), extrinsic motives for going to college (e.g., making more money), as well as
sex, race and ethnicity, and cognitive ability. Regression models are shown in Table 2. Inspecting the standardized regression
coefficients in Table 2 shows that a self-transcendent purpose
for learning predicted greater personal meaningfulness of⬎
schoolwork (␤ ⫽ .15, p ⬍ .001), grit (␤ ⫽ .27, p ⬍ .001),
academic self-control (␤ ⫽ .29, p ⬍ .001), and the number of
correctly solved boring math problems (␤ ⫽ .09, p ⫽ .01). In

Table 2
Ordinary Least Squares Regressions Predicting Construal and Academic Self-Regulation in Study 1
Dependent measure
Meaningfulness of
schoolwork

Grit

No. of boring math
problems solved during
the diligence task

Self-control

Predictor

␤

t

p

␤

t

p

␤

t

p

␤

t

p

Self-transcendent motives
(“Purpose for learning”)
Self-oriented, intrinsic motives
Extrinsic motives
Cognitive ability
Sex
Ethnicity
Adjusted R2
N

.15
.09
⫺.10
⫺.07
⫺.02
⫺.07

4.06
2.74
⫺3.50
2.78
⫺.76
⫺2.61
.07
1,360

.00
.01
.00
.01
.45
.01

.27
.10
⫺.09
⫺.10
⫺.10
⫺.11

7.04
2.63
⫺3.04
⫺2.49
⫺4.25
⫺4.21
.20
1,358

.00
.01
.00
.01
.00
.00

.29
.09
⫺.10
⫺.02
⫺.05
⫺.10

7.05
2.45
⫺3.47
⫺0.34
⫺1.87
⫺3.75
.13
1,358

.00
.01
.00
.73
.06
.00

.09
.01
⫺.11
⫺.02
⫺.05
⫺.10

2.59
0.41
⫺3.58
⫺0.34
⫺1.87
⫺3.75
.09
1,234

.01
.68
.00
.73
.06
.00

Note.

␤ ⫽ standardized regression coefficient. Sex: 1 ⫽ female, 0 ⫽ male. Ethnicity: 1 ⫽ Hispanic/Latino, 0 ⫽ non-Hispanic.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

566

YEAGER ET AL.

this multiple regression, a self-oriented, intrinsic motive for
learning did not significantly predict number of math problems
solved (see Row 2 in Table 2), and it was a significantly weaker
predictor of reported grit and self-control compared to a purpose for learning, Wald test of equality of coefficients, F(1,
1349) ⫽ 4.74, p ⫽ .03.
Note that these analyses do not show that self-oriented motives are unimportant. Almost all participants who reported at
least some self-transcendent motives (e.g., at or above the scale
midpoint) also expressed at least modest levels of intrinsic,
self-oriented motives (also at or above the scale midpoint; also
see Yeager et al. 2012). Nevertheless, more strongly endorsing
a self-oriented motive was not related to individual differences
self-regulation. By contrast, in a sample of adolescents with at
least some level of self-oriented motivation, greater endorsement of self-transcendent motives consistently predicted greater
self-regulation.
Finally, zero-order correlations showed that intuitively appealing extrinsic self-oriented motives such as making money in a
future job were significant positive predictors of meaningfulness
of schoolwork and trait-level self-regulation (Table 1). However,
this appeared to be due to shared variance with the other motives.
The extrinsic self-oriented items include variance both due to a
general motivation to go to college—which would be shared with
the purpose items—as well as variance due to more specific
extrinsic motives (making money, getting out of the house), which
might not be. In regression analyses that presumably remove the
former source of variance, extrinsic motives were in every case
strong negative predictors of both personal meaningfulness of
schoolwork and academic self-regulation (see Row 3 in Table 2).
That is, wanting to go to college in order to make money or get out
of the house predicted significantly worse academic selfregulation, net of other motives to go to college.
Longitudinal measure: College persistence. Many factors
are likely to affect whether high-school graduates follow through
with their college aspirations. These include academic preparation
or the need for financial aid. Yet students also face barriers that
require self-regulation, such as navigating the bureaucratic difficulties of completing the paperwork for enrollment, housing,
course and major selection, etc., as well as the need to take
entry-level, sometimes-tedious or disconnected introductory
courses (Ryu, 2012). College students also have more freedom
with their time compared to high school students, and they must
freely choose to work in service of their long-term goals even as
they face daily temptations to engage in social activities or consume entertaining media. Because self-regulation, in theory,
should help students complete these tasks and therefore persist in
college—and recall that diligence task behavior predicted college
enrollment—we hypothesized that a purpose for learning might
predict goal persistence across the socially, academically, and
bureaucratically difficult transition to college.
Consistent with this theoretical expectation, in a logistic regression with no covariates, a self-transcendent purpose for learning
significantly predicted college enrollment (OR ⫽ 1.40, Z ⫽ 4.82,
p ⬍ .001). Controlling for sex, race and ethnicity, cognitive ability,
as well as cumulative high school grade point average (GPA), did
not diminish this relation (OR ⫽ 1.40, Z ⫽ 4.62, p ⬍ .001).
Estimated values from this model are depicted in Figure 3. This
figure shows that for students with responses at the bottom of the

Figure 3. A self-transcendent purpose for learning predicts long-term
persistence toward an academic goal (enrollment at a 4-year college 6 –10
months postassessment, among college-going high school graduates) in
Study 1. Predicted values that adjusted for cognitive ability, gender, racial
minority status, and high school grade point average are depicted. All
participants were high school graduates who stated that their goal was to
graduate from college.

purpose scale (the lowest two out of five points), only 30% of
students were still enrolled at college in the Fall immediately
following high school graduation. Among students at the midpoint
of the purpose scale, 57% were still enrolled in college. For
students at the highest two out of five scale points, this number was
even greater: 64%.5 Controlling for self-oriented, intrinsic motives
for learning as well as extrinsic motives for going to college did
not diminish the significant relation between a purpose for learning
and college enrollment (OR ⫽ 1.34, Z ⫽ 2.77, p ⫽ .006).6 These
additional motives did not significantly predict college enrollment:
self-oriented, intrinsic motives (OR ⫽ 1.10, Z ⫽ .85, p ⫽ .40), and
extrinsic motives (OR ⫽ 1.11, Z ⫽ 1.05, p ⫽ .30). Wald tests
comparing the sizes of these coefficients to a self-transcendent
purpose for learning failed to reach statistical significance (ps ⫽
.35 and .22, respectively). Altogether, a self-transcendent purpose
for learning predicted persistence toward the eventual goal of
college graduation. In the full regression model, other, more selforiented motives did not.

Discussion
This research was conducted with a large sample of low-income,
mostly racial minority students, many of whom would be the first
in their families to graduate from college. In this sample, those
who expressed more of a self-transcendent purpose for learning as
they were leaving high school also viewed tedious academic
activities as more personally meaningful and both reported and
behaviorally displayed greater academic self-regulation. They
5
The relation was not exclusively driven by the low-purpose individuals. When reconducting analyses only with the sample at or above the
midpoint of the purpose scale (3, 4, or 5, excluding 1 and 2; see Figure 3),
a self-transcendent purpose for learning remained a significant predictor of
college enrollment (OR ⫽ 1.32, Z ⫽ 2.77, p ⫽ .006).
6
For a subset of students, we were able to obtain college-admissions test
scores (SATs and ACTs). When reconducting analyses with test scores as
covariates, all conclusions about the significance of each of the motives
(self-oriented and self-transcendent) were unchanged (ps ⬍ .05).

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION

were also more likely to continue toward their stated goal of
persisting in college. These effects were independent of cognitive
ability. In addition, stronger endorsement of more typical selforiented motives did not as consistently predict greater selfregulation, suggesting that there is a unique contribution of adding
more self-transcendent motives.
More generally, the results of Study 1 raise the intriguing
possibility that an intervention designed to promote a selftranscendent purpose for learning might improve adolescents’ academic performance over time. We tested this in Study 2.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Study 2: A Longitudinal Intervention Experiment
Study 1 was the first to show that a self-transcendent purpose for
learning could predict a tendency to display greater diligence and
self-regulation on academic activities as well as greater college
persistence. Although encouraging support for our theory, these
correlational analyses are limited in their ability to isolate causal
processes. We therefore created a novel purpose for learning
intervention and assessed its effects on behavior over time. This
was informed most directly by pioneering research by Hulleman
and Harackiewicz (2009; also see Hulleman, Durik, Schweigert, &
Harackiewicz, 2008; Hulleman, Godes, Hendricks, & Harackiewicz, 2010). It was also informed by past studies showing that
even brief persuasive messages that alter students’ appraisals of
recurring events in school can improve student achievement
months or years later (Aronson, Fried, & Good, 2002; Blackwell et
al., 2007; G. L. Cohen, Garcia, Purdie-Vaughns, Apfel, & Brzustoski, 2009; Sherman, Hartson, Binning, Purdie-Vaughns, Garcia,
Taborsky-Barba, Tomassetti, & Cohen, 2013; Walton & Cohen,
2011; see Garcia & Cohen, 2012; Yeager & Walton, 2011). Building on this, a one-time purpose intervention might produce a shift
in students’ thinking that buffers them from a loss in selfregulation when confronted with uninteresting tasks on a daily
basis (cf. Grant & Sonnentag, 2010). Specifically, we hypothesized that an intervention promoting a self-transcendent purpose
for learning could improve GPA in STEM courses several months
later, compared to a control group that completed a neutral exercise.

Method
Participants. Participants were 338 ninth grade students at a
middle class suburban high school in the Bay Area of Northern
California. Exactly half were male and half were female; 60%
were Asian, 28% were White, 9% were Hispanic/Latino, and 1%
were African American. The present study’s population adds to
Study 1’s, which showed the importance of a purpose for learning
among predominately low-income students of color attending urban public schools. In the present study, poverty and poor quality
instruction were not common barriers for students; only 8% percent were eligible for free or reduced-price lunch and over 85%
were considered proficient in math and science on state tests. Thus
it was possible to examine whether the effects of a selftranscendent purpose could generalize beyond the type of sample
employed in Study 1. There was no stopping rule for data collection in the present study because all students in the school were
invited to participate.
Procedures. The intervention was delivered in the school’s
computer lab during the school day. Teachers directed students to

567

a website (http://www.perts.net) that delivered the session via a
computer. All that was required of the teachers was to keep the
class orderly. The materials took less than one class period (20 –30
min) to complete.
The school has four grading periods in the year, each producing
independent grades, and each lasting one fourth of the school year.
In the first week of the fourth grading period of the year (in
March), students completed Study 2’s web-based self-transcendent
purpose intervention or a control intervention (see below). This
allowed for a test of the intervention on grades in the final quarter
of the year, controlling for prior grades in the third quarter.
The intervention was delivered during an elective period, not in
a math or science class. This provides a strict test of the hypothesis
that students themselves could create a purposeful framework that
they could apply even with no explicit associations between the
intervention content and STEM course learning objectives. We
made no mention to students that the purpose intervention was
designed to affect their thinking or behavior—instead, it was a
framed as a student survey requiring their input. No teacher at the
school had access to the intervention materials (so they could not
reinforce it knowingly), and they were unaware of treatment and
control assignments.
Purpose for learning intervention. A number of insights informed our intervention design. First, in past qualitative research
(Moran et al., 2013; Yeager & Bundick, 2009; Yeager et al., 2012)
many high school students spontaneously named both self-oriented
motives and self-transcendent motives. Students who did so
showed the greatest improvements in terms of the meaning of their
schoolwork over a 2-year period (Yeager et al., 2012; for analogous research in the workplace, see Grant, 2008). Almost no
adolescents (8%), however, mentioned only self-transcendent motives. We therefore expected that teens would find it implausible to
only focus on the world beyond the self, especially because high
school is transparently a preparation for one’s future personal
academic and professional goals. Therefore the intervention asked
students to connect self-transcendent aims to self-relevant reasons
for learning, rather than asking them to be completely altruistic.
Next, a premise of our approach is that it is either not possible
or extremely difficult to tell a teenager what his or her purpose for
learning should be. Doing this could threaten autonomy, a key
concern for adolescents (Erikson, 1968; Hasebe, Nucci, & Nucci,
2004; Nucci, 1996). Indeed, teens commonly express reactance in
response to adults’ attempts to influence their personal goals
(Brehm, 1966; Erikson, 1968), rejecting adult’s suggestions— or
even endorsing their opposite—to reassert autonomy (see Lapsley
& Yeager, in press). Furthermore, Vansteenkiste et al. (2004)
showed that autonomy-supportive framing was especially important when providing intrinsic motives for a learning task. At the
same time, it may be possible to lead a teenager to reflect on and
construct motives in a certain direction, in a way that leads them
to develop their own self-transcendent purposes for learning (see
Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009). In past research on service
learning activities with adolescents, reflecting on the personal
meaning of one’s past prosocial behaviors led to changes in
beliefs, attitudes, and thinking styles (Eyler, 2002; Eyler & Giles,
1999). Informed by these insights, our intervention did not seek to
give a personally relevant, self-transcendent purpose to a student.
Instead it sought to serve as an “enzyme” to catalyze students’

568

YEAGER ET AL.

reflections about their own self-transcendent purposes for learning
and facilitate connections to self-oriented motives.
More concretely, the intervention first primed students’ selftranscendent thoughts by asking them to write an open-ended
essay response to a question about social injustices they found
particularly egregious. The prompt was,

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

How could the world be a better place? Sometimes the world isn’t fair,
and so everyone thinks it could be better in one way or another. Some
people want there to be less hunger, some want less prejudice, and
others want less violence or disease. Other people want lots of other
changes. What are some ways that you think the world could be a
better place?

Student responses dealt with issues such as war, poverty, or
politics. Some examples were “Without discrimination, there
would be much less violence and war in this world” or “The
hunger problem can be solved if we have proper energy sources.”
With those prosocial concerns in mind, students next completed a
structured reading and writing exercise.
In doing so, the intervention drew on a variety of strategies
designed to be maximally persuasive without threatening autonomy (Yeager & Walton, 2011; see Aronson et al., 2002; Walton &
Cohen, 2011). The intervention conveyed the social norm that
“many students like you” have a self-transcendent purpose for
learning. Such descriptive norms can motivate behavior change
(Cialdini, Reno, & Kallgren, 1990; Goldstein, Cialdini, &
Griskevicius, 2008; see Cialdini, 2003), especially during adolescence (G. L. Cohen & Prinstein, 2006). To create a descriptive
norm, we presented results of a survey that communicated that, in
addition to common motives like making money or having freedom, most students also (sometimes secretly) are motivated to do
well in school in order to gain skills that can be used for prosocial
ends. Survey statistics presented to participants indicated that most
students were motivated to do well in high school at least in part
“to gain knowledge so that they can have a career that they
personally enjoy” and “to learn so they can make a positive
contribution to the world.” These statistics were also designed to
counteract pluralistic ignorance about the norm that people are
purely self-interested (also see Grant & Patil, 2012; Miller, 1999).
As in similar social-psychological interventions (e.g., Walton &
Cohen, 2011), summary statistics were accompanied by representative quotes purportedly from upperclassmen at the school that
reinforced the focal message. One such quote stated,
For me, getting an education is all about learning things that will help
me do something I can feel good about, something that matters for the
world. I used to do my schoolwork just to earn a better grade and look
smart. I still think doing well in school is important, but for me it’s
definitely not just about a grade anymore. I’m growing up, and doing
well in school is all about preparing myself to do something that
matters, something that I care about.

Finally, building on self-perception and cognitive dissonance
(Bem, 1972; Festinger, 1957), past research finds that when a
person freely chooses to advocate for a message this can lead a
person to internalize it (Aronson, 1999; Aronson et al., 2002).
Therefore, students next wrote brief testimonials to future students
about their reasons for learning. Specifically, students explained
how learning in high school would help them be the kind of person
they want to be or help them make the kind of impact they want

on the people around them or society in general. Participants on
average wrote two to four sentences. In this way, rather than being
passive recipients of the intervention, students themselves authored it. This allowed students to make the message both personal
and persuasive to the self (Yeager & Walton, 2011).
We conducted a pilot experiment to confirm that the selftranscendent purpose intervention could indeed promote personal
meaning in school as expected by theory (Yeager & Bundick,
2009; also see Study 1). This pilot involved N ⫽ 451 high school
students from 13 different high schools across the United States
(extensive detail is presented in the online supplemental material).
In the pilot, students were randomized to the purpose intervention
or a neutral control activity (see below). Students then completed
a more extended version of the Study 1 meaningfulness of schoolwork measure—the academically oriented BIF (Figure 1; cf. Vallacher & Wegner, 1989). As expected, in this pilot the purpose
manipulation led to greater personal meaningfulness of tedious
academic tasks compared to a neutral control, t(446) ⫽ 2.67, p ⫽
.007, d ⫽ 0.25 (Control raw M ⫽ 4.78, SD ⫽ 2.53 vs. Purpose raw
M ⫽ 5.39, SD ⫽ 2.41). This confirms that the purpose intervention
can operate as expected, at least in the short term in the pilot
sample.
Control exercise. In a control condition, participants read
about and then explained how high school was different from
middle school. As in the purpose condition, participants saw
summary statistics, read messages purportedly from helpful upperclassman (e.g., statements discussing the differences in the number
of teachers or difficulty of time management), and wrote essays
about how their lives were different now compared to when they
were in middle school. Thus the control exercise was ageappropriate, social, and engaging but was devoid of the focus on
motives for learning. It primarily rules out the alternative explanation that any positive and friendly message about school from
older students could create a sense of connection with others and
facilitate prosocial motivation.
Measures.
STEM GPA. The primary dependent variable was grades in
STEM courses (math and science) for the fourth grading period of
the year. As is common, we scored grades from individual courses
on a 4-point GPA scale (i.e., A ⫽ 4, A⫺ ⫽ 3.67, B⫹ ⫽ 3.33, etc.)
and then averaged them. We did the same for the preintervention
grading periods. Math courses were Algebra 1, Algebra 2, or
geometry (depending on where guidance counselors placed students); all students took biology, although some students were in
more advanced biology classes than others.

Results
Preliminary analyses. The two conditions did not differ in
terms of word count of their written responses, t(319) ⫽ ⫺0.10,
p ⫽ .92, suggesting that, at least along this index, the two interventions elicited similar levels of engagement with the activity.
Next, students successfully responded to the prompt. Some examples for the purpose intervention condition were:
I would like to get a job as some sort of genetic researcher. I would
use this job to help improve the world by possibly engineering crops
to produce more food, or something like that.

or

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION
I believe learning in school will give me the rudimentary skills to
survive in the world. Science will give me a good base for my career
in environmental engineering. I want to be able to solve our energy
problems.

or

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

I think that having an education allows you to understand the world
around you. It also allows me to form well-supported, well-thought
opinions about the world. I will not be able to help anyone without
first going to school.

GPA analyses. Did the purpose intervention improve overall
grades in STEM-related courses (math and science)? It did, as
shown in Figure 4. In an OLS regression, there was a full-sample
effect of the one-time intervention on STEM-course GPA in the
months following the experiment (Control covariate-adjusted M ⫽
2.93, SD ⫽ 1.03; Purpose covariate-adjusted M ⫽ 3.04, SD ⫽
0.89), t(337) ⫽ 3.20, p ⫽ .001, d ⫽ 0.11.7 As is standard procedure in analyses of psychological intervention effects on GPA
(Blackwell et al., 2007; G. L. Cohen et al., 2009; Walton & Cohen,
2011; Yeager et al., 2014), this analysis was conducted controlling
for prior performance (in the present case, third grading period
grades; the same findings emerged controlling for all prior grading
periods). Indeed, doing so reduced the standard errors associated
with the condition variable, allowing for more precise estimates of
treatment effects and maximization of statistical power.8 Additional models that added controls for race, gender, age and level of
math course did not change the finding of a main effect of
condition on GPA (p ⫽ .001). These control variables also did not
moderate treatment effects (all interaction effect ps ⬎ .15).9
Under the assumption that low-achieving math and science
students might be more likely to be disinterested (see, e.g., Skinner, Kindermann, & Furrer, 2009; also see Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009), we tested whether the purpose for learning would
have the greatest effect on students who were earning the lowest
math and science grades preintervention. Indeed, there was a
significant Purpose Intervention ⫻ Preintervention GPA interaction, t(338) ⫽ ⫺2.92, p ⫽ .004, such that lower performing
students benefitted more. To illustrate this interaction, which was
tested using the continuous preintervention GPA variable, it is

569

possible to examine simple effects within meaningful subgroups of
lower performers (students with a GPA ⬍ 3.0) and higher performers (GPA of 3.0 or higher). A cut-point of a GPA of 3.0 was
selected for this illustration because an analysis of high school
transcripts and college enrollment statistics identified this as the
best GPA threshold for college readiness (Roderick, Nagaoka, &
Allensworth, 2006). Among lower performers, who are typically
less likely to successfully complete college on the basis of their
high school GPAs, there was a significant treatment effect of 0.2
grade points, t(119) ⫽ 2.90, p ⫽ .005, d ⫽ 0.21. This is shown in
Figure 4. Among higher performers, there was a nonsignificant
effect of 0.05 grade points, t(207) ⫽ 1.38, p ⫽ .17, d ⫽ 0.06.
Thus, the self-transcendent purpose for learning increased
STEM-course grades for students overall, but especially so for
low-performers who were on track for being underprepared for
higher education. This result mirrors past intervention studies,
which have found that lower performing students tend to benefit
most from activities that redirect their thinking about academic
work in a positive way (e.g., G. L. Cohen et al., 2009; Hulleman
& Harackiewicz, 2009; also see Wilson & Linville, 1982). It is of
course possible that this moderation by baseline grades is a statistical issue; indeed, A, A⫺, and B ⫹ students have less room to
improve. At the same time, to the extent that lower grades could be
caused by disinterest and disengagement (see, e.g., Skinner et al.,
2009), the present moderation is consistent with the theory that the
purpose intervention would confer the greatest benefits when
disinterest and disengagement are greatest.

Discussion
Extending the Study 1 correlational findings, Study 2 showed
that a self-transcendent purpose intervention could affect overall
achievement in STEM courses several months into the future. How
could a brief purpose intervention increase official GPA? In the
next two studies we sought to illuminate some of the behavioral
processes that might be set in motion by the self-transcendent
purpose manipulation.

Study 3: Deeper Learning During Tedious
Multiple-Choice Questions
Study 2 was a contribution in showing a causal effect of a
one-time self-transcendent purpose intervention on accumulated
behavior over time—specifically, GPA in high school STEM
classes. It provides causal evidence for the kinds of achievement
effects that may have produced the Study 1 correlational finding
that purpose for learning predicted college persistence. However, a

Figure 4. A self-transcendent purpose for learning intervention raises
grades in math and science for all students but especially for poor performers in Study 2 (students with a GPA below 3.0 in the preintervention
quarter). Error bars indicate 1 standard error. STEM ⫽ science, technology, engineering, and mathematics.

7
Cohen’s d effect sizes were calculated by dividing the covariateadjusted treatment effect by the raw, pooled standard deviation.
8
Even without controlling for baseline performance—which reduced the
standard error for the treatment effect by more than 250%—the treatment
effect on final grades was marginally significant (p ⫽ .06).
9
While our primary focus was on STEM course GPA, the participating
school also provided students’ English grades. Supplemental analyses
showed that there was a full-sample effect of the purpose intervention on
fourth grading period English grades of .15 grade points, t(329) ⫽ 2.18,
p ⫽ .03, including the same covariates noted above. Perhaps this was
because students found freshman year English to be boring, or perhaps this
is because the intervention led to a general increase in engagement in
school that spilled over to English class.

YEAGER ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

570

number of issues remain. Study 2 did not document which shortterm behaviors were affected by the intervention and that subsequently added up to the long-term treatment effect. For instance,
we do not know if a self-transcendent purpose increased overall
grades by making students more likely to truly learn from their
academic experiences, as opposed to moving as quickly as possible
through their academic work without trying to retain the information for future use (see Jang, 2008).
Study 3 was a naturalistic field experiment conducted among
undergraduates preparing for one of their final exams in their
psychology course. A few days before the exam, the instructor
e-mailed students a survey link that randomized them to a purpose
intervention or a control exercise. The survey then directed students to complete a tedious (⬎100-question) web-based test review. Our hypothesis was that the self-transcendent purpose intervention would increase students’ attempts to seriously review the
material, operationalized as the average amount of time spent on
each question. Notably, the materials were presented as an actual
extra-credit exercise, not as a study, in order to more closely
recreate the real-world choices students might have been making
in Study 2.

Method
Participants. A total of 89 second- through fifth-year students
in an undergraduate psychology course received an e-mail inviting
them to access a test review and receive extra credit. A total of 71
(80%) completed the intervention materials and provided any data
on dependent measures. Of these, 78% were women. There was no
stopping rule because all students in the class were invited. No data
were excluded.
Note that in this study (and Study 4), participants are college
students, not high school students. In part this is because of our
interest in understanding the processes that lead to the attainment
of long-term educational goals such as college graduation (e.g.,
Study 1). This sample was also convenient. This difference in
sample provides the benefit of possibly generalizing the prior
results. It would be informative if a self-transcendent purpose for
learning intervention produced analogous effects among high
school freshmen (Study 2), high school seniors (Study 1), and
college students (Studies 3 and 4).
Procedure. Near the end of the term, students completed the
online purpose intervention and exam review activity. During the
review activity, the survey software tracked students’ behavior
(e.g., time spent on each practice problem), and this constituted the
primary dependent measure.
More specifically, 2 days before an exam, students were sent the
following e-mail from their professor:
Hello class. I’m currently working on an online activity to help the
students in my class do better. This online activity involves two
things. First, it helps you think about how our psychology class fits
into the context of your lives. Second, I’ve created an online activity
to help you study the course material and prepare for your next exam,
which involves showing you several sample multiple-choice questions
that are similar to the kinds of questions that you will be tested on
during EXAM 3. Since this online tool is still a work in progress, I’m
offering you 2 points extra credit (to be applied to your lowest exam
score) if you decide to go through it and help refine it. . . . [It] will take
as long as you’d like–you can answer as many or as few questions as
you want.

Purpose and control exercises. The self-transcendent purpose
materials were highly similar to those used in Study 2. They were
edited slightly to refer to reasons for learning psychology, so that
the materials could conceivably be seen as related to the psychology course. The normative quotes were also framed as coming
from former students in the course, as opposed to upperclassmen
in general. The control exercise was highly similar to the Study 2
control group, only it discussed how learning in college is different
from learning in high school. Both of these changes were made
because the experiment was conducted as institutional research,
which means that the goal of the study was to improve instructional practice, although the data could also be used for generalizable knowledge. And in fact the review boosted grades, dramatically so for the lowest performers across conditions (see online
supplemental materials). This ethics arrangement also had implications for random assignment. Because the research team already
possessed evidence that the intervention could benefit students
(e.g., Study 2) and because there were real-world grades at stake
for students, for ethical reasons 75% of students received the
purpose intervention and 25% received the control. Furthermore,
no self-report attitudes or other psychological measures were assessed. Only students’ postmanipulation behaviors on the review
materials were measured.
Measures. As a dependent measure, we created a situation
that was tedious: reviewing for a test by answering over 100
multiple-choice questions. We then measured behavior that could
signify an intention to truly learn from it: time spent on each
review question. All questions were taken from a psychology test
bank. On average, students answered 90 questions and spent 40
min doing so. Review questions were programmed so that students
could not proceed to the next question until they answered it
correctly, and task instructions clearly stated that spending more
time on each question—rather than just guessing randomly until
they got it right and could move on—signaled a desire for deeper
learning. The instructions were,
IMPORTANT: HOW TO ACTUALLY LEARN FROM THESE
QUESTIONS
New cognitive psychology research shows that simply guessing on
multiple-choice questions does not promote deep learning on the
activity, because it doesn’t force you to retrieve the information. . . .
So, if you want to deeply learn from this activity, it is best to look
through your notes and the textbook and try to recall the information
while answering the questions, as if you were really taking an important exam.

Students were also given web links to actual published empirical
articles showing that memory is improved only by earnest retrieval
behaviors. Thus, we created a situation in which the longer students thought about each question before trying to answer it, and
the longer they spent clarifying their understanding before moving
on, the more they were choosing to “learn deeply” from the
activity. We conducted a number of additional analyses to confirm
this theoretical interpretation of the data, and they are reported in
the online supplement.
The survey software recorded the number of milliseconds that
each question was displayed before students ultimately submitted
a correct answer. These values were summed and then divided by
the number of questions attempted, to produce an average time per

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION

question per person. Treatment versus control students did not
differ in terms of the number of questions students completed (p ⫽
.38), but the effect was in the direction of treated students completing more problems (see online). As is common in analyses of
time, our measure showed significant skew and kurtosis (joint test
p ⬍ .00001). We therefore conducted a “ladder of powers” analysis (Tukey, 1977) to identify the transformation that best reduced
deviation from normality (it was one divided by the square root of
the number of seconds). The ladder analysis and subsequent transformation were done blind to the effect of the transformations on
the significance of the intervention effect. The transformed measure had no significant skew or kurtosis (joint test p ⫽ .90). Time
was ultimately coded so that higher numbers corresponded to more
time on average on each page, and then z-scored to have a mean of
zero and a standard deviation of 1. All analyses are from regressions that control for prior test performance, which significantly
predicted time per page and reduced standard errors associated
with treatment effects.

Results
Results showed that a self-transcendent purpose for learning
increased the tendency to attempt to deeply learn from the tedious
academic task. Students who completed the self-transcendent purpose intervention spent more time working on each review question (Z-scored time per question: Control M ⫽ ⫺0.43, SD ⫽ 1.11;
Purpose M ⫽ 0.13, SD ⫽ 0.93), t(69) ⫽ 2.11, p ⫽ .038, d ⫽ 0.56.
In the untransformed data, this corresponded to spending roughly
twice as much time on each question (Control M ⫽ 25 s per
question vs. Treatment M ⫽ 49 s per question).10

Discussion
Study 3 investigated one of the short-term behaviors that might
have led to the long-term effects of a purpose in Study 2: deeper
learning on a tedious exam review. Students spent twice as long on
their review questions when they had just written about how truly
understanding the subject area could allow them to contribute to
the world beyond the self, compared to controls. Importantly, this
was done in a naturalistic setting—that is, looking at real world
student behavior on an authentic examination review. Perhaps the
purpose intervention increased grades over time in Study 2 because it led students to complete their academic work in a qualitatively distinct fashion— one that privileged learning and retention over “getting through it.”

Study 4: Working Hard in the Face of Temptations
The findings from Study 3 suggest one way in which a one-time
self-transcendent purpose intervention might have increased overall grades in STEM courses in Study 2: deeper learning during
review activities. However we have not shown that the purpose
manipulation altered students’ abilities to regulate their competing
desires. That is, we have not shown effects in situations that clearly
require self-regulation. To begin to answer this, a more precise
behavioral test is required— one that pits the desire to meet one’s
learning goals against the desire to give up and engage in a
tempting alternative.
Therefore Study 4 examined behavior on the “diligence task”
described in Study 1 (also see Figure 2). This task simulates a

571

common experience for students: having to complete problem sets
for math and science classes while being tempted to consume
entertaining media on the Internet. Thus, the present study allowed
for a face-valid test of our hypothesis that a self-transcendent
purpose for learning could lead students to continue to solve math
problems and eschew tempting alternatives even as boredom is
increasing.
Second, it would be helpful to know if a self-transcendent
purpose could benefit all learners, but especially when a task is
most uninteresting. Therefore, instead of examining betweenperson differences that might moderate treatment effects, as in
Study 2, Study 4 focused on within-person differences. That is,
Study 4 examined whether the purpose manipulation would lead to
more math problems solved on the later trials of the diligence task,
when boredom is greatest.
Study 4 was primarily designed to address these two research
questions. However a third objective was to test whether simply
emphasizing the self-oriented benefits of learning in school
would be sufficient to promote academic self-regulation. Recall
that Studies 2 and 3 compared the purpose manipulation to a
neutral control exercise, something that has often been done in
many past social-psychological interventions that have affected
long-term educational outcomes (e.g., Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009; Walton & Cohen, 2011). Yet it is unknown whether
an analogous self-oriented manipulation would show the same
benefits as the purpose manipulation. While Study 1 is helpful
in showing the unique correlational effect of a self-transcendent
purpose, an analogous experimental study has not been conducted. To address this, in the second of the two samples
included in the present study we added a self-oriented condition, making it a three-cell design. We hypothesized that the
self-oriented condition would not be sufficient to lead to higher
numbers of math problems solved when boredom was greatest,
compared to controls. We did not have a strong prediction about
the comparison between the self-oriented condition and the
purpose condition, however, because the former was intentionally designed to share much of the same content, and because
past research has found these two groups do not differ significantly (Yeager et al., 2012; also recall the inconsistent Wald
test results in Study 1).

Method
Participants. Participants (total N ⫽ 429) were two samples
of students taking introductory psychology at the University of
Texas at Austin in consecutive semesters. They participated in
exchange for partial course credit. Forty-eight percent were male,
and 52% were female. Race and ethnicity information was not
collected from these students; however, the freshmen cohort at the
university (which historically closely mirrors introductory psychology) is 57% White, 18% Asian, 17% Hispanic/Latino, and 5%
African American. Students were predominately first- or secondyear students: 37% were 18 years old, 36% were 19 years old, and
10
It was also possible to explore treatment effects on actual scores on
the final exam administered a few days after the study. Exploratory
analyses found that the large majority of students showed greater improvement in test scores in the purpose condition compared to the control.
Analyses are presented in the online supplemental materials.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

572

YEAGER ET AL.

15% were 20 years old. Data were collected during daytime hours
in the last few days of the semester, a time when self-regulation
might have been precarious due to final exams.
Sample 1 had no stopping rule. We sought to collect as much
data as possible (final n ⫽ 117) before the end of the term, and data
were not analyzed until after the term was over. Sample 2 was
collected the following semester and so it was possible to conduct
a power analysis based on the results of Sample 1 before collecting
data. This led to a target sample size of 300 for Sample 2, because
a power analysis revealed that roughly 95 participants per cell
would be required to have 80% power to detect an effect of d ⫽
0.41 between any two conditions (the effect size estimate for the
purpose intervention from Sample 1). Ultimately Sample 2 involved usable data from a maximum of n ⫽ 312 students (data
collection was stopped at the end of the first day on which more
than 300 complete responses had been collected). Some students
did not provide data for some measures, and so degrees of freedom
varied across analyses. No data were excluded except for those
mentioned here or in the online supplement.
Procedures. The intervention procedures were nearly identical to those used in Study 3. Immediately after completing the
intervention materials, participants completed the diligence task as
described in Study 1.
Purpose and control exercises. These were nearly identical to
those used in Study 2.
Self-oriented control exercise. Sample 2 had a three-cell design that added a self-oriented (and intrinsic) condition to the
control and self-transcendent purpose conditions. The self-oriented
manipulation was similar to the purpose manipulation in nearly
every way except for the elimination of self-transcendent prompts
in the stimuli. It was future-oriented, goal-directed, and highly
focused on learning and on developing skills—all things expected
by theory to promote a commitment to learning (e.g., Lepper et al.,
2005; Ryan & Deci, 2000; Vansteenkiste et al., 2006). This is a
highly conservative test in that the manipulations shared much of
the same content—approximately 90% of the text was the same.
Also recall that Study 1 indicated that self-transcendent and selforiented motives were strongly correlated (r ⫽ .66). The present
self-oriented control group was designed to rule out the alternative
explanation that any manipulation involving reading and writing
about intrinsic personal motives for learning would be sufficient to
lead to greater self-regulation on an uninteresting task.
In the self-oriented exercise, an initial essay question asked
about changes in the world. This held time-perspective and counterfactual thinking constant, both shown to affect level of construal, which could promote self-regulation (Trope & Liberman,
2010, 2011). However, this prompt asked how the world might be
changed to benefit the self, rather than to address an injustice in the
world:
How could the world be better for you? Sometimes the world isn’t
what you want it to be, and so everyone thinks it could be better for
them in one way or another. Some people want more fun, some want
it to be less stressful, and others want to be more interested in what
they’re doing. Other people want lots of other changes. What are some
ways that you think the world could be better for you?

All but one of the summary statistics and all but one of the
representative quotes were identical across conditions. For the one
quote that was not the same, we removed self-transcendent infor-

mation without sacrificing a focus on building skills, so that it
read,
For me, getting an education is all about learning things that will help
me do something I can be good at—something that I can be the best
at. I used to do my homework just to earn a better grade and look
smart. I still think doing well in school is important, but for me it’s
definitely not just about a grade anymore. I’m growing up, and doing
well in school is all about preparing myself to do a job that I can be
good at. That seems really rewarding to me— knowing that at the end
of the day you completed an important job, and you did an awesome
job at it. [Differences from the quotation in Study 2 shown in italics.]

Next, participants were asked to share their own testimonials.
The prompt closely mirrored the purpose condition and strongly
emphasized the acquisition of skills (rather than the accumulation
of extrinsic benefits). It asked “Why is learning important to your
goals,” and “How will learning in school help you be the kind of
person you want to be and help you have a career in life that you
enjoy or are interested in?” It was designed to promote a suite of
self-oriented motives, including task value (i.e., personal interest)
and utility value (i.e., gaining a fulfilling career; Eccles & Wigfield, 1995, 2002). Supplementing this was a clear invocation of
mastery goals for learning (Elliot & McGregor, 2001). All of these
motives, on their own, might be expected to promote persistence.
Yet this manipulation lacks explicit mention of the potential to use
that mastery to benefit others, allowing for a test of our theory
regarding the benefits of adding self-transcendent motives, above
and beyond this suite of more self-oriented motives.
Measures. Participants completed the same behavioral measure of academic self-regulation (i.e., the diligence task) that was
used in Study 1 (see Figure 2). As in Study 1, we analyzed the total
number of correct math responses.11 Performance on each of the
two blocks was analyzed separately to allow for a test of whether
self-regulatory benefits would be greatest when boredom had
increased. To verify the extent to which the task was boring for
participants in all conditions, at the end we asked participants
whether the task was in fact boring, using the same item described
in Study 1.

Results
Analytic plan. The primary theoretical interest was in
whether the purpose for learning condition differed from the
control condition in terms of behavior on the diligence task.
Because, as will be shown, this focal comparison was significant
independently within Samples 1 and 2, we primarily analyze a
stacked data set and in statistical models we include a dummy
variable for sample (and of course the self-oriented condition data
are excluded in those analyses).
A secondary question was whether the self-oriented manipulation produced the same or a different pattern of results as the
purpose for learning manipulation. Therefore we next conducted
analyses of the self-oriented manipulation using only data from
Sample 2. We hypothesized that the self-oriented condition would
11
As in Study 1, we treated people who stopped the task altogether after
the first block as a “0,” as in Study 1, to avoid dropping data. The statistical
significance levels of the focal analyses (Block 2 math problems successfully answered) were no different when omitting participants who did not
begin Block 2.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION

not differ from controls. We did not have strong hypotheses about
differences from the purpose condition, given the overlap between
the two manipulations and the strong endorsement of learning
goals in the self-oriented condition.
Preliminary analyses. The experimental manipulations again
appeared to elicit similar levels of thinking and writing about their
respective topics; there were no differences across conditions in
terms of the word count on the open-ended essay prompts: Sample
1 t(116) ⫽ 0.50, ns; Sample 2 F(2, 282) ⫽ 0.13, ns. Next, the
diligence task was experienced as truly boring. Fully 73% of
participants said they were “Extremely,” “Very” or “Somewhat”
bored when working on the math problems, while only 4% said
they were “not bored at all.” Ratings of boredom did not differ by
condition: Sample 1 t(116) ⫽ 0.47, ns; Sample 2: F(2, 282) ⫽
1.27, ns. Thus, this study was a test of whether participants would
display greater self-regulation on a task that was experienced as
equally boring across conditions.
Primary analyses. Did the self-transcendent purpose manipulation affect the number of math problems correctly solved? On
the first block in the stacked data set, the purpose manipulation had
no effect compared to the control, t(310) ⫽ 0.18, p ⫽ .86 (or in
either sample): Sample 1 t(116) ⫽ 0.19, p ⫽ .85; Sample 2 F(2,
283) ⫽ 0.57, p ⫽ .56). However recall from the methods of Study
1 that the second block in the diligence task is experienced as
much more tedious and aversive compared to the first block (and
significantly so). Therefore differences were predicted to emerge
precisely when participants became most bored, in Block 2.
This is what the data showed, as depicted in Figure 5. Specifically, for participants in the control condition, the number of math
problems solved dropped precipitously from the first to the second
block. Control participants completed 44% fewer problems in
Block 2 compared to Block 1 (Control Block 1 raw M ⫽ 66.47,
SD ⫽ 46.29; Control Block 2 raw M ⫽ 37.12, SD ⫽ 45.10), a
significant difference, paired t(164) ⫽ 7.51, p ⬍ .001, d ⫽ 0.65.
However, for participants who completed the purpose manipulation, the drop in math problems solved from the first to the second
block was mitigated. Purpose condition participants completed
only 26% fewer problems in Block 2 (Purpose Block 1 M ⫽ 68.62,
SD ⫽ 45.11; Purpose Block 2 M ⫽ 50.56, SD ⫽ 49.00), still a
significant difference, paired t(165) ⫽ 4.21, p ⬍ .001, d ⫽ 0.38.
Importantly, an OLS regression analysis comparing difference
scores (Block 2 problems solved minus Block 1 problems solved,
by condition) showed that the decline experienced by the purpose

573

condition was significantly smaller than that experienced by participants in the control condition, b ⫽ 12.45, t(309) ⫽ 2.10, p ⫽
.03, d ⫽ 0.28. Thus, by the second block, there was a significant
effect of the purpose manipulation compared to the control,
t(309) ⫽ 2.81, p ⫽ .005, d ⫽ 0.32, such that purpose condition
participants completed 36% more boring math problems compared
to controls in the second block. This condition difference in Block
2 was significant independently within Sample 1, t(115) ⫽ 2.14,
p ⫽ .03, d ⫽ 0.40, and Sample 2, t(192) ⫽ 2.13, p ⫽ .03, d ⫽ 0.31,
and did not differ across samples, interaction t(308) ⫽ 0.11, p ⫽
.90. Hence, it was a reproducible finding (see Figure 5).
Comparison to the self-oriented control group. By contrast,
the highly similar self-oriented control group— emphasizing intrinsic motives for learning— did not appear to improve selfregulation on the boring math task compared to controls. Recall
that these analyses could only be conducted with data from Sample
2, which is the sample that involved the three-cell experiment. The
self-oriented condition did not differ from the control in terms of
number of math problems solved, either in Block 1, t(287) ⫽ 0.90,
p ⫽ .39, d ⫽ 0.11, or Block 2, t(287) ⫽ 0.92, p ⫽ .38, d ⫽ 0.11,
although comparisons were in the direction of more math problems
solved for the self-oriented group versus the control. Note that this
nonsignificant difference is not likely due to limited statistical
power; the purpose condition showed a significant difference from
control on Block 2 in Sample 2 (see Figure 5). The self-oriented
condition did not differ from the purpose condition in either block,
Block 1, t(285) ⫽ 1.37, p ⫽ .17, d ⫽ 0.16, Block 2,
t(285) ⫽ ⫺0.99, p ⫽ .32, d ⫽ 0.11.
Also informative is an analysis of changes across blocks. Participants in the self-oriented condition showed a decline in the
number of math problems solved that mirrored the control condition, as shown in Figure 5. Participants in the self-oriented manipulation condition solved 32% fewer problems in Block 2 than in
Block 1 (Self-oriented Block 1 M ⫽ 82.43, SD ⫽ 73.52; Block 2
M ⫽ 55.63, SD ⫽ 45.65), t(86) ⫽ 6.00, p ⬍ .001, d ⫽ 0.45. An
analysis of difference scores found that this change across blocks
did not differ from the same changes seen in the control condition,
t(286) ⫽ 0.35, p ⫽ .73. However the change score did differ
significantly from the changes seen in the purpose condition,
t(286) ⫽ ⫺2.17, p ⫽ .03, d ⫽ 0.26, showing that the purpose
manipulation was significantly better at warding off a decline in
math problems solved across blocks compared to the highly similar self-oriented manipulation.

Figure 5. A self-transcendent purpose for learning intervention sustains self-regulation on the “diligence task”
in Study 4. Error bars indicate 1 standard error.

YEAGER ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

574

Inspecting Figure 5, it is interesting that students in the selforiented manipulation condition showed an initial, nonsignificant
boost in Block 1 problems solved compared to controls. This may
have been contributing to the significant comparison between the
purpose and self-oriented conditions in terms of difference scores
across blocks. It is possible that the self-oriented manipulation led
individuals to try harder initially, on Block 1, but this effort sapped
their self-regulatory ability on the subsequent trial, Block 2. This
will be important to investigate in future research. Regardless,
simply reading and writing about intrinsic self-relevant motives for
learning did not lead to significant differences from controls when
the task became most boring. By contrast, a highly similar activity
that added self-transcendent motives was effective at sustaining
self-regulation.

Discussion
Study 4 extended the evidence about the effects of a selftranscendent purpose on academic self-regulation. It put learners in
a situation in which they were asked to complete a tedious,
low-level task that had only a tenuous relationship to future work
goals, and they were told they could quit at any time and entertain
themselves online. In many regards this is the modern dilemma:
With ubiquitous entertainment at our fingertips, learners must
exercise self-discipline even when they do not know whether they
themselves or someone else will benefit from their hard work in
the long term. We showed that learners could be helped in such
situations when they reflected on how their future role in society
might contribute in some ways to the world beyond the self. These
individuals were better able to maintain their level of persistence
and overcome temptation even when boredom was growing.

General Discussion
Many repetitive, foundational, skill-building math and science
tasks are experienced as tedious or boring (Raytheon Company,
2012; Stigler & Hiebert, 1999). Our research found that when it is
difficult to make a task interesting it can be helpful to focus on
creating personal meaning by promoting a prosocial, selftranscendent purpose for learning (see Brophy, 2008).
In correlational, experimental, and longitudinal studies involving roughly 2,000 high school and college students, a purpose for
learning predicted or caused more effective academic selfregulation in the immediate term and over time. A selftranscendent purpose was correlated with more diligence in the
face of tempting alternatives and also greater college persistence
rates among low-income, urban, predominantly minority students
(Study 1). A brief experimental intervention to promote a selftranscendent purpose increased overall STEM-course grades several months later (Study 2). Studies 3 and 4 clarified the nearerterm effects of this manipulation. A self-transcendent purpose
doubled the amount of time students spent on tedious exam review
questions (Study 3) and increased by 35% the number of boring
math problems students solved compared to controls, even when
they had the option to consume entertaining Internet media at any
time (Study 4). Adolescents with more of a self-transcendent
purpose for learning also literally saw learning tasks differently.
They were more likely to say that pictures and descriptions of
quotidian academic tasks were linked to important and personally

meaningful academic goals (Study 1; for causal evidence, also see
the pilot randomized experiment reported in the online supplement
and referenced in Study 2). All told, it seems that when adolescents
had a personally important and self-transcendent “why” for learning they were able to bear even a tedious and unpleasant “how” (cf.
Frankl, 1963).
Previous research has shown that having a prosocial, selftranscendent motive for engaging in a behavior can lead to
greater persistence on repetitive and uninteresting tasks at work
(see Grant, 2007, 2013). The present research extended this by
examining situations in which a person was completing skillbuilding tasks that have no immediate payoff for others but may
prepare one to make a contribution in the future—such as doing
single-digit subtraction or completing tedious multiple-choice
questions. We found that a self-transcendent purpose for learning could alter a person’s self-regulation in such circumstances.
This type of result might well generalize to nonschool settings. Do armed forces cadets engage in more vigorous physical
exercise when they see themselves as preparing to protect
civilians from harm versus protecting themselves from harm?
Do computer hackers spend more hours learning syntax when
they anticipate using it to resist an oppressive government
versus stealing money or content for personal consumption? We
believe the findings here might offer a perspective on the causes
of persistence on foundational skill-development tasks in a
number of settings.
The present research is also an advance because it documents
the development of a new research tool to examine the causal
impact of a self-transcendent purpose for learning. Unlike research
that has developed psychological interventions to undo the belief
that academic struggle might mean you are “dumb” (Aronson et
al., 2002; Blackwell et al., 2007; Wilson & Linville, 1982), or that
you might not belong or be valued in a setting (G. L. Cohen et al.,
2009; G. L. Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Harackiewicz et al., 2014;
Walton & Cohen, 2011), research on youth purpose has to date
been limited mostly to correlational survey analyses or qualitative
interviews, preventing strong causal inferences (Bronk, 2012; Burrow & Hill, 2011; Yeager & Bundick, 2009; see Hill, Burrow, &
Sumner, 2013; but see Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009). The
intervention developed here has the advantage of web-based scalability and replicable effects in different populations using different outcomes. It will hopefully spawn future experimental investigations on the effect of a purpose for learning and perhaps,
eventually, improvements to educational practice.
Another innovation of this research stems from the fact that the
self-transcendent purpose predicted or affected consequential educational behaviors, even among disengaged students or students
attending urban public high schools. Behavioral economic strategies to reduce inequality such as paying low-income students for
completing their homework have been applied broadly and found
to have no consistent positive effects on overall achievement
(Fryer, 2011). Yet a free, roughly 20-min, web-based intervention
led students to choose to persist on unpleasant academic tasks and
also earn higher grades. This is a testament to the power of
psychological theory (e.g., Damon et al., 2003; Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009), to lead to behavior change in situations where
more traditional economic efforts fail (also see Ross & Nisbett,
1991). Furthermore, this research counteracts potential stereotypes
about how to motivate low-income students attending urban public

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION

schools. Many of the students in Study 1 said that they wanted to
contribute to the world beyond themselves, not just make money.
And when they said this, they were more likely to demonstrate
self-control and make progress toward long-term goals. This suggests that telling these students to focus on how they can make
more money if they go to college may not give them the motives
they need to actually make it to college graduation. Instead,
perhaps cultivating motives that transcend the self could provide
them with the personal meaning they need to sustain selfregulation.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Understanding Long-Term Effects
Social psychology has a long history of documenting counterintuitive but reproducible effects of brief interventions that affect
health, stress, or achievement months or years later, even though
the mechanisms for these effects have remained obscure (e.g.,
G. L. Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Wilson & Linville, 1982; see
Pennebaker, 2004). In these past studies and in the present research, it is often easier to understand why a manipulation would
affect immediate outcomes than it is to understand why the intervention would “stick” over time, resulting in effects on overall
GPA (G. L. Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Yeager & Walton, 2011).
High school students undoubtedly receive many messages from
valued adults entreating them to pay greater attention to their
schoolwork. Why would the brief message delivered over the
Internet in Study 2 stand out?
Extant theory and some of the present data speak to this issue,
but more research is needed. Specifically, theory has pointed to the
fact that school is an environment in which recursive processes
abound. Later knowledge builds on prior knowledge, later interactions with peers or teachers depend on relationships and reputations built in prior interactions, and later self-views and goals
depend on prior thoughts and experiences (G. L. Cohen et al.,
2009; G. L. Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Yeager & Walton, 2011).
When a social-psychological intervention redirects a key motive
for doing well in school, then it is possible for a “virtuous cycle”
to gain momentum and affect diverse outcomes. A social psychological intervention might add up to accumulated effects via small
adjustments in the probabilities of exerting self-control or deeply
learning during tedious tasks (Abelson, 1985; also see G. L. Cohen
& Sherman, 2014; Garcia & Cohen, 2012; Walton, 2014). Studies
3 and 4 speak to this possibility directly, but the full mediational
process remains undocumented.

Limitations and Future Directions
One limitation of our research is that we did not investigate
participants’ strategies for self-regulation. Did participants with
more of a self-transcendent purpose engage in mental actions to
make uninteresting tasks more appealing or were they simply
better at suppressing the urge to quit and engage in the tempting
alternative? Past research suggests that both are possible (e.g.,
Fishbach & Shah, 2006; Fishbach et al., 2010; Fishbach, Zhang, &
Koo, 2009). For instance, Sansone et al. (1992) showed that when
participants were asked to complete an uninteresting task and were
given a rationale for why it might be personally important, participants implemented ways to make it feel subjectively more interesting. They randomly varied their method of completing the task

575

(also see Sansone, Wiebe, & Morgan, 1999). Meanwhile, Mischel,
Ebbensen, and Zeiss (1972) found that self-regulation on a delay of
gratification task was facilitated through cognitive strategies to
mentally transform the tempting alternative into something that
felt less appealing. Unpacking which of these alternative strategies
emerge from the self-transcendent purpose for learning could shed
light on the underlying psychological processes in the present
research.
A crucial caveat is that our research does not definitively
show that intrinsic interest-driven motives are unimportant for
self-regulation. Instead, what we showed was that with the same
statistical power the self-transcendent purpose manipulation—
which also invoked self-oriented motives–was more reliably
different from the control manipulation that focuses exclusively
on self-oriented motives (Study 4; also see the Study 2 pilot
reported in the online supplement). Self-transcendent motives
were sometimes but not always stronger predictors than selforiented ones in a multiple regression (Study 1). The finding
that the intrinsic-interest-driven motives were “in the middle”
mirrors past longitudinal research (Yeager et al., 2012) and has
some intuitive appeal. If learners are seeking tasks that interest
them or have some other intrinsic benefit to them, then they
may show a general boost in motivation on school-related tasks.
However, those only seeking benefits for the self may not
persist on aversively tedious, low-level learning tasks in the
face of alternatives that more readily satisfy their desire for
interesting activities.
The present research has focused on the role of a purpose for
learning in skill-building activities. However when expert performance is of interest, then the belief that others are counting on you
to perform well may not be beneficial. Such worries may interfere
with working memory and increase the chance that a person will
“choke” due to heightened anxiety (Beilock, 2011). Indeed, experimental procedures designed to induce anxiety and undermine
performance sometimes explicitly involve telling participants that
others’ outcomes will be negatively affected if they fail (e.g., see
Beilock, Kulp, Holt, & Carr, 2004). Perhaps a self-transcendent
purpose would undermine high-stakes performance. Thus, an important avenue for future research will be to illuminate whether a
self-transcendent purpose is as effective in performance contexts
as it appears to be in learning contexts.
Finally, it is crucial to underscore that the self-transcendent
purpose intervention is not a “magic bullet” for underachievement.
Rather, it is a context-dependent solution to a particular psychological barrier (G. L. Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Yeager & Walton,
2011)—in this case, the feeling that tedious academic tasks are
meaningless and school has no connection to one’s purposes in
life. In settings or among individuals where this belief is not
prominent— or in settings that are not quite as recursive—then the
type of intervention tested here would not be predicted to have a
lasting effect. We think of the present results as an existence proof,
not a guaranteed effect size across all settings. Research designed
to understand the moderating mechanisms of brief interventions
and likely boundary conditions for them is a high priority in social
and developmental psychology (G. L. Cohen & Sherman, 2014;
Garcia & Cohen, 2012; Walton, 2014; Yeager & Walton, 2011;
also see Wilson, 2011).

YEAGER ET AL.

576

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Conclusion
In a recent nationally representative survey, 69% of American
K–12 teachers reported that students’ lack of interest in learning
was a problem in their classrooms. In fact, this was the classroom
problem most frequently cited by teachers (Bridgeland, Bruce, &
Hariharan, 2013). Of course, sometimes low motivation can be
addressed by simply making coursework more interesting. Yet not
all assignments can be made interesting at all times. If a teacher
connects the day’s lesson to the idiosyncratic interest of one
student (e.g., emphasizing the relevance of math for understanding
sports) it may disengage another student (e.g., a student who does
not like sports). Even when relevant connections can be made for
large groups of students, it can be difficult, logistically and convincingly, to do this for all tasks every day.
In such instances a higher order, self-transcendent purpose for
working hard and learning in school might effectively lead to
self-regulation. Strikingly, however, there is little or no focus on
promoting self-transcendent aims in expert guides for educational
practitioners (e.g., Mitchell et al., 2005; National Research Council, 2000; National Research Council & the Institute of Medicine,
2004; Pintrich & Schunk, 2002). We hope the present experimental interventions, combined with past experimental research (e.g.,
Grant, 2007, 2013), can begin to encourage a shift in thinking
toward beyond-the-self aims. Of course, encouraging a selftranscendent motive is not a replacement for other motivational
strategies, especially not self-oriented, interest-based ones. But the
data presented here show that a self-transcendent motive can in
some cases serve as an important addition to interest-based approaches.

References
Abelson, R. P. (1985). A variance explanation paradox: When a little is a
lot. Psychological Bulletin, 97, 129 –133. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.97.1
.129
Ames, C. (1992). Classrooms: Goals, structures, and student motivation.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 84, 261–271. doi:10.1037/00220663.84.3.261
Andrews, M. C. (2011). Meaningful engagement in educational activity
and purposes for learning (Doctoral dissertation, Stanford University).
Retrieved from https://stacks.stanford.edu/file/druid:qp476bx9339/
Andrews_PurposesforLearning_6-1-11-augmented.pdf
Aronson, E. (1999). The power of self-persuasion. American Psychologist,
54, 875– 884. doi:10.1037/h0088188
Aronson, J., Fried, C., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the effects of stereotype threat on African American college students by shaping theories of
intelligence. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 113–125.
doi:10.1006/jesp.2001.1491
Ashforth, B. E., & Kreiner, G. E. (1999). “How can you do it?” Dirty work
and the challenge of constructing a positive identity. Academy of Management Review, 24, 413– 434. doi:10.5465/AMR.1999.2202129
Atkinson, J. W. (1957). Motivational determinants of risk taking behavior.
Psychological Review, 64, 359 –372. doi:10.1037/h0043445
Batson, C. D. (1998). Altruism and prosocial behavior. In D. T. Gilbert,
S. T. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), The handbook of social psychology
(4th ed., Vol. 2, pp. 282–316). Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill.
Beilock, S. (2011). Choke: What the secrets of the brain reveal about
getting it right when you have to. New York, NY: Free Press.
Beilock, S. L., Kulp, C. A., Holt, L. E., & Carr, T. H. (2004). More on the
fragility of performance: Choking under pressure in mathematical prob-

lem solving. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 133, 584 –
600. doi:10.1037/0096-3445.133.4.584
Bem, D. J. (1972). Self-perception theory. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances
in experimental social psychology (Vol. 6, pp. 1– 62). New York, NY:
Academic Press.
Blackwell, L., Trzesniewski, K., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Implicit theories
of intelligence predict achievement across an adolescent transition: A
longitudinal study and an intervention. Child Development, 78, 246 –
263. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2007.00995.x
Brehm, J. W. (1966). A theory of psychological reactance. In W. W. Burke,
D. G. Lake, & W. Paine (Eds.), Organization change: A comprehensive
reader (pp. 337–390). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Bridgeland, J., Bruce, M., & Hariharan, A. (2013). The missing piece: A
national teacher survey on how social and emotional learning can
empower children and transform schools. Retrieved from http://
www.civicenterprises.net/MediaLibrary/Docs/CASEL-Report-lowres-FINAL.pdf
Bronk, K. C. (2012). A grounded theory of youth purpose. Journal of
Adolescent Research, 27, 78 –109. doi:10.1177/0743558411412958
Brophy, J. (2008). Developing students’ appreciation for what is taught
in school. Educational Psychologist, 43, 132–141. doi:10.1080/
00461520701756511
Buhrmester, M., Kwang, T., & Gosling, S. D. (2011). Amazon’s Mechanical Turk: A new source of inexpensive, yet high-quality, data? Perspectives on Psychological Science, 6, 3–5. doi:10.1177/
1745691610393980
Burrow, A. L., & Hill, P. L. (2011). Purpose as a form of identity capital
for positive youth adjustment. Developmental Psychology, 47, 1196 –
1206. doi:10.1037/a0023818
Carnevale, A. P., & Desrochers, D. M. (2003). Standards for what? The
economic roots of K–16 reform. Princeton, NJ: Communication and
Public Affairs, Office of Assessment, Equity, and Careers, Educational
Testing Service.
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (1981). Attention and self-regulation: A
control-theory approach to human behavior. New York, NY: SpringerVerlag. doi:10.1007/978-1-4612-5887-2
Cialdini, R. B. (2003). Crafting normative messages to protect the environment. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 12, 105–109.
doi:10.1111/1467-8721.01242
Cialdini, R. B., Reno, R. R., & Kallgren, C. A. (1990). A focus theory of
normative conduct: Recycling the concept of norms to reduce littering in
public places. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 1015–
1026. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.58.6.1015
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Apfel, N., & Brzustoski, P.
(2009). Recursive processes in self-affirmation: Intervening to close the
minority achievement gap. Science, 324, 400 – 403. doi:10.1126/science
.1170769
Cohen, G. L., & Prinstein, M. J. (2006). Peer contagion of aggression and
health risk behavior among adolescent males: An experimental investigation of effects on public conduct and private attitudes. Child Development, 77, 967–983. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2006.00913.x
Cohen, G. L., & Sherman, D. (2014). The psychology of change: Selfaffirmation and social psychological intervention. Annual Review of
Psychology, 65, 333–371. doi:10.1146/annurev-psych-010213-115137
Cohen, J., Cohen, P., West, S. G., & Aiken, L. S. (2003). Applied multiple
regression/correlation analysis for the behavioral sciences (3rd ed.).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Damon, W. (2008). The path to purpose: Helping our children find their
calling in life. New York, NY: Free Press.
Damon, W., Menon, J., & Bronk, K. C. (2003). The development of
purpose during adolescence. Applied Developmental Science, 7, 119 –
128. doi:10.1207/S1532480XADS0703_2
Diekman, A. B., Clark, E. K., Johnston, A. M., Brown, E. R., & Steinberg,
M. (2011). Malleability in communal goals and beliefs influences at-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION
traction to stem careers: Evidence for a goal congruity perspective.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 101, 902–918. doi:
10.1037/a0025199
Dik, B. J., Steger, M. F., Gibson, A., & Peisner, W. (2011). Make your
work matter: Development and pilot evaluation of a purpose-centered
career education intervention. New Directions for Youth Development,
2011, 59 –73. doi:10.1002/yd.428
Duckworth, A. L., & Carlson, S. M. (2013). Self-regulation and school
success. In B. W. Sokol, F. M. E. Grouzet, & U. Müller (Eds.), Selfregulation and autonomy: Social and developmental dimensions of
human conduct (pp. 208 –230). New York, NY: Cambridge University
Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139152198.015
Duckworth, A., Kirby, T., Tsukayama, E., Berstein, H., & Ericsson, K.
(2011). Deliberate practice spells success: Why grittier competitors
triumph at the National Spelling Bee. Social Psychological and Personality Science, 2, 174 –181. doi:10.1177/1948550610385872
Duckworth, A. L., Peterson, C., Matthews, M. D., & Kelly, D. R. (2007).
Grit: Perseverance and passion for long-term goals. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 1087–1101. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.92
.6.1087
Duckworth, A. L., & Quinn, P. D. (2009). Development and validation of
the Short Grit Scale (GRIT–S). Journal of Personality Assessment, 91,
166 –174. doi:10.1080/00223890802634290
Duckworth, A. L., Tsukayama, E., & Kirby, T. (2013). Is it really selfcontrol? Examining the predictive power of the delay of gratification
task. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 39, 843– 855. doi:
10.1177/0146167213482589
Duffy, R. D., & Dik, B. J. (2009). Beyond the self: External influences in
the career development process. The Career Development Quarterly, 58,
29 – 43. doi:10.1002/j.2161-0045.2009.tb00171.x
Dunn, E. W., Aknin, L. B., & Norton, M. I. (2008). Spending money on
others promotes happiness. Science, 319, 1687–1688. doi:10.1126/
science.1150952
Dutton, J. E., Roberts, L. M., & Bednar, J. (2010). Pathways for positive
identity construction at work: Four types of positive identity and the
building of social resources. The Academy of Management Review, 35,
265–293. doi:10.5465/AMR.2010.48463334
Dynarski, S., Scott-Clayton, J., & Wiederspan, M. (2013). Simplifying tax
incentives and aid for college: Progress and prospects. In J. R. Brown
(Ed.), Tax policy and the economy (Vol. 27, pp. 161–202). Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press. doi:10.1086/671247
Eccles, J. S. (2009). Who am I and what am I going to do with my life?
Personal and collective identities as motivators of action. Educational
Psychologist, 44, 78 – 89. doi:10.1080/00461520902832368
Eccles, J. S., Adler, T. F., Futterman, R., Goff, S. B., Kaczala, C. M.,
Meece, J. L., & Midgley, C. (1983). Expectancies, values, and academic
behaviors. In J. T. Spence (Ed.), Achievement and achievement motivation (pp. 75–146). San Francisco, CA: Freeman.
Eccles, J. S., & Wigfield, A. (1995). In the mind of the actor: The structure
of adolescents’ achievement task values and expectancy-related beliefs.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 21, 215–225. doi:10.1177/
0146167295213003
Eccles, J. S., & Wigfield, A. (2002). Motivational beliefs, values, and
goals. Annual Review of Psychology, 53, 109 –132. doi:10.1146/annurev
.psych.53.100901.135153
Elliot, A. J., Conroy, D. E., Barron, K. E., & Murayama, K. (2010).
Achievement motives and goals: A developmental analysis. In R. M.
Lerner, M. E. Lamb, & A. M. Freund (Eds.), The handbook of life-span
development (Vol. 2, pp. 474 –510). New York, NY: Wiley. doi:
10.1002/9780470880166.hlsd002013
Elliot, A. J., & McGregor, H. A. (2001). A 2 ⫻ 2 achievement goal
framework. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 501–519.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.80.3.501

577

Emmons, R. A. (1986). Personal strivings: An approach to personality and
subjective well-being. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51,
1058 –1068. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.51.5.1058
Ericsson, K. A. (2006). The influence of experience and deliberate
practice on the development of superior expert performance. In K. A.
Ericsson, N. Charness, P. J. Feltovich, & R. R. Hoffman (Eds.), The
Cambridge handbook of expertise and expert performance (pp. 683–
704). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/
CBO9780511816796.038
Ericsson, K. A. (2007). An expert-performance perspective of research on
medical expertise: The study of clinical performance. Medical Education, 41, 1124 –1130. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2923.2007.02946.x
Ericsson, K. A. (Ed.). (2009). Development of professional expertise:
Toward measurement of expert performance and design of optimal
learning environments. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511609817
Ericsson, K. A., Krampe, R. T., & Tesch-Römer, C. (1993). The role of
deliberate practice in the acquisition of expert performance. Psychological Review, 100, 363– 406. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.100.3.363
Ericsson, K. A., & Ward, P. (2007). Capturing the naturally occurring
superior performance of experts in the laboratory toward a science of
expert and exceptional performance. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 16, 346 –350. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8721.2007.00533.x
Erikson, E. H. (1968). Identity: Youth and crisis. New York, NY: Norton.
Evans, G. W., & Rosenbaum, J. (2008). Self-regulation and the incomeachievement gap. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 23, 504 –514.
doi:10.1016/j.ecresq.2008.07.002
Eyler, J. (2002). Reflection: Linking service and learning-linking students
and communities. Journal of Social Issues, 58, 517–534. doi:10.1111/
1540-4560.00274
Eyler, J., & Giles, D. E., Jr. (1999). Where’s the learning in servicelearning? San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Feiler, D. C., Tost, L. P., & Grant, A. M. (2012). Mixed reasons, missed
givings: The costs of blending egoistic and altruistic reasons in donation
requests. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48, 1322–1328.
doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2012.05.014
Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Fishbach, A., & Shah, J. Y. (2006). Self-control in action: Implicit dispositions toward goals and away from temptations. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 90, 820 – 832. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.90.5.820
Fishbach, A., & Trope, Y. (2005). The substitutability of external control
and self-control. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 41, 256 –
270. doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2004.07.002
Fishbach, A., Zhang, Y., & Koo, M. (2009). The dynamics of selfregulation. European Review of Social Psychology, 20, 315–344. doi:
10.1080/10463280903275375
Fishbach, A., Zhang, Y., & Trope, Y. (2010). Counteractive evaluation:
Asymmetric shifts in the implicit value of conflicting motivations.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 29 –38. doi:10.1016/j
.jesp.2009.09.008
Ford, M. E., & Nichols, C. W. (1987). A taxonomy of human goals and
some possible applications. In M. E. Ford & D. H. Ford (Eds.), Humans
as self-constructing living systems: Putting the framework to work (pp.
289 –311). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Frankl, V. E. (1963). Man’s search for meaning. New York, NY: Washington Square Press.
Fryer, R. G. (2011). Financial incentives and student achievement: Evidence from randomized trials. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126,
1755–1798. doi:10.1093/qje/qjr045
Fujita, K. (2011). On conceptualizing self-control as more than the effortful
inhibition of impulses. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 15,
352–366. doi:10.1177/1088868311411165

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

578

YEAGER ET AL.

Galla, B., Plummer, B., White, R., Meketon, D., D’Mello, S. K., &
Duckworth, A. (2014). Development and validation of the diligence
task: A behavioral measure of individual differences in academic diligence. Unpublished manuscript, Department of Psychology, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (2012). A social-psychological approach to
educational intervention. In E. Shafir (Ed.), Behavioral foundations of
policy (pp. 329 –350). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Goldstein, N. J., Cialdini, R. B., & Griskevicius, V. (2008). A room with
a viewpoint: Using social norms to motivate environmental conservation
in hotels. Journal of Consumer Research, 35, 472– 482. doi:10.1086/
586910
Grant, A. M. (2007). Relational job design and the motivation to make a
prosocial difference. The Academy of Management Review, 32, 393–
417. doi:10.5465/AMR.2007.24351328
Grant, A. M. (2008). Does intrinsic motivation fuel the prosocial fire?
Motivational synergy in predicting persistence, performance, and productivity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 93, 48 –58. doi:10.1037/00219010.93.1.48
Grant, A. M. (2013). Rethinking the extraverted sales ideal: The ambivert
advantage. Psychological Science, 24, 1024 –1030. doi:10.1177/
0956797612463706
Grant, A. M., & Campbell, E. M. (2007). Doing good, doing harm, being
well and burning out: The interactions of perceived prosocial and antisocial impact in service work. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 80, 665– 691. doi:10.1348/096317906X169553
Grant, A. M., & Hofmann, D. A. (2011). It’s not all about me: Motivating
hospital hand hygiene by focusing on patients. Psychological Science,
22, 1494 –1499. doi:10.1177/0956797611419172
Grant, A. M., & Patil, S. V. (2012). Challenging the norm of self-interest:
Minority influence and transitions to helping norms in work units. The
Academy of Management Review, 37, 547–568. doi:10.5465/amr.2010
.0437
Grant, A. M., & Rothbard, N. P. (2013). When in doubt, seize the day?
Security values, prosocial values, and proactivity under ambiguity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 98, 810 – 819. doi:10.1037/a0032873
Grant, A. M., & Sonnentag, S. (2010). Doing good buffers against feeling
bad: Prosocial impact compensates for negative task and selfevaluations. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
111, 13–22. doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2009.07.003
Harackiewicz, J. M., Canning, E. A., Tibbetts, Y., Giffen, C. J., Blair, S. S.,
Rouse, D. I., & Hyde, J. S. (2014). Closing the social class achievement
gap for first-generation students in undergraduate biology. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 106, 375–389. doi:10.1037/a0034679
Harackiewicz, J. M., Rozek, C. R., Hulleman, C. S., & Hydes, J. S. (2012).
Helping parents to motivate adolescents in mathematics and science: An
experimental test of a utility-value intervention. Psychological Science,
23, 899 –906. doi:10.1177/0956797611435530
Harackiewicz, J. M., & Sansone, C. (1991). Goals and intrinsic motivation:
You can get there from here. In M. L. Maehr & P. R. Pintrich (Eds.),
Advances in motivation and achievement: Goals and self-regulatory
processes (Vol. 7, pp. 21– 45). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Hasebe, Y., Nucci, L., & Nucci, M. S. (2004). Parental control of the
personal domain and adolescent symptoms of psychopathology: A crossnational study in the United States and Japan. Child Development, 75,
815– 828. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2004.00708.x
Higgins, E. T. (2005). Value from regulatory fit. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 14, 209 –213. doi:10.1111/j.0963-7214.2005
.00366.x
Hill, P. L., Burrow, A. L., & Sumner, R. (2013). Addressing important
questions in the field of adolescent purpose. Child Development Perspectives, 7, 232–236. doi:10.1111/cdep.12048
Hughes, E. C. (1958). Men and their work. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.

Hughes, E. C. (1962). Good people and dirty work. Social Problems, 10,
3–11. doi:10.2307/799402
Hulleman, C. S., Durik, A. M., Schweigert, S. B., & Harackiewicz, J. M.
(2008). Task values, achievement goals, and interest: An integrative
analysis. Journal of Educational Psychology, 100, 398 – 416. doi:
10.1037/0022-0663.100.2.398
Hulleman, C. S., Godes, O., Hendricks, B. L., & Harackiewicz, J. M.
(2010). Enhancing interest and performance with a utility value intervention. Journal of Educational Psychology, 102, 880 – 895. doi:
10.1037/a0019506
Hulleman, C. S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2009). Promoting interest and
performance in high school science classes. Science, 326, 1410 –1412.
doi:10.1126/science.1177067
Jang, H. (2008). Supporting students’ motivation, engagement, and learning during an uninteresting activity. Journal of Educational Psychology,
100, 798 – 811. doi:10.1037/a0012841
Kane, M. J., Hambrick, D. Z., Tuholski, S. W., Wilhelm, O., Payne, T. W.,
& Engle, R. W. (2004). The generality of working memory capacity: A
latent variable approach to verbal and visuospatial memory span and
reasoning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 133, 189 –
217. doi:10.1037/0096-3445.133.2.189
Kaufman, A. S., & Kaufman, N. L. (1990). Manual for the Kaufman Brief
Intelligence Test. Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service.
Koltko-Rivera, M. E. (2006). Rediscovering the later version of Maslow’s
hierarchy of needs: Self-transcendence and opportunities for theory,
research, and unification. Review of General Psychology, 10, 302–317.
doi:10.1037/1089-2680.10.4.302
Lapsley, D., & Yeager, D. (in press). Moral-character education. In I.
Weiner (Ed.), Handbook of psychology (pp. 1– 42). New York, NY:
Wiley.
Lee, J. Q., McInerney, D. M., Liem, G. A. D., & Ortiga, Y. P. (2010). The
relationships between future goals and achievement goal orientations:
An intrinsic-extrinsic motivation perspective. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 35, 264 –279. doi:10.1016/j.cedpsych.2010.04.004
Lepper, M. R., Corpus, J. H., & Iyengar, S. S. (2005). Intrinsic and
extrinsic motivational orientations in the classroom: Age differences and
academic correlates. Journal of Educational Psychology, 97, 184 –196.
doi:10.1037/0022-0663.97.2.184
Little, B. (1983). Personal projects: A rationale and method for investigation. Environment and Behavior, 15, 273–309. doi:10.1177/
0013916583153002
Loewenstein, G. (1996). Out of control: Visceral influences on behavior.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 65, 272–292.
doi:10.1006/obhd.1996.0028
Markus, H., & Nurius, P. (1986). Possible selves. American Psychologist,
41, 954 –969. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.41.9.954
Marshall, S. K. (2001). Do I matter? Construct validation of adolescents’
perceived mattering to parents and friends. Journal of Adolescence, 24,
473– 490. doi:10.1006/jado.2001.0384
Maslow, A. H. (1969). The farther reaches of human nature. Journal of
Transpersonal Psychology, 1, 1–9.
Massey, E. K., Gebhardt, W. A., & Garnefski, N. (2008). Adolescent goal
content and pursuit: A review of the literature from the past 16 years.
Developmental Review, 28, 421– 460. doi:10.1016/j.dr.2008.03.002
Michaels, J. L., Parkin, S. S., & Vallacher, R. R. (2013). Destiny is in the
details: Action identification in the construction and destruction of
meaning. In J. Hicks & C. Routledge (Eds.), The experience of meaning
in life: Emerging themes and controversies (pp. 103–115). New York,
NY: Springer Press. doi:10.1007/978-94-007-6527-6_8
Miller, D. T. (1999). The norm of self-interest. American Psychologist, 54,
1053–1060. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.54.12.1053
Mischel, W., Cantor, N., & Feldman, S. (1996). Principles of self-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION
regulation: The nature of willpower and self-control. In E. T. Higgins &
A. W. Kruglanski (Eds.), Social psychology: Handbook of basic principles (pp. 329 –360). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Mischel, W., Ebbensen, E. B., & Zeiss, A. R. (1972). Cognitive and
attentional mechanisms in delay of gratification. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 21, 204 –218. doi:10.1037/h0032198
Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., & Rodriguez, M. L. (1989). Delay of gratification
in children. Science, 244, 933–938. doi:10.1126/science.2658056
Mitchell, K., Shkolnik, J., Song, M., Uekawa, K., Murphy, R., Garet, M.,
& Means, B. (2005). Rigor, relevance and results: The quality of teacher
assignments and student work in new and conventional high schools.
Washington, DC: American Institute for Research.
Moffitt, T. E., Arseneault, L., Belsky, D., Dickson, N., Hancox, R. J.,
Harrington, H., . . . Caspi, A. (2011). A gradient of childhood selfcontrol predicts health, wealth, and public safety. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 108,
2693–2698. doi:10.1073/pnas.1010076108
Moran, S., Bundick, M. J., Malin, H., & Reilly, T. S. (2013). How
supportive of their specific purposes do youth believe their family and
friends are? Journal of Adolescent Research, 28, 348 –377. doi:10.1177/
0743558412457816
National Research Council. (2000). How people learn: Brain, mind, and
school. Washington, DC: The National Academic Press.
National Research Council & the Institute of Medicine. (2004). Engaging
schools: Fostering high school students’ motivation to learn. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Nicholls, J. G. (1984). Achievement motivation: Conceptions of ability,
subjective experience, task choice, and performance. Psychological Review, 91, 328 –346. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.91.3.328
Nucci, L. (1996). Morality and the personal sphere of actions. In E. S.
Reed, E. Turiel, & T. Brown (Eds.), Values and knowledge (pp. 41– 60).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Olivola, C. Y., & Shafir, E. (2013). The martyrdom effect: When pain and
effort increase prosocial contributions. Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making, 26, 91–105. doi:10.1002/bdm.767
Oyserman, D., & Destin, M. (2010). Identity-based motivation: Implications for intervention. The Counseling Psychologist, 38, 1001–1043.
doi:10.1177/0011000010374775
Patall, E., Cooper, H., & Robinson, J. (2008). The effects of choice on
intrinsic motivation and related outcomes: A meta-analysis of research
findings. Psychological Bulletin, 134, 270 –300. doi:10.1037/0033-2909
.134.2.270
Patrick, S. D., & Duckworth, A. L. (2013, May). Empirical support for a
tripartite taxonomy of character in adolescents. Poster presented at the
25th annual convention of the Association for Psychological Science,
Washington, DC.
Pennebaker, J. W. (2004). Theories, therapies, and taxpayers: On the
complexities of the expressive writing paradigm. Clinical Psychology:
Science and Practice, 11, 138 –142. doi:10.1093/clipsy.bph063
Pintrich, P. R., & Schunk, D. H. (2002). Motivation in education: Theory,
research, and applications (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice
Hall Merrill.
Rachlin, H., Brown, J., & Cross, D. (2000). Discounting in judgments of
delay and probability. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 13,
145–159. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1099-0771(200004/06)13:2⬍145::AIDBDM320⬎3.0.CO;2-4
Raven, J., Raven, J. C., & Court, J. H. (1998). Manual for Raven’s
Progressive Matrices and Vocabulary scales. Section 3: The standard
progressive matrices. Oxford, England: Oxford Psychologists Press.
Raytheon Company. (2012). Math relevance to U.S. middle school students. Retrieved from http://www.raytheon.com/newsroom/rtnwcm/
groups/corporate/documents/content/rtn12_studentsmth_results.pdf
Roderick, M., Nagaoka, J., & Allensworth, E. (2006). From high school to
the future: A first look at Chicago Public School graduates’ college

579

enrollment, college preparation, and graduation from four-year colleges. Chicago, IL: Consortium on Chicago School Research.
Ross, L., & Nisbett, R. E. (1991). The person and the situation: Perspectives of social psychology. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Self-determination theory and the
facilitation of intrinsic motivation, social development, and well-being.
American Psychologist, 55, 68 –78. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.55.1.68
Ryu, M. (2012). The education gap: Understanding African American and
Hispanic attainment disparities in higher education. Washington, DC:
American Council on Education.
Sansone, C., Weir, C., Harpster, L., & Morgan, C. (1992). Once a boring
task always a boring task? Interest as a self-regulatory mechanism.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 379 –390. doi:
10.1037/0022-3514.63.3.379
Sansone, C., Wiebe, D. J., & Morgan, C. (1999). Self-regulating interest:
The moderating role of hardiness and conscientiousness. Journal of
Personality, 67, 701–733. doi:10.1111/1467-6494.00070
Schwartz, S. H. (1992). Universals in the content and structure of values:
Theoretical advance and empirical tests in 20 countries. Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology, 25, 1– 65. doi:10.1016/S00652601(08)60281-6
Sherman, D. K., Hartson, K. A., Binning, K. R., Purdie-Vaughns, V.,
Garcia, J., Taborsky-Barba, S., . . . Cohen, G. L. (2013). Deflecting the
trajectory and changing the narrative: How self-affirmation affects academic performance and motivation under identity threat. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 104, 591– 618. doi:10.1037/
a0031495
Simmons, J. P., Nelson, L. D., & Simonsohn, U. (2011). False-positive
psychology: Undisclosed flexibility in data collection and analysis allows presenting anything as significant. Psychological Science, 22,
1359 –1366. doi:10.1177/0956797611417632
Skinner, E. A., Kindermann, T. A., & Furrer, C. J. (2009). A motivational
perspective on engagement and disaffection conceptualization and assessment of children’s behavioral and emotional participation in academic activities in the classroom. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 69, 493–525. doi:10.1177/0013164408323233
Steger, M. F. (2012). Experiencing meaning in life: Optimal functioning at
the nexus of spirituality, psychopathology, and well-being. In P. T. P.
Wong (Ed.), The human quest for meaning (2nd ed., pp. 165–184). New
York, NY: Routledge.
Steger, M. F., Bundick, M., & Yeager, D. S. (2012). The development of
meaning during adolescence. In R. J. Levesque (Ed.), Encyclopedia of
adolescence (pp. 1666 –1777). New York, NY: Springer Press.
Steger, M. F., Frazier, P., Oishi, S., & Kaler, M. (2006). The Meaning in
Life Questionnaire: Assessing the presence of and search for meaning in
life. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 53, 80 –93. doi:10.1037/00220167.53.1.80
Steger, M. F., Kashdan, T. B., & Oishi, S. (2008). Being good by doing
good: Daily eudaimonic activity and well-being. Journal of Research in
Personality, 42, 22– 42. doi:10.1016/j.jrp.2007.03.004
Stephens, N. M., Fryberg, S. A., Markus, H. R., Johnson, C., & Covarrubias, R. (2012). Unseen disadvantage: How American universities’ focus
on independence undermines the academic performance of firstgeneration college students. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102, 1178 –1197. doi:10.1037/a0027143
Stigler, J. W., & Hiebert, J. (1999). The teaching gap: Best ideas from the
world’s teachers for improving education in the classroom. New York,
NY: Free Press.
Stipek, D. J. (2004). Motivation to learn: Integrating theory and practice.
Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Thaler, R. H., & Shefrin, H. M. (1981). An economic theory of self-control.
Journal of Political Economy, 89, 392– 406. doi:10.1086/260971

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

580

YEAGER ET AL.

Trope, Y., & Fishbach, A. (2000). Counteractive self-control in overcoming temptation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 493–
506. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.79.4.493
Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2010). Construal-level theory of psychological
distance. Psychological Review, 117, 440 – 463. doi:10.1037/a0018963
Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2011). Construal level theory. In P. Van Lange,
A. W. Kruglanski, & E. T. Higgins (Eds.), Handbook of theories of
social psychology (pp. 118 –134). London, England: Sage. doi:10.4135/
9781446249215.n7
Tsukayama, E., Duckworth, A. L., & Kim, B. E. (2013). Domain-specific
impulsivity in school-age children. Developmental Science, 16, 879 –
893. doi:10.1111/desc.12067
Tukey, J. W. (1977). Exploratory data analysis. Reading, MA: AddisonWesley.
U.S. Congress Joint Economic Committee. (2012). STEM education: Preparing jobs for the future. Retrieved from http://www.jec.senate.gov/
public//index.cfm?a⫽Files.Serve&File_id⫽6aaa7e1f-9586-47be-82e7326f47658320
Vallacher, R. R., & Wegner, D. M. (1989). Levels of personal agency:
Individual variation in action identification. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 57, 660 – 671. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.57.4.660
Vansteenkiste, M., Lens, W., & Deci, E. L. (2006). Intrinsic versus extrinsic goal contents in self-determination theory: Another look at the
quality of academic motivation. Educational Psychologist, 41, 19 –31.
doi:10.1207/s15326985ep4101_4
Vansteenkiste, M., Simons, J., Lens, W., Sheldon, K. M., & Deci, E. L.
(2004). Motivating learning, performance, and persistence: The synergistic effects of intrinsic goal contents and autonomy-supportive contexts. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87, 246 –260.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.87.2.246
Vohs, K. D. (2013). The poor’s poor mental power. Science, 341, 969 –970.
doi:10.1126/science.1244172
Walton, G. M. (2014). The new science of wise psychological interventions. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 23, 73– 82. doi:
10.1177/0963721413512856

View publication stats

Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A brief social-belonging intervention improves academic and health outcomes among minority students.
Science, 331, 1447–1451. doi:10.1126/science.1198364
Westernelectric555. (2008). File: Ti83plus.jpg [Image file]. Retrieved from
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ti83plus.jpg
Wilson, T. D. (2011). Redirect: The surprising new science of psychological change. New York, NY: Little, Brown and Company.
Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. (1982). Improving the academic performance of college freshmen: Attribution therapy revisited. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 42, 367–376. doi:10.1037/00223514.42.2.367
Wrzesniewski, A., Dutton, J. E., & Debebe, G. (2003). Interpersonal
sensemaking and the meaning of work. In B. M. Staw & R. Kramer
(Eds.), Research in organizational behavior (Vol. 25, pp. 93–135). New
York, NY: Elsevier Science. doi:10.1016/S0191-3085(03)25003-6
Yeager, D. S., & Bundick, M. J. (2009). The role of purposeful work
goals in promoting meaning in life and in schoolwork during adolescence. Journal of Adolescent Research, 24, 423– 452. doi:10.1177/
0743558409336749
Yeager, D. S., Bundick, M. J., & Johnson, R. (2012). The role of future
work goal motives in adolescent identity development: A longitudinal
mixed-methods investigation. Contemporary Educational Psychology,
37, 206 –217. doi:10.1016/j.cedpsych.2012.01.004
Yeager, D. S., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., Brzustoski, P.,
Master, A., . . . Cohen, G. L. (2014). Breaking the cycle of mistrust:
Wise interventions to provide critical feedback across the racial divide.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 143, 804 – 824. doi:
10.1037/a0033906
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological interventions
in education: They’re not magic. Review of Educational Research, 81,
267–301. doi:10.3102/0034654311405999

Received September 16, 2013
Revision received March 10, 2014
Accepted March 31, 2014 䡲

