RUNNING HEAD: LAY THEORIES OF SELF-CONTROL

In: C. Zedelius, B. C. N. Muller, & J. Schooler (in press). The Science of Lay Theories: How
Beliefs Shape Our Cognition, Behavior, and Health. Springer.

Lay Theories of Self-Control

Veronika Job
University of Zurich

Gregory M. Walton
Stanford University

Veronika Job (corresponding author)
Department of Psychology, University of Zurich, Binzmuehlestrasse 14/11, 8050 Zurich,
Switzerland
Phone: +41 (0)44 635 72 83 or +41(0)78 633 56 61, Fax: +41 (0) 44 635 75 19
Email: v.job@psychologie.uzh.ch
Gregory M. Walton
Department of Psychology, Stanford University, 450 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305

	

1	

Abstract
Why do people sometimes fail to regulate their behavior effectively to accomplish their goals?
How can they do better? This chapter explores the role of prominent beliefs in society about the
nature of willpower, and how these beliefs shape self-regulation. Social factors can convey, and
people can believe, that self-control relies on a limited resource and, when this resource is
drawn down, so too is the capacity to exert self-control (limited-resource theory). Or people can
reject this idea, and believe instead that exerting self-control can become self-energizing and
even boost later performance (nonlimited-resource theory). Longitudinal and experimental
studies show that these beliefs or lay theories causally affect how people strive toward goals
and ultimately their well-being. The belief that willpower relies on a limited resource
undermines self-control in the laboratory and in everyday life, especially as demands
accumulate. This theory sensitizes people to cues about the availability of mental resources,
such as feelings of tiredness and the consumption of sugar long before any actual lack of
resources, and facilitates the goal to rest following self-control efforts. By contrast, the belief
that willpower is not so dependent helps people maintain their self-control and make progress
on valued personal goals, and increases well-being.

Keywords: lay theories, self-control, self-regulation, ego depletion, goal-striving, well-being,
rest goal, self-efficacy

	

2	

People sometimes fail to behave as they intend. Children who participated in the famous
marshmallow experiments wanted to wait and not to eat a tempting marshmallow placed on the
plate before them. They knew that they would get a second marshmallow if they managed to
wait until the experimenter came back. Still, many children ate the one marshmallow losing the
chance to get a second one (Mischel, Shoda, & Rodriguez, 1989). Often people give in to
temptations and immediate impulses at the cost of their long-term goals. Aggression and
violence, over-eating, impulsive spending and sexual behavior, as well as drug addiction are
examples of failures in self-control (Baumeister & Heatherton, 1996; Gottfredson & Hirschi,
1990; Vohs & Faber, 2007). They can have disastrous consequences for an individual and high
costs for society as a whole. Therefore, considerable psychological research has aimed to
understand self-control failures and investigate ways to improve self-control. The research
reviewed in this chapter focused on people’s beliefs about the availability of self-control
capacity as an important predictor of their self-control.
During the last few decades, social-psychological research on self-control has been
dominated by a model that uses a simple metaphor to explain self-control failures: the strength
model of self-control (Baumeister, Bratslavsky, Muraven, & Tice 1998; Muraven, Tice, &
Baumeister, 1998). This model suggests that self-control relies on a limited resource. Engaging
in self-control draws down this resource, leaving the individual with reduced capacity to exert
further self-control. In support for this theory, studies have found that after people have exerted
self-control on one task subsequent self-control performance is impaired, even on a very
different kind of task. This is termed the ego depletion effect. The strength model of selfcontrol stimulated an impressive array of empirical research. Ego depletion effects were
documented for outcomes as diverse as intellectual performance (Schmeichel, Vohs, &
Baumeister, 2003), information processing (Fischer, Greitemeyer, & Frey, 2008), impression
management (Vohs, Baumeister, & Ciarocco, 2005), and resisting violent responses to a

	

3	

partner’s provocation (Finkel, DeWall, Slotter, Oaten, & Foshee, 2009) (for meta-analytic
summaries and controversies, see Carter, Kofler, Forster, McCullough, 2015; Hagger, Wood,
Stiff, & Chatzisarantis, 2010). Indeed, ego depletion has been described as a universal
phenomenon based in physiology (Gailliot & Baumeister, 2007).
However, increasing evidence questions this model. New research finds that the ego
depletion effect is not inevitable but is affected by motivation (e.g., Inzlicht & Schmeichel,
2012; Inzlicht, Schmeichel, & Macrae, 2014; Molden et al., 2012) and other moderators (for
overviews see Loschelder & Friese, in press; Masicampo, Martin, & Anderson, 2014). For
instance, monetary incentives, autonomy, and positive mood can prevent ego depletion effects
(Moller, Deci, & Ryan, 2006; Muraven & Slessareva, 2003; Tice, Baumeister, Shmueli, &
Muraven, 2007). Further, people’s expectancies about their ability to exert self-control
following the exertion of self-control can moderate ego depletion. People were told that
performing an effortful task (controlling their emotions) could either improve or harm
performance on a subsequent task (Martijn, Tenbült, Merckelbach, Dreezens, & de Vries,
2002). Participants’ subsequent self-control performance confirmed their expectations: Those
who expected self-control depletion performed worse, while those who expected a self-control
boost performed better.
We ask a more general question. Perhaps it is not just that motivation helps people
overcome depletion. Perhaps lay theories about self-control in general give rise to ego depletion
in the first place (see also Mukhopadhyay & Johar, 2005). People may draw from society’s
general theories about the nature of self-control capacity. These general theories are expressed,
for example, in cultural products like movies or advertisements that echo and promulgate a
specific belief (“You’re not you when you’re hungry”). Holding a global theory that difficult
tasks deplete one, making it difficult to sustain self-control efforts, may make people feel
depleted, exhausted, and in need of rest and replenishment when they face high demands. We

	

4	

expected that people who do not endorse this limited theory on self-control—who instead
believe that self-control efforts can even become self-energizing—may not experience
depletion.
In this chapter we provide an overview of research on lay theories of self-control.
Laboratory research shows that these theories, both measured as an individual difference and
manipulated to examine causality, predict performance as people take on a series of self-control
tasks. The theory that self-control does not rely on a limited resource helps people sustain selfcontrol performance. Further, theories of self-control matter in everyday life settings. They
predict self-regulatory success as well as well-being, specifically when people face high
demands.
Measuring Lay Theories of Willpower
A first step to investigating people’s lay theories on self-control was to develop a
measure. Previous research showed that lay theories (e.g., of the malleability of personal
attributes) are typically domain specific (Dweck, 1999). Since we expected the same for lay
theories of self-control, we decided to begin by focusing on strenuous mental activities. We
developed a scale containing six items that reflected the belief that self-control, for which we
also use the colloquial term willpower, relies on a limited and easily depleted resource (limitedresource theory; e.g., “After a strenuous mental activity your energy is depleted and you must
rest to get it refueled again”). Reverse-coded items (e.g., “After a strenuous mental activity,
you feel energized for further challenging activities”) referred to the opposite belief: They
reject the idea that willpower is highly constrained and, instead, suggest that exerting willpower
can be energizing. We called this belief a nonlimited theory about willpower (Table 1). People
with a nonlimited theory do not necessarily believe that self-control capacity is infinite or that
they can exert self-control endlessly, never needing to rest or sleep. It is not an “unlimited”
belief. However, they reject the view that willpower is readily depleted by acts of self-control.

	

5	

Depending on the research question and the purpose of a study, we have developed
additional scales assessing lay theories in other domains, like resistance to temptation, emotion
control, and physical exertion (Bernecker & Job, 2015a, in press). The domain-specific scales
represent distinct factors that best predict specific behavior when matched to the behavior in
question. For example, in a study conducted with Type 2 diabetes patients, only willpower
theories in the domain of resisting temptations predicted junk food eating and only willpower
theories in the domain of strenuous physical activity predicted physical activity (Bernecker &
Job, 2015a).
The willpower theories scales we have developed so far are certainly not exhaustive and
future research may well develop measures in other self-control domains.
Do People Experience Ego-Depletion Only if They Believe that Willpower Relies on a
Limited Resource?
Our first set of studies tested whether ego depletion is “all in your head,” that is,
whether if occurs only if people believe that willpower relies on a limited resource (Job,
Dweck, & Walton, 2010).
In a first study, we tested the hypothesis that peoples’ habitual lay theories about
willpower, as assessed with the “strenuous mental activity” scale, would moderate the ego
depletion effect. After filling out the scale, participants completed a difficult self-control task
that has been used in previous research to induce a state of depletion, or an easier version of the
task that does not require self-control. We then assessed a classic laboratory measure of selfcontrol: Stroop performance. Color words (red, green, yellow, and blue) appeared on a
computer screen in one of the four colors. Participants were instructed to indicate the color of
the font, which either matched or did not match the meaning of the word. This task requires
self-control because on incongruent trials (e.g., the word “red” displayed in green) people have
to suppress the meaning of the word. Previous research has found ego depletion effects on

	

6	

performance on these trials (Inzlicht, McKay, & Aronson, 2006; Webb & Sheeran, 2003).
Participants who held a limited-resource theory showed the same pattern. After completing the
difficult rather than easy initial task, they made more mistakes on incongruent trials on the
Stroop task. But participants who held a non-limited theory performed equally well whether
they had completed a difficult “depleting” or nondepleting task first. These results have been
replicated several times; by us (Job, Walton, Bernecker, & Dweck, 2013) and independently
(Chow, Hui, & Lau, 2015; Salmon, Adriaanse, De Vet, Fennis, & De Ridder, 2014).
Research also extends these findings to other self-control domains, including resistance
to temptation (Bernecker & Job, in press). In one study, participants who had to resist a
tempting food (freshly baked buns) (see Baumeister et al., 1998) later showed poor Stroop
performance to the extent that they endorsed the theory that people have a limited capacity to
resist temptations. Illustrating the domain-specificity of willpower theories, people’s theories
about whether strenuous mental activities depend on a limited resource did not predict
performance in this study (the two scales were only modestly correlated). Another study
examined theories about emotion control (Bernecker & Job, in press, Study 2). We manipulated
whether people had to suppress their emotions during a funny video (see Brown & McConnell,
2011). Lay theories about emotion control (but not strenuous mental activity) predicted how
long people persisted on a subsequent frustrating task. People who thought that their capacity to
control emotions depends on a limited resource persisted less long when they had had to
suppress their emotions than when they had not. But people who thought the capacity to control
emotions does not depend on a limited resource showed no decrement in persistence when they
had had to suppress their emotions.
Taken together, these studies suggest that people who hold nonlimited willpower
theories do not experience ego depletion in a wide range of self-control domains. Moreover,
they illustrate that theories of willpower are domain specific. If people think that strenuous

	

7	

mental activity drains a limited resource, they become depleted after such a task and show
impaired self-control even in other domains (e.g., Stroop). However, they do not necessarily
feel depleted after resisting a temptation, since they do not necessarily believe the resistance to
temptations depends on a limited and depletable resource. To matter, the implicit theory
assessed in a research study has to match the initial, “depleting” task.
In the studies described so far, theories about willpower were only measured. They thus
do not demonstrate their causal effect. Perhaps people who actually have greater self-control in
a domain see this self-control as less limited, and this is why they can maintain their selfcontrol performance as self-control demands accumulate. To address possibilities like this and
test the causal effects of willpower theories, we manipulated theories about willpower using
two biased questionnaires containing easy-to agree-with items that endorsed either a limited or
a nonlimited resource theory (e.g., “Working on a strenuous mental task can make you feel
tired such that you need a break before accomplishing a new task” vs. “Sometimes, working on
a strenuous mental task can make you feel energized for further challenging activities”, see
Table 2). This procedure evokes thoughts consistent with a specific theory. Manipulation
checks consistently show that in each condition participants agreed with the suggested theory.
As predicted, in the context of strenuous mental activity, participants led to endorse the limited
resource theory showed ego depletion (Job et al., 2010). They performed worse after they had
completed a “depleting” task as compared to the nondepleting control task. In contrast,
participants led to endorse the nonlimited theory showed no drop in self-control performance
following the initial “depleting” task as compared to an undemanding task. Thus, manipulated
theories about willpower showed parallel effects on self-control performance as measured
theories.
An artificial aspect of most laboratory research on self-control including the abovementioned studies is that they assess performance on a single self-control task rather than

	

8	

sustained effort and success over time. A further study tested whether willpower theories might
predict people’s sustained efforts over the course of a challenging learning task (Miller,
Walton, Dweck, Job, Trzesniewski, & McClure, 2012). Participants completed the biased
questionnaire that manipulated their theory about willpower. They then engaged for 20 minutes
with a demanding task widely used to improve working memory. Although all participants
learned effectively at the beginning of the task, improving their performance over the first half
of the task, participants led to think of willpower as a limited resource stalled over the second
half of the task, whereas those in the nonlimited theory condition sustained their learning and
improvements in performance over the full task.
These laboratory experiments indicate that reduced performance after previous selfcontrol exertion (i.e., “ego depletion”) results not from a true lack of resources but from
people’s beliefs about their self-control capacity. They raise important questions. First, many
goals in the real world demand sustained self-control. Can implicit theories about willpower
affect the extent to which people accomplish their goals and flourish in their daily lives? And
second, what mechanisms underlie the effects of willpower theories on sustained self-control?
Effects of Lay Theories About Willpower in Everyday Life
The strength model of self-control suggests that understanding the limits of self-control
capacity should help people use their limited resources wisely and therefore predict better selfregulation and well-being. People with a nonlimited theory, by contrast, may overuse their
resources and suffer from severe depletion when high demands accumulate (Vohs, Baumeister,
& Schmeichel, 2012). However, in contrast to this view, we hypothesized that a limited
resource theory leads people to let up on self-control efforts long before they have reached any
actual limit. If so, they may reduce their effort on everyday tasks and fail to accomplish their
goals, especially when they face high demands. But people with a nonlimited theory might
better sustain their efforts, improving their everyday self-regulation.

	

9	

Everyday self-regulation
In a first longitudinal study (Job et al., 2010, Study 4), we tracked college students
across three time points over an academic term, the last of which was during final exams. The
results showed that only students who endorsed a limited-resource theory (assessed with the
strenuous mental activity and the resisting temptations scale) self-regulated less effectively at
the stressful final time point, for instance reporting procrastinating more and eating more junk
food controlling for baseline self-regulation.
This study simply assumed that self-regulatory demands were high for all students as
final exams approached. A second study examined the level of self-regulatory demands each
student reported on a week-by-week basis so as to distinguish students who faced high
demands from those who faced lower demands (Job, Walton, Bernecker, & Dweck, 2015). As
predicted, although students with limited and nonlimited willpower theories faced similar levels
of self-regulatory demands, only those with a limited theory showed increasing self-regulation
failures (e.g., procrastination, junk food eating, bad time management) as demands increased.
In addition, this study assessed students’ end-of-term grade point average (GPA). Among
students who took a heavy course load, students with the nonlimited theory earned higher
grades than students with the limited theory.
A recent study extended these findings to people with diabetes, who face particularly
high and significant self-control challenges (Bernecker & Job, 2015a). To control their blood
sugar levels, people with diabetes have to adhere to a complex regimen involving regular blood
sugar testing, medication, a low-glycemic diet, and exercise throughout their entire life (Boule,
Haddad, Kenny, Wells, & Sigal, 2001; Brand-Miller, Petocz, Hayne, & Colagiuri, 2003).
Would lay theories about willpower predict how well patients adhere to their therapy? In a
correlational study, type 2 diabetes patients completed three theories about willpower scales
(resisting temptations, physical activity, strenuous mental activity) and measures assessing

	

10	

therapy adherence (i.e., blood glucose monitoring, diet, exercise) and psychological adjustment
(i.e., emotional distress, well-being, life quality). As predicted, participants with a limited
theory reported fewer self-care activities (full scale), a less healthy diet (resisting temptations
scale), and less physical activity (physical activity scale) than people with a nonlimited theory.
They also reported more emotional distress from the disease and experienced less subjective
well-being and reported a worse life quality. The belief that willpower is nonlimited seems to
be more adaptive for coping with the demands that arise from managing diabetes than the belief
that willpower is limited.
Personal goal-striving and well-being
Another important context of self-regulation involves the personal goals people set for
themselves, and their success in accomplishing them. For instance, a person may have the goal
to be admitted to a specific college or to lose ten pounds of weight. Personal goals are
conscious representations of anticipated end-states. They represent what people strive for and
want to achieve in life (Emmons, 1986; Klinger, 1977; Little, 1983). Several theorists propose
that having goals and striving for and achieving them is crucial for the development and
maintenance of well-being, because goals provide meaning, structure, and direction to a
person’s life as well as, when completed, a sense of accomplishment (Brunstein, 1993; Diener,
Suh, Lucas, & Smith, 1999; Emmons, 1986; Maier & Brunstein, 2001).
In early research on personal goal-striving, Mukhopadhyay and Johar (2005) showed
that measured and manipulated beliefs about self-control as depending on a limited or a
nonlimited resource and as either malleable versus fixed affected the number of New Years’
resolutions people set. People who thought that self-control is not limited set more New Years’
resolutions. Moreover, a second study showed that manipulating lay theories about willpower
affected people’s success in the keeping of their resolutions. Participants led to view willpower
as dependent on a limited resource were less likely to succeed four months later, especially if

	

11	

they had set difficult goals. It seems that they were more likely to give up in the face of
difficulties or setbacks.
To examine more directly whether lay theories of self-control predict goal attainment
most when demands accumulate, one of the above-mentioned longitudinal studies (Job et al.,
2010, Study 4) assessed self-regulation with respect to a personal achievement goal. At the first
assessment period, students listed a personal goal that involved challenge and achievement.
People were asked at each subsequent time point over the term how well they had regulated
themselves in pursuing this goal (e.g., “I was often not in the mood to do something for this
goal”). As predicted, during the demanding final exam week, students who had a limited theory
about willpower reported worse goal-related self-regulation than students with a nonlimited
theory. Another study found that with a limited resource theory even demands experienced on a
day-to-day basis can undermine self-regulatory efforts toward personal goals (Bernecker & Job,
2015b).
If people with a nonlimited theory make more progress toward to their personal goals,
do they experience greater well-being? In another set of studies, we first found a strong
relationship between theories about willpower and life-satisfaction as well as affective wellbeing (Bernecker, Herrmann, Brandstätter, & Job, 2015). The more people endorsed a
nonlimited theory about willpower the greater was their subjective well-being. Next, a
longitudinal study tested whether willpower theories predicted change in subjective well-being
over students’ first year in college. As expected, a limited theory about willpower predicted a
decline in subjective well-being from a period with low demands (i.e., the beginning of the first
year) to a period with high demands (i.e., final exams at the end of the first year). Another
longitudinal study replicated this finding using a daily diary method and, moreover, showed
that the gains in well-being for people with a nonlimited theory of willpower were mediated by
more effective goal striving and more progress toward personal goals over the course of the

	

12	

term (Bernecker et al., 2015, Study 3). These findings show that a nonlimited theory of
willpower does not just help people accomplish tasks in the face of demands. It does not just
make people better workers. It helps people accomplish goals—people’s own priorities for their
lives—and this improves their well-being.
Mechanisms
How does a limited theory about willpower undermine people’s efforts at self-control,
especially as demands accumulate? So far, several potential mechanisms have been explored:
perceived exhaustion, sensitivity to cues about the availability of resources, activation of the
goal to rest, and self-efficacy.
Perceived exhaustion
The first evidence that perceived exhaustion may play an important factor came from a
series of experiments conducted by Clarkson and colleagues, which found that a manipulation
of the exhaustion people perceived in a previous task affected subsequent self-control
performance, whereas actual self-control exertion did not (Clarkson, Hirt, Jia, & Alexander,
2010). Does a limited theory about willpower make people experience self-control exertion as
more exhausting, and is this what reduces subsequent performance? To test this question, we
assessed perceived exhaustion (“How exhausting was the task?”) in a study manipulating
implicit theories about willpower (Job et al., 2010, Study 3). Even though the manipulation
affected subsequent self-control performance, it had no effect on the degree to which people
perceived the “depleting” task as exhausting (see also Job, Bernecker, Miketta, & Friese, 2015).
Instead, willpower theories affected how people responded to the experience of exhaustion.
People in the limited willpower theory condition responded to feelings of exhaustion with
decrements in their subsequent self-control performance. The more exhausting they found the
first task, the worse they performed on the second task. This was not the case for people in the
nonlimited theory condition. Although they found the “depleting” task just as exhausting, for

	

13	

them, feelings of exhaustion were not a reason to let up on their self-control efforts. A limitedresource theory seems to attune people to experiences of exhaustion, and to take this as a sign
to let up.
Sensitivity to cues about the availability of resources
If people with a limited-resource theory are sensitive to perceived exhaustion, are they
sensitive to cues about the availability of mental resources more generally? This resource
sensitivity hypothesis is supported by another set of studies, which link theories about
willpower to the finding that ingested glucose, too, buffers the ego depletion effect (Job et al.,
2013).
Previous research showed that ingesting glucose can improve self-control performance
and buffer ego depletion (DeWall, Baumeister, Gailliot, & Maner, 2008; Gailliot et al., 2007).
Research suggests, however, that ingested glucose does not simply restore depleted energy
resources and directly fuel performance (Kurzban, 2010). In contrast, peripheral sensory
receptors in the mouth and digestive system, which are sensitive to glucose, can activate reward
regions in the brain and increase motivation (Chambers, Bridge, & Jones, 2009; Kringelbach,
2004; Kurzban, 2010). Merely rinsing the mouth with glucose, as compared to a sugarsubstitute, improves physical performance and mitigates ego depletion (Hagger &
Chatzisarantis, 2013; Molden et al., 2012; Sanders, Shirk, Burgin, & Martin, 2012). Thus,
people who have ingested glucose may perform better because these peripheral cues signal the
availability of energy, motivating them to sustain effort on difficult tasks. If a limited resource
theory sensitizes people to cues about the availability of resources, then theories about
willpower may moderate the effect of glucose on subsequent self-control performance.
Three experiments found evidence for this hypothesis (Job et al., 2013). Replicating
past research, people who reported holding a limited resource theory, or who were induced to
hold this theory, showed improved self-control performance following an initial demanding

	

14	

task when they had consumed glucose (lemonade with sugar) rather than a substitute (lemonade
with a sugar substitute). Yet, people with a nonlimited theory showed no such benefit. They
performed well regardless of whether they consumed the sugar or the nonsugar drink. This was
the case even though participants could not reliably distinguish the sugar from the nonsugar
drink in their self-reports. The results provide further evidence that self-control does not rely on
a limited physiological resource that is depleted by even brief acts of self-control and is
restored by glucose consumption (Gailliot & Baumeister, 2007; Gailliot et al., 2007; see
Kurzban, 2010; Molden et al., 2012). Instead, a limited-resource theory attunes people to cues
about the availability of resources, including cues below conscious awareness. They further
document how top down beliefs interact with bottom-up physiological information to influence
people’s self-regulatory success.
Activation of a rest goal
If a limited resource theory attunes people to cues to their internal states (perceived
exhaustion) and the availability of self-control resources (glucose), does it also activate the goal
to rest following self-control exertion? This hypothesis is consistent with the process model of
self-control (Inzlicht & Schmeichel, 2012; Inzlicht et al., 2014), which proposes that after
people exert self-control, they are no longer motivated to exert themselves and this is why
people perform worse on subsequent self-control tasks.
Because it is well documented that people possess limited introspective abilities that
often lead to invalid self-reports about inner motivational states (e.g., Silvia & Gendolla, 2001;
Wilson & Dunn, 2004) a series of studies assessed motivational shifts after “depletion” using
indirect implicit and behavioral indicators, including reaction times (RTs), object evaluations,
and actual resting (Job et al., 2015).
In one study, we tested whether people with a limited-resource theory would value
means to reach the goal to rest more strongly once they were “depleted.” We assumed that after

	

15	

engaging in a self-control task they would evaluate objects that are helpful for resting (bed,
sofa, hammock, cup of tea, bathtub, TV screen) more positively (see Ferguson & Bargh, 2004;
Fishbach, Shah, & Kruglanski, 2004). After reporting their theories about willpower and
completing the depletion manipulation, participants were asked how much they liked both
objects relevant to rest and objects relevant to physical or mental exertion (barbell, racing
bicycle, punching bag, treadmill, sneakers, Sudoku puzzles). As predicted, in the high“depletion” condition, the more people endorsed the limited-resource theory the more highly
they evaluated rest-conducive objects, and the more they devalued objects conducive to
physical and mental exertion. Willpower theories were not related to evaluations in the low
depletion condition. After self-control exertion, a limited-resource theory both inclines people
to value rest and recovery and disinclines activities that involve effort and exertion. A second
study found the same result after manipulating theories about willpower, confirming their
causal effect (Job et al., 2015, Study 3).
If people with a limited resource theory want to rest, do they rest more if given the
chance? In additional studies, a limited-resource theory—both measured and manipulated—led
people to rest longer following a “depleting” experience before continuing with another task. In
one study, only participants randomly assigned to a limited-theory condition and to a high
depletion condition took an excessively long time to complete an ostensible “product-tasting”
task in which they could lounge in comfortable chairs following the depletion task (Job et al.,
2015, Study 5).
These data show that the belief that willpower depends on a limited resource causes a
motivational shift toward rest following the exertion of self-control. The findings are consistent
with the process model of self-control, which denies the existence of a specialized self-control
resource and explains ego depletion effects through shifts in motivation and attention (Inzlicht
& Schmeichel, 2012; Inzlicht et al., 2014). That model postulates that after having expended

	

16	

effort in a strenuous task, people are less motivated to expend further effort. Our research adds
an important specification: Only people who think, or are led to think, that self-control relies on
a limited resource show the motivational shift toward rest.
Changes in self-efficacy
A recent line of research suggests changes in self-efficacy as a further mechanism
underpinning the effects of lay theories of willpower on self-control. Self-efficacy is the
“judgment of how well one can execute courses of action required to deal with prospective
situations” (Bandura, 1982, p. 122). People tend to prefer to engage effort in tasks that they
perceive themselves to be good at and to withdraw from tasks that seem difficult to them.
Chow and colleagues (2015) proposed that when people exert self-control their self-efficacy for
upcoming tasks is temporarily reduced, which impairs further performance. Moreover, they
suggest, this reduction in self-efficacy occurs only in people with a limited-resource theory.
People with a nonlimited theory about willpower should not react to self-control exertion with
reduced self-efficacy because for them exerting self-control does not imply a lack of available
resources (Chow, Hui, & Lau, 2015).
Three experiments supported this theorizing. First, they showed that people depleted by
an initial challenging self-control task reported reduced self-efficacy to exert further selfcontrol. A second study confirmed that this reduction in self-efficacy mediated the effect of
depletion on subsequent self-control performance. Finally, a third experiment confirmed that
only people with a limited theory about willpower showed this drop in self-efficacy following
self-control exertion. Moreover, the drop in self-efficacy mediated the moderating effect of a
limited willpower theory on subsequent self-control performance (Chow et al., 2015).
Relations among mechanisms
So far different research lines explored three different mechanisms explaining why a
limited theory about willpower leads to reduced self-control when demands accumulate. It is

	

17	

likely that these processes interact. For instance, the inference that cues (e.g., feelings of
exhaustion, lack of sleep, time since last snack) signal a lack of needed resources sets off two
motivational shifts: 1) a feeling of reduced self-efficacy (“I can’t do more”) and the activation
of a rest goal (“I want to rest”). Thus there may be a reciprocal relationship between these
processes dragging down people’s willingness and perceived ability to exert self-control. It is a
task for future research to examine these concurring processes and to integrate them into a
comprehensive model.
Boundaries and Possible Negative Consequences
The findings we have presented thus far suggest that a nonlimited theory about
willpower is more beneficial than a limited theory about willpower, both in laboratory selfcontrol tasks and in everyday self-regulation, goal-striving, and well-being. Could a nonlimited
theory be counterproductive in some circumstances?
Overuse of resources
Vohs and colleagues (2012) hypothesized that a nonlimited theory may lead people to
“overuse” resources, temporarily compensating for depleted resources, and thus improve selfcontrol performance in the face of mild or moderate self-control demands but not in the face of
high demands. In a laboratory experiment, they compared a “no depletion” condition (no initial
self-control tasks), a “mild depletion” condition (two initial self-control tasks), and a “severe
depletion” condition (four initial self-control tasks). Theories about willpower were
manipulated with the biased questionnaire. First, the study replicated our previous findings: In
the “mild depletion” condition participants led to think of willpower as a nonlimited resource
sustained a high level of performance. But in the “severe depletion” condition, there was no
positive effect of a nonlimited theory. Moreover, on one of two measures of self-control
performance the effect reversed. Participants in the severe depletion condition performed worse
when they had been led to think of willpower as nonlimited. Vohs and colleagues concluded

	

18	

that a nonlimited theory can be counterproductive. Thinking that willpower is nonlimited, they
suggest, “might undermine the normal tendency to conserve resources so that people find
themselves severely depleted after multiple tasks” (Muraven, Shmueli, & Burkley, 2006, p.
186).
As a laboratory session wears on, however, many factors beyond people’s self-control
capacity may affect their willingness to exert further effort on tasks of little personal relevance.
People in the severe depletion condition may simply have been unwilling to exert further effort
on such tasks, regardless of their willpower theory. Indeed, a nonlimited theory about
willpower would not be functional if it led people to engage on a high level with every task that
came along regardless of its value or purpose. Future research may distinguish the capacity to
exert self-control from the value or meaning of a task to the self, for instance by comparing
tasks of personal relevance to those without. However, from our perspective the critical test of
the functionality of willpower theories comes from field studies examining people’s efforts to
accomplish their own goals in their daily lives. As discussed earlier, examining students’ selfregulatory success in a demanding academic environment was predicted by a non-limited
theory, especially when they faced the greatest demands (Job et al., 2015). Further, among
people with type 2 diabetes who face high and significant self-regulatory demands, the nonlimited theory predicted greater therapy adherence (Bernecker & Job, 2015a).
Of course, it is possible that alternative processes may arise when people face extreme
physical or psychological circumstances (e.g., torture). As we have emphasized, a non-limited
theory is not an unlimited theory. The belief that willpower is not limited does not imply that
people think they can continue to control themselves and exert effort indefinitely without
needing to rest, sleep, or eat. What research on implicit theories shows is that, as compared to
the belief that willpower relies on a limited resource, the belief that willpower does not rely on
a limited resource simply helps people stay engaged for longer during the normal range of

	

19	

challenges they face in their daily lives. Put the other way: the limited-resource theory
undermines people’s self-control success by leading people to reduce effort and conserve their
“resources” long before they reach any true limits.
Interpersonal consequences
Most research on theories of willpower has examined people’s efforts to accomplish
their own goals. But if a person believes that willpower does not rely on a limited resource, do
they expect more not only from themselves but also from others? If other people fail to meet
these expectations, are nonlimited theorists less understanding and harsher in their judgments?
Although not examining limited-resource beliefs, one line of research found that peoples’
beliefs about willpower as either malleable or a fixed trait (measured and manipulated)
predicted harsher judgments of people with salient self-regulatory failures (e.g., to quit
smoking, to lose weight; Freeman, Shmueli, & Muraven, 2013). However, high expectations
can also be helpful in promoting people’s performance—when these expectations are
communicated in positive, growth-oriented ways (e.g., Cohen, Steele, & Ross, 1999; Lepper,
Woolverton, Mumme, & Gurtner, 1993). Future research can examine how individuals can
communicate a nonlimited theory about willpower in ways that support and improve other
people’s self-control.
Consequences for parenting
Mukhopadhyay and Yeung (2010) examined how lay theories about self-control affect
parenting. They theorized that parents who think of willpower as not reliant on a limited
resource would not sufficiently prioritize the development of self-control skills in their
children. They reasoned that “the belief that reserves of self-control are already large may
lessen the value of further developing these reserves” (p. 242). Accordingly, they expected that
parents with a limited theory about willpower, who in addition believe that the limited capacity
can be enlarged (limited, but malleable theorists), would engage more in behaviors that help

	

20	

develop children’s self-control as compared to parents with a nonlimited theory. Indeed, a
series of studies showed that parents who believed that willpower relies on a limited resource
but is malleable were more likely to restrict unhealthy snacking and fast-food consumption in
their children as compared to nonlimited-malleable theorists. They were further more likely to
choose educational television programs for their children. A manipulation of theories about
self-control (nonlimited vs. limited/fixed vs. limited/malleable) further confirmed their causal
effect. Adults led to believe that self-control does not rely on a limited resource were more
likely to choose gifts for a child that provided instant pleasure. But adults led to believe that
self-control is limited but malleable chose gifts that were more educational. They were further
convinced that their choice would have a positive effect on the child’s development. People
with a nonlimited theory did not emphasize the development of children’s self-control in their
choice. Apparently, they did not think it necessary to foster the development of self-control.
An important question concerns whether these behaviors, which were showed by
parents with a limited-malleable theory, are effective in promoting improved self-control in
children. Specifically, it is not clear whether restricting children’s food and toy related choices,
promotes the development of self-control. Could restricting a child’s freedom give the child
fewer opportunities to learn to restrain him or herself and, hence, rather undermine the
development of self-control?
An additional question involves the transmission of beliefs about willpower from
parents to children, and whether specific kinds of acts or ways of talking about willpower in
parents foster harmful beliefs in children about willpower (see Gunderson et al., 2013;
Haimovitz & Dweck, 2016). It is also important to keep in mind that the nonlimited willpower
theory helps people exert self-control especially in the face of challenge, and this predicts better
interpersonal outcomes (e.g., Moffitt et al., 2011; Tangney, Baumeister, & Boone, 2004).
Indeed, being able to control one’s impulses and regulate one’s emotions in the face of high

	

21	

demands may be particularly crucial in challenging parenting situations and therefore
contribute to relationship quality and functional parenting (Deater-Deckard, 2014; Valiente,
Lemery-Chalfant, & Reiser, 2007).
Future Directions: Exploring the Antecedents of Willpower Theories
So far, most research on implicit theories about willpower has focused on their
behavioral consequences in the laboratory and the field and mechanisms that explain these
effects. Yet little is known about their cultural, social, and developmental antecedents. Where
do willpower theories come from?
Social learning
Previous theoretical and empirical work suggests that one factor that shapes children’s
motivational beliefs, expectations, and values are their parent’s beliefs (Eccles, 1993;
Haimovitz & Dweck, 2016; Simpkins, Fredricks, & Eccles, 2012). For example, Simpkins and
colleagues (2012) showed that when parents value a certain domain, like sports or literature,
their children are more likely to develop an interest in that domain, too. How do parents’ beliefs
about willpower affect their children’s beliefs?
According to social learning theory (Bandura, 1971; Bandura & Walters, 1963; Olson &
Dweck, 2008), learning is a cognitive process that is tied to the social context of a person. One
crucial element of this process is the observation of other people’s behavior. Accordingly,
children acquire knowledge about social norms by observing what their parents and other
adults do, when they do it, and what consequences arise from this behavior. With regard to
children’s beliefs about willpower, we would assume that being raised by a person with a
limited theory about willpower exposes a child to numerous adult behaviors implying that the
capacity to exert effort is limited and that periods of hard work have to be followed by rest and
recovery. As described above, we have found that people with a limited-resource theory strive
for rest and recovery once they have exerted self-control (Job et al., 2015). Do parents with a

	

22	

limited theory rest more after they have exerted themselves as compared to parents with a
nonlimited theory? Do they talk more about the need to rest after they have worked hard?
Previous research further shows that parents communicate their theories of intelligence
in what they say to a child and by praise and feedback they provide to a child’s performance
(Gunderson et al., 2013; Haimovitz & Dweck, 2016; Mueller & Dweck, 1998).	Do parents with
a limited theory communicate to their child, explicitly or implicitly, that their child needs to
rest after having worked hard (“You deserve a break!”)? If so, do children of parents who have
a limited theory infer that one has to rest after (demanding) work before being able to function
well again?
Cultural background
A recent series of studies (Savani & Job, 2017) explored cross-cultural differences in
willpower theories, which might inform their cultural roots. We found that in the United States,
people tend to endorse a limited theory about willpower. Interestingly, in India, a country with
a strong self-control tradition, we found the opposite—people tended to believe that completing
strenuous mental tasks is energizing. Moreover, Indians exhibit a reversed ego-depletion effect.
They performed better after an initial demanding task, especially if they endorsed a nonlimited
theory of willpower—that is, who believed that exerting self-control is energizing.
These cultural differences could have their roots in philosophical traditions. Numerous
religious traditions originating in India, including Hinduism, Jainism, and Buddhism, advocate
the frequent exertion of self-control not just for monks and nuns but for lay people in their daily
lives (Bronkhorst, 1993; Mosher, 2005; Walsh & Shapiro, 2006). Characteristics of the Indian
schooling system as compared to the US might further contribute to the cross-cultural
differences in theories about willpower. The workload of students in India is considerably
higher than in the US putting less emphasis on breaks and times for recovery (Larson & Verma,

	

23	

1999; Verma, Sharma, & Larson, 2002). Such a practice communicates to students that
sustained mental effort is possible.
Future research should systematically investigate cultural differences in willpower
beliefs and the socio-cultural mechanisms that perpetuate them. An interdisciplinary approach,
including sociological and/or historical perspectives may generate knowledge of both
theoretical and practical relevance. Indeed, research on the origins of willpower beliefs could
inform, for instance, educational reforms and social policies on how to promote the
development of nonlimited willpower theories in children and adults.
Interventions
Although a limited-resource theory might be functional in some situations, the
accumulated evidence documents its costs. When people face high self-control demands those
with a limited theory show impaired self-regulation, goal-attainment, and well-being. An
important direction for future research is to develop interventions that can help people adopt a
nonlimited theory about willpower and self-regulate more effectively when they face high
demands, such as in challenging academic programs or when a chronic disease requires a
careful lifestyle change). Indeed, how to improve people’s self-regulatory outcomes is a
pressing issue (Diamond, 2012; Duckworth, Grant, Loew, Oettingen, & Gollwitzer, 2011).
Previous field-experiments show that it is possible to change people’s implicit theories
about intelligence and personality in field settings, with beneficial consequences including for
academic performance (Aronson, Fried, & Good, 2002; Blackwell, Trzesniewski, & Dweck,
2007; Paunesku et al., 2015; Yeager, Romero, et al., 2016) and social outcomes (e.g., Yeager,
Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2013). Such interventions give people information (e.g., scientific
reports) about the nature of human qualities and help them internalize this information using
powerful persuasive techniques, such as “saying-is-believing” exercises in which people

	

24	

advocate for the intervention message to others (see Aronson, 1999; Yeager & Walton, 2011).
Could this approach change people’s beliefs about willpower?
An important caution is that it would not be fruitful for people to infer that self-control
is easy—that they have ample resources to resist temptation, say, and thus need not take normal
steps to make self-regulation easier (e.g., putting the cookies on a high shelf). Ironically, simply
learning that willpower is stronger than one might have supposed could backfire. People could
feel encouraged to put themselves in situations they are ill-equipped to deal with (e.g., keeping
temptations close at hand in the belief that they will be able to resist them indefinitely).
In a currently ongoing project, we have started to develop such an intervention. In a first
study, participants did not learn that willpower is ample. Instead, materials emphasized that
how you think about willpower matters, and you can choose how you think about it. They then
thought of a person who struggles with willpower, and wrote a letter of advice to this person
describing these ideas. In a first randomized field experiment with students enrolled in their
first year at the university, we found that, for students who faced high academic demands, the
intervention improved their academic self-regulation (i.e., time spent on academic tasks) and
semester grades (Job, Flückiger, Bernecker, Lieb, & Mata, 2017). This gain was found relative
to a control group exposed to parallel but psychologically neutral (in terms of theories about
willpower) material that addressed time-management. Thus, when confronted with high
demands, students in the nonlimited willpower theory condition were able to scale up their
academic effort to achieve greater success. Although these results are promising, many
questions remain. Can such an intervention produce long-term change in people’s willpower
theories and self-regulatory success? If so, what recursive processes contribute to lasting
change? Can such an intervention be scaled-up to benefit a wide population? Can it be adapted
to help non-student populations that face specific challenges, such as people trying to make
lifestyle changes to manage a chronic disease?

	

25	

Conclusion
Research on lay theories on self-control suggests that one reason people may fail to
control themselves or have trouble reaching their personal goals involves their beliefs about
self-control resources, not a true lack of resources. This approach does not deny that a person is
in part an energy-based system. Obviously, people need food to function well, they get tired,
and they need sleep. But in the normal range of self-regulatory demands people face in
everyday life there is not a narrow energy-based constraint on self-control capacity. However,
in a social and cultural context that promulgates the belief that willpower depends on a highly
limited resource—including in the strength model of self-control itself—people can easily
believe in such a constraint, and thus attend and respond to minor fluctuations in their available
resources. This belief then itself limits people’s willpower.
Although research on willpower theories began as an alternative view of self-control, it
extends beyond a mere critique of the strength model. Not only does it suggest that ego
depletion is not an inevitable state determined by basic physiological processes. It further
informs our understanding of processes, including self-efficacy and rest-goal activation, which
contribute to self-regulatory performance, personal goal striving, and well-being when selfregulatory demands arise. Thus, it brings top-down processes back into focus in self-regulation
research, and shows that seemingly fixed, physiological principles can, at least in part, be
created and modulated by people’s beliefs and expectations.

	

26	

References
Aronson, E. (1999). The power of self-persuasion. American Psychologist, 54, 584–588.
Aronson, J., Fried, C. B., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the effects of stereotype threat on
African American college students by shaping theories of intelligence. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 113–125.
Bandura, A. (1971). Social learning theory. New York, NY: General Learning Press.
Bandura, A. (1982). Self-efficacy mechanism in human agency. American Psychologist, 37,
122–147.
Bandura, A., & Walters, R. H. (1963). Social learning and personality development (Vol. 14).
New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Baumeister, R. F., Bratslavsky, E., Muraven, M., & Tice, D. M. (1998). Ego depletion: Is the
active self a limited resource? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 1252–
1265.
Baumeister, R. F., & Heatherton, T. F. (1996). Self-regulation failure: An overview.
Psychological Inquiry, 7, 1-15.
Bernecker, K., Hermann, M., Brandstätter, V., & Job, V. (2015). Implicit theories about
willpower predict subjective well-being. Journal of Personality.
Bernecker, K., & Job, V. (2015a). Beliefs about willpower are related to therapy adherence and
psychological adjustment in patients with type 2 Diabetes. Basic and Applied Social
Psychology, 37, 188–195.
Bernecker, K., & Job, V. (2015b). Beliefs about willpower moderate the effect of previous day
demands on next day’s expectations and effective goal striving. Frontiers in
Psychology, 6, 1496.
Bernecker, K., & Job, V. (in press). Implicit theories about willpower in resisting temptations
and emotion control. Journal of Psychology.

	

27	

Blackwell, L. S., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Implicit theories of intelligence
predict achievement across an adolescent transition: A longitudinal study and an
intervention. Child Development, 78, 246–63.
Boule, N. G., Haddad, E., Kenny, G. P., Wells, G. A., & Sigal, R. J. (2001). Effects of exercise
on glycemic control and body mass in type 2 diabetes mellitus: A meta-analysis of
controlled clinical trials. Journal of the American Medical Association, 286, 1218–1227.
Brand-Miller, J., Petocz, P., Hayne, S., & Colagiuri, S. (2003). Low-glycemic index diets in the
management of diabetes: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Diabetes
Care, 26, 2261–2267.
Bronkhorst, J. (1993). The two traditions of meditation in ancient India. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass.
Brown, C. M., & McConnell, A. R. (2011). Discrepancy-based and anticipated emotions in
behavioral self-regulation. Emotion, 11, 1091–5.
Brunstein, J. C. (1993). Personal goals and subjective well-being: A longitudinal study. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 1061–1070.
Carter, E. C., Kofler, L. M., Forster, D. E., & McCullough, M. E. (2015). A series of metaanalytic tests of the depletion effect: Self-control does not seem to rely on a limited
resource. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 144, 796-815.
Chambers, E. S., Bridge, M. W., & Jones, D. A. (2009). Carbohydrate sensing in the human
mouth: Effects on exercise performance and brain activity. The Journal of Physiology,
587, 1779–1794.
Chow, J. T., Hui, C. M., & Lau, S. (2015). A depleted mind feels inefficacious: Ego-depletion
reduces self-efficacy to exert further self-control. European Journal of Social
Psychology, 45, 754-768.

	

28	

Clarkson, J. J., Hirt, E. R., Jia, L., & Alexander, M. B. (2010). When perception is more than
reality: The effects of perceived versus actual resource depletion on self-regulatory
behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 98, 29–46.
Cohen, G. L., Steele, C. M., & Ross, L. D. (1999). The Mentor’s Dilemma: Providing Critical
Feedback Across the Racial Divide. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25,
1302–1318.
Deater-Deckard, K. (2014). Family matters: Intergenerational and interpersonal processes of
executive function and attentive behavior. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
23, 230-236.
DeWall, C. N., Baumeister, R. F., Gailliot, M. T., & Maner, J. K. (2008). Depletion Makes the
Heart Grow Less Helpful: Helping as a Function of Self-Regulatory Energy and Genetic
Relatedness. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 34, 1653-1662.
Diamond, A. (2012). Activities and programs that improve children’s executive functions.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 21, 335–341.
Diener, E., Suh, E. M., Lucas, R. E., & Smith, H. L. (1999). Subjective well-being: Three
decades of progress. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 276–302.
Duckworth, A. L., Grant, H., Loew, B., Oettingen, G., & Gollwitzer, P. M. (2011). Selfregulation strategies improve self-discipline in adolescents: Benefits of mental
contrasting and implementation intentions. Educational Psychology, 31, 17–26.
Dweck, C. S. (1999). Self-theories: Their role in motivation, personality and development.
Philadelphia, PA: Taylor & Francis.
Eccles, J. S. (1993). School and family effects on the ontogeny of children’s interests, selfperceptions, and activity choices. In R. Dienstbier (Series Ed.) & J. E. Jacobs (Vol. Ed.),
Nebraska Symposium on Motivation: 1992. Developmental perspectives on motivation
(Vol. 40, pp. 145–208). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.

	

29	

Emmons, R. A. (1986). Personal strivings: An approach to personality and subjective wellbeing. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 1058-1068.
Ferguson, M. J., & Bargh, J. A. (2004). Liking is for doing: The effects of goal pursuit on
automatic evaluation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87, 557–572.
Finkel, E. J., DeWall, C. N., Slotter, E. B., Oaten, M., & Foshee, V. A. (2009). Self-regulatory
failure and intimate partner violence perpetration. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 97, 483-499.
Fischer, P., Greitemeyer, T., & Frey, D. (2008). Self-regulation and selective exposure: The
impact of depleted self-regulation resources on confirmatory information processing.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 94, 382-395.
Fishbach, A., Shah, J. Y., & Kruglanski, A. W. (2004). Emotional transfer in goal systems.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 40, 723– 738.
Freeman, N., Shmueli, D., & Muraven, M. (2013). Lay theories of self-control influence
judgments of individuals who have failed at self-control. Journal of Applied Social
Psychology, 43, 1418–1427.
Gailliot, M. T., & Baumeister, R. F. (2007). The physiology of willpower: Linking blood
glucose to self-control. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 11, 303–327.
Gailliot, M. T., Baumeister, R. F., DeWall, C. N., Maner, J. K., Plant, E. A., Tice, D. M,
Brewer, L. E., & Schmeichel, B. J. (2007). Self-control relies on glucose as a limited
energy source: Willpower is more than a metaphor. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 92, 325–336.
Gottfredson, M. R., & Hirschi, T. (1990). A general theory of crime. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.

	

30	

Gunderson, E. A., Gripshover, S. J., Romero, C., Dweck, C. S., Goldin-Meadow, S., & Levine,
S. C. (2013). Parent Praise to 1-3 Year-Olds Predicts Children’s Motivational
Frameworks 5 Years Later. Child Development, 84, 1526–1541.
Hagger, M. S., Wood, C., Stiff, C., & Chatzisarantis, N. L. (2010). Ego depletion and the
strength model of self-control: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 136, 495-525.
Hagger, M. S., & Chatzisarantis, N. L. D. (2013). The sweet taste of success: The presence of
glucose in the oral cavity moderates the depletion of self-control resources. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 39, 28–42.
Haimovitz, K., & Dweck, C. S. (2016). What predicts children’s fixed and growth intelligence
mind-sets? Not their parents’ views of intelligence but their parents’ views of failure.
Psychological Science, 27, 859-869.
Inzlicht, M., & Schmeichel, B. J. (2012). What is ego depletion? Toward a mechanistic revision
of the resource model of self-control. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7, 450–
463.
Inzlicht, M., Schmeichel, B. J., & Macrae, C. N. (2014). Why self-control seems (but may not
be) limited. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 18, 127–133.
Inzlicht, M., McKay, L., & Aronson, J. (2006). Stigma as ego depletion: How being the target
of prejudice affects self-control. Psychological Science, 17, 262–269.
Job, V., Bernecker, K., Miketta, S., & Friese, M. (2015). Implicit theories about willpower
predict the activation of a rest goal following self-control exertion. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 109, 694-706.
Job, V., Dweck, C. S., & Walton, G. M. (2010). Ego depletion—Is it all in your head? Implicit
theories about willpower affect self-regulation. Psychological Science, 21, 1686–1693.

	

31	

Job, V., Flückiger, L., Bernecker, K., Lieb, R. & Mata, J. (2017). An implicit theories about
willpower intervention helps students to deal with demands: Effects on academic selfregulation and grades. Manuscript in preparation.
Job, V., Walton, G. M., Bernecker, K., & Dweck, C. S. (2013). Beliefs about willpower
determine the impact of glucose on self-control. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 110, 14837–14842.
Job, V., Walton, G. M., Bernecker, K., & Dweck, C. S. (2015). Implicit theories about
willpower predict self-regulation and grades in everyday life. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 108, 637–647.
Klinger, E. (1977). Meaning and void: Inner experience and the incentive in people’s lives.
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Kringelbach, M. L. (2004). Food for thought: Hedonic experience beyond homeostasis in the
human brain. Neuroscience, 126, 807–819.
Kurzban, R. (2010). Does the brain consume additional glucose during self-control tasks?
Evolutionary Psychology, 8, 244–259.
Larson, R. W., & Verma, S. (1999). How children and adolescents spend time across the world:
Work, play, and developmental opportunities. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 701-736.
Lepper, M. R., Woolverton, M., Mumme, D. L., & Gurtner, J. (1993). Motivational techniques
of expert human tutors: Lessons for the design of computer-based tutors. In S. P. Lajoie
& S. J. Derry (Eds.), Computers as cognitive tools (pp. 75-105). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Little, B. (1983). Personal projects: A rationale and method for investigation. Environment and
Behavior, 15, 273-309.
Loschelder, D. D., & Friese, M. (in press). Moderators of the ego depletion effect. In E. R. Hirt
(Ed.), Self-regulation and ego control. San Diego, CA: Elsevier.

	

32	

Maier, G. W., & Brunstein, J. C. (2001). The role of personal work goals in newcomers’ job
satisfaction and organizational commitment: A longitudinal analysis. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 86, 1034-1042.
Masicampo, E. J., Martin, S. R., & Anderson, R. A. (2014). Understanding and Overcoming
Self-control Depletion. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 8, 638–649.
Martijn, C., Tenbült, P., Merckelbach, H., Dreezens, E., & De Vries, N. K. (2002). Getting a
grip on ourselves: Challenging expectancies about loss of energy after self-control.
Social Cognition, 20, 441–460.
Miller, E. M., Walton, G. M., Dweck, C. S., Job, V., Trzesniewski, K. H., & McClure, S. M.
(2012). Theories of willpower affect sustained learning. PLoS ONE, 7, e38680.
Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., & Rodriguez, M. I. (1989). Delay of gratification in children. Science,
244, 933–938.
Moffitt, T. E., Arseneault, L., Belsky, D., Dickson, N., Hancox, R. J., & Harrington, H. (2011).
A gradient of childhood self-control predicts health, wealth, and public safety.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108, 2693–2698.
Molden, D. C., Hui, C. M., Scholer, A. A., Meier, B. P., Noreen, E. E., D’Agostino, P. R., &
Martin, V. (2012). Motivational versus metabolic effects of carbohydrates on selfcontrol. Psychological Science, 23, 1137–1144.
Moller, A. C., Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2006). Choice and ego-depletion: The moderating
role of autonomy. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 32, 1024-1036.
Mosher, L. (2005). Praying: The Rituals of Faith (Vol. 2). New York, NY: Seabury Books.
Mueller, C. M., & Dweck, C. S. (1998). Praise for intelligence can undermine children's
motivation and performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 33-52.

	

33	

Mukhopadhyay, A., & Johar, G. V. (2005). Where there is a will, is there a way? Effects of lay
theories of self-control on setting and keeping resolutions. Journal of Consumer
Research, 31, 779–786.
Mukhopadhyay, A., & Yeung, C. W. (2010). Building character: Effects of lay theories of selfcontrol on the selection of products for children. Journal of Marketing Research, 47,
240–250.
Muraven, M., Shmueli, D., & Burkley, E. (2006). Conserving self-control strength. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 91, 524–537.
Muraven, M., & Slessareva, E. (2003). Mechanisms of self-control failure: Motivation and
limited resources. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29, 894–906.
Muraven, M., Tice, D. M., & Baumeister, R. F. (1998). Self-control as limited resource:
Regulatory depletion patterns. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 774–
789.
Olson, K. R., & Dweck, C. S. (2008). A blueprint for social cognitive development.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 3, 193–202.
Paunesku, D., Walton, G. M., Romero, C., Smith, E. N., Yeager, D. S., & Dweck, C. S. (2015).
Mind-set interventions are a scalable treatment for academic underachievement.
Psychological Science, 26, 784-793.
Salmon, S. J., Adriaanse, M. A., De Vet, E., Fennis, B. M., & De Ridder, D. T. D. (2014).
“When the going gets tough, who keeps going?” Depletion sensitivity moderates the
ego-depletion effect. Frontiers in Psychology, 5, 647.
Sanders, M. A., Shirk, S. D., Burgin, C. J., & Martin, L. L. (2012). The gargle effect: Rinsing
the mouth with glucose enhances self-control. Psychological Science, 23, 1470–1472.

	

34	

Savani, K., & Job, V. (2017). Is ego-depletion a cultural phenomenon? Acts of self-control
improve subsequent performance in cultures in which willpower exertion is believed to
be energizing. Manuscript in preparation.
Schmeichel, B. J., Vohs, K. D., & Baumeister, R. F. (2003). Intellectual performance and ego
depletion: Role of the self in logical reasoning and other information processing.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 33-64.
Silvia, P. J., & Gendolla, G. H. E. (2001). On introspection and self- perception: Does selffocused attention enable accurate self-knowledge? Review of General Psychology, 5,
241–269.
Simpkins, S. D., Fredricks, J. A., & Eccles, J. S. (2012). Charting the Eccles’ expectancy-value
model from mothers' beliefs in childhood to youths' activities in adolescence.
Developmental Psychology, 48, 1019–1032.
Tangney, J. P., Baumeister, R. F., & Boone, A. L. (2004). High self-control predicts good
adjustment, less pathology, better grades, and interpersonal success. Journal of
Personality, 72, 271–324.
Tice, D., Baumeister, R., Shmueli, D., & Muraven, M. (2007). Restoring the self: Positive
affect helps improve self-regulation following ego depletion. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 43, 379–384.
Valiente, C., Lemery-Chalfant, K., & Reiser, M. (2007). Pathways to problem behaviors:
chaotic homes, parent and child effortful control, and parenting. Social Development,
16, 249-267.
Verma, S., Sharma, D., & Larson, R. W. (2002). School stress in India: Effects on time and
daily emotions. International Journal of Behavioral Development, 26, 500-508.
Vohs, K. D., Baumeister, R. F., & Ciarocco, N. J. (2005). Self-regulation and self-presentation:
Regulatory resource depletion impairs impression management and effortful self-

	

35	

presentation depletes regulatory resources. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 88, 632–657.
Vohs, K. D., Baumeister, R. F., & Schmeichel, B. J. (2012). Motivation, personal beliefs, and
limited resources all contribute to self-control. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 48, 943–947.
Vohs, K. D., & Faber, R. J. (2007). Spent resources: Self-regulatory resources availability
affects impulse buying. Journal of Consumer Research, 33, 537-547.
Walsh, R., & Shapiro, S. L. (2006). The meeting of meditative disciplines and Western
psychology: A mutually enriching dialogue. American Psychologist, 61, 227-239.
Webb, T. L., & Sheeran, P. (2003). Can implementation intentions help to overcome egodepletion? Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 53, 5–13.
Wilson, T. D., & Dunn, E. W. (2004). Self-knowledge: Its limits, value, and potential for
improvement. Annual Review of Psychology, 55, 493–518.
Yeager, D. S., Romero, C., Paunesku, D. Hulleman, C. S., Schneider, B., Hinojosa, C., Lee, H.
Y., O’Brien, J., Flint, K., Roberts, A., Trott, J., Greene, D., Walton, G. M., & Dweck, C.
S. (2016). Using design thinking to improve psychological interventions: The case of
the growth mindset during the transition to high school. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 108, 374-391.
Yeager, D. S, Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2013). An implicit theories of personality
intervention reduces adolescent aggression in response to victimization and exclusion.
Child Development, 84, 970–988.
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological interventions in education:
They’re not magic. Review of Educational Research, 81, 267–301.

	

36	

Table	1.	Items	to	measure	implicit	theories	about	willpower	for	strenuous	mental	activity	
(Job	et	al.,	2010)	
	
Strenuous	mental	activity	
1. Strenuous	mental	activity	exhausts	your	resources,	which	you	need	to	refuel	
afterwards	(e.g.	through	taking	breaks,	doing	nothing,	watching	television,	eating	
snacks).	
2. After	a	strenuous	mental	activity,	your	energy	is	depleted	and	you	must	rest	to	
get	it	refuelled	again.	
3. When	you	have	been	working	on	a	strenuous	mental	task,	you	feel	energized	and	
you	are	able	to	immediately	start	with	another	demanding	activity.		
4. Your	mental	stamina	fuels	itself.	Even	after	strenuous	mental	exertion,	you	can	
continue	doing	more	of	it.	
5. When	you	have	completed	a	strenuous	mental	activity,	you	cannot	start	another	
activity	immediately	with	the	same	concentration	because	you	have	to	recover	
your	mental	energy	again.	
6. After	a	strenuous	mental	activity,	you	feel	energized	for	further	challenging	
activities.	

	
R	
R	
	
	
R	
	

Note.	R	=	reversed	items	

	

37	

Table	2.	Biased	questionnaires	to	manipulate	implicit	theories	about	willpower	(Job	et	al.,	
2010)		
	
Induction	of	limited-resource	theory	
1. When	you	think	over	a	matter	with	great	concentration,	it	can	be	sometimes	tiring.	
2. Working	on	a	strenuous	mental	task	can	make	you	feel	tired	much	so	that	you	need	a	break	
before	accomplishing	a	new	task.	
3. When	you	have	to	do	many	demanding	activities	for	a	while,	you	eventually	get	exhausted	
and	less	productive.	
4. Sometimes,	when	you	completely	focus	your	attention	on	a	demanding	mental	activity,	you	
feel	tired	and	you	need	a	break	sooner	or	later	since	your	resources	have	to	be	refilled.	
5. After	you	have	been	working	on	a	strenuous	mental	task	for	several	hours	you	can	get	
fatigued	so	that	you	need	to	rest	before	taking	on	the	next	challenging	activity.	
6. Strenuous	mental	activity	sometimes	exhausts	your	resources,	which	you	need	to	refuel	
afterwards	(e.g.	through	breaks,	doing	nothing,	watching	television,	eating….).	
7. After	a	strenuous	mental	activity	your	energy	can	be	depleted	and	you	sometimes	must	rest	
to	get	it	refuelled	again.	
8. Sometimes,	when	you	have	completed	a	very	exhausting	mental	activity,	you	have	to	recover	
your	mental	energy	again	before	starting	with	the	same	concentration	on	a	new	difficult	task.	
Resisting	temptations	
1. Sometimes,	it	can	be	very	inspiring	to	think	over	a	matter	with	great	concentration.	
2. When	situations	accumulate	that	challenge	you	with	temptations,	it	gets	more	and	more	
difficult	to	resist	the	temptations.	
3. It	can	be	energizing	to	be	completely	focused	on	a	demanding	mental	activity,	so	that	you	are	
able	to	remain	concentrated	for	a	while.	
4. Sometimes,	it	is	energizing	to	be	fully	absorbed	with	a	demanding	mental	task.	
5. It	can	be	energizing	to	be	completely	focused	on	a	demanding	mental	activity,	so	that	you	can	
remain	concentrated	for	a	long	time.	
6. Sometimes,	your	mental	stamina	fuels	itself.	After	a	strenuous	mental	exertion	you	can	
continue	doing	more	of	it.	
7. It	is	possible	to	be	in	such	a	productive	work	mode	that	you	don’t	need	much	recreation	
between	different	mentally	strenuous	tasks.	
8. Working	on	a	strenuous	mental	task	can	activate	your	mental	resources	and	you	become	
even	better	at	accomplishing	subsequent	demanding	tasks.	

	

	

38	

