How Brief Social-Psychological
Interventions Can Cause
Enduring Effects
DUSHIYANTHINI (TONI) KENTHIRARAJAH and GREGORY M. WALTON

Abstract
In recent years, several studies have shown that brief, theory-based socialpsychological interventions can cause large, enduring effects on important outcomes, such as school achievement and marital relationships. How are such
effects possible? We propose a field-theory model: this model distinguishes “nudge”
interventions—interventions designed to change a “snapshot” in time such as
a particular decision or behavior—from interventions designed to change a
“movie”—core beliefs or other aspects of the self and thus people’s behavior
as it unfolds over time in diverse settings. Movie interventions target underlying
social-psychological processes—such as students’ confidence that they belong in
school or individuals’ felt security in close relationships. These psychological processes can interact with naturalistic variables—such as how people interact with one
another and the relationships they build—to propel intervention effects forward in
time. In this model, real-world factors can serve as proximal outcomes that catalyze
long-term effects. An important implication is that such interventions can sometimes
amplify their effects over time, if the targeted recursive process “snowballs.” A second implication is that the long-term effects of movie interventions are dependent on
the context—specifically, on whether the context affords naturalistic variables that
can catalyze changes in the self forward in time. To illustrate this field-theory model,
we compare it to Mortensen and Cialdini’s (2010) full-cycle model. Although both
models share important features, including an emphasis on laboratory research, the
latter treats forces in the world as “noise” and predicts that the effects of psychological interventions will dissipate, not strengthen with time. In addition to their applied
potential, movie interventions raise profound new theoretical questions, such as how
psychological processes unfold over time and do so in interaction with social contexts. Exploring these questions represents an exciting direction for future research.

INTRODUCTION
It is increasingly obvious that most if not all major social problems have
a behavioral, and specifically a psychological component. Why do people
eat too much junk food; how can we encourage healthier eating? Why
Emerging Trends in the Social and Behavioral Sciences. Edited by Robert Scott and Stephan Kosslyn.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN 978-1-118-90077-2.

1

2

EMERGING TRENDS IN THE SOCIAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES

do few people sign up to be organ donors or contribute to retirement
savings programs? Why do many people not vote; can we promote greater
civic engagement? Why do students disengage from school; can we raise
achievement? What causes marriages to go awry; can we prevent this? How
can we promote more sustainable behaviors?
In recent years, the social sciences have seen a veritable explosion of
techniques to promote positive behavior change in diverse settings (Cohen
& Sherman, 2014; Thaler & Sunstein, 2009; Walton, 2014; Yeager & Walton,
2011). These techniques aim to help people flourish—to accomplish their
own personally important goals—and, in so doing, to begin to address major
societal problems. In an effort to facilitate a deeper understanding of diverse
social problems and how we can tackle them, this review distinguishes
two kinds of interventions. The first, often referred to as nudges (Thaler &
Sunstein, 2009) aims to change a specific decision or behavior in a specific
setting. We call these “snapshot interventions”: They aim to change behavior
in a moment in time. Although important in many contexts, we argue that
this approach is inherently limited. Many social problems unfold over time
in diverse settings, such as the quality of close relationships or students’
achievement in school. Is it possible to change behavior in a great array of
situations so as to strengthen marriages or to raise school achievement? We
call interventions that aim to accomplish this “movie interventions”: Movie
interventions aim to change core beliefs or other aspects of the self and thus
people’s behavior over time in diverse settings in ways that can become
self-perpetuating and improve outcomes such as these.
To illustrate this distinction, we begin with a prominent model of the intersection of psychological research with real-world problems: Mortensen and
Cialdini (2010)’s full-cycle model. We discuss some of the assumptions this
model makes and predictions that follow from it about how psychological
strategies can affect real-world outcomes. Next, we discuss several recent
interventions that are not well-explained by the full-cycle model and propose a complementary model—a field-theory model—to account for them.
We conclude by discussing critical questions these interventions raise for the
field.

FOUNDATIONAL RESEARCH
MORTENSEN & CIALDINI (2010)’S FULL-CYCLE MODEL OF PSYCHOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Mortensen and Cialdini’s full-cycle model emphasizes how theory development, laboratory experimentation and field research iteratively inform one
another. In this model, the control available in laboratory settings helps
researchers develop psychological theory and a precise understanding of

How Brief Social-Psychological Interventions Can Cause Enduring Effects

3

causal relationships, which may be weaker or less apparent in naturalistic
settings. Analogously, while field research can reveal whether an independent variable can change behavior that matters in the real world, Mortensen
and Cialdini argue that field settings are ill-equipped to identify the theoretical processes that underlie an effect. Moreover, they suggest, because
variables that were deliberately controlled in the laboratory may be influential in naturalistic settings, the field represents a conservative test of effects
established in the laboratory. They conceptualize naturalistic variables
as noise: “Once in the field and unable to carefully manipulate variables
under study while eliminating all confounding variables—variables that, as
mentioned before, may actually overpower the effects of the variables under
study outside the lab—one can see if an effect is really worth its salt.” (p. 59).
According to this model, it is crucial to test an effect in the laboratory to
understand its scope in a controlled environment and to identify underlying
mechanisms and in the field to identify boundary conditions and assess its
prevalence and strength.
SNAPSHOT INTERVENTIONS: NUDGES TO CHANGE A SPECIFIC DECISION OR BEHAVIOR IN A
SPECIFIC CONTEXT
If real-world settings are replete with noise that risks drowning out any intervention, then the task of the social scientist who wishes to promote positive
social change is daunting. From this perspective, one way forward is to identify key decision points or single behaviors that are consequential and can
be impacted positively with an understanding of underlying psychological
processes. By narrowly targeting a single important decision or behavior,
this approach tests whether a psychological process matters in terms of an
important outcome while limiting the influence of other factors that may
arise in field settings that would wash out the impact of a more comprehensive approach.
For instance, research points to the role of defaults in determining whether
people agree to be organ donors (Johnson & Goldstein, 2003); setting the
default as to donate rather than to not donate (opt-out versus opt-in) conveys a norm of donating that encourages greater support for organ donation
(Davidai, Gilovich, & Ross, 2012). In addition, research suggests that one way
to increase voter turn-out is to represent voting as an opportunity to become a
valued kind of person, not just an errand to be run (Bryan, Walton, Rogers, &
Dweck, 2011). In this research, simply asking registered voters to respond to a
series of questions the day before an election about “being a voter” instead of
parallel questions about “voting” increased voter turnout in two state-wide
elections in the United States by about 11%—one of the largest experimental
effects ever observed on objective measurements of voter turnout.

4

EMERGING TRENDS IN THE SOCIAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES

An obvious limitation of this approach is that many social problems are
not discrete decisions or behaviors but behaviors that unfold over time,
in interaction with social systems. Can “nudges” change behavior over
time? One approach to such problems is to instantiate fixed features in
social situations that continually evoke and re-evoke desired behaviors.
For instance, reorganizing a school cafeteria to make healthy options more
convenient can reduce how much junk food students eat (Hanks, Just,
Smith, & Wansink, 2012). In addition, research shows that “broken-windows
policing”—that is, fixing “broken windows”: cleaning vacant lots, razing
abandoned buildings, removing graffiti, and improving street lighting—can
reduce crime in those neighborhoods. Working with police in Lowell,
Massachusetts, Braga and Bond (2008) randomized local crime hotspots
to broken-windows or business-as-usual policing. As compared to control
hotspots, the cleaned-up hotspots showed 19.8% fewer citizen 911 calls for
infractions such as assault, robbery, and disorder over the next 6 months.
Why? Laboratory research and small-scale field experiments (e.g., Cialdini,
Reno, & Kallgren, 1990) show that salient cues of disorder signal that
rule breaking is acceptable in a setting. By changing those cues, local law
enforcement changed the perceived social norm and thus people’s behavior
within that setting over time.
What happens, however, when people leave one neighborhood and walk
into another? Alternatively, if signs of disorder in a neighborhood accumulate, perhaps after the broken-windows policing grant has run its course
or the police chief moves to a new city? Put bluntly, “nudge” interventions
have no theory of time beyond the immediate cues in a situation—no way
to understand how to change people’s behavior so as to improve their
outcomes in many situations over long periods of time. Yet this is exactly
characteristic of many social problems, from school achievement, to health
behaviors, to relationships. Another kind of intervention can address these
social problems—they target the one thing people carry with them from
situation to situation: the self.
CUTTING-EDGE RESEARCH: SOCIAL-PSYCHOLOGICAL
INTERVENTIONS AFFECT THE SELF OVER TIME
Diverse lines of research show that brief, single-shot social-psychological
interventions can affect people over long-periods of time and along diverse
outcomes. These movie interventions aim to change not a moment in time but
people’s experience over time (Walton, 2014; Wilson, 2011). For instance,
Walton and Cohen’s (2007, 2011) social-belonging intervention consisted
of a single hour-long session during students’ first-year of college. This
intervention gave students a new belief about the transition to college—that

How Brief Social-Psychological Interventions Can Cause Enduring Effects

5

worries about belonging are normal in this transition and pass with time.
This raised at-risk students’ achievement over the next 3 years. Finkel,
Slotter, Luchies, Walton, & Gross (2013) asked married couples to complete
three 7-min writing tasks over a year: they reflected on how a neutral third
party would view conflicts in their marriage and how they could adopt this
perspective in future conflicts. This caused couples to experience greater
passion, intimacy, and love in their marriages over the year, and the benefits
amplified over time.
How are such effects possible? As an intervention recedes in time, will it
not recede in recipients’ minds? How can an experience that is distal in time
and presumably in mind continue to cause effects?
To understand movie interventions, we propose a field-theory model (see also
Garcia & Cohen, 2013; Yeager & Walton, 2011). This model incorporates several aspects of the full-cycle model, including the importance of psychological
theory and basic laboratory research and the interplay between laboratory
and field research. However, the field-theory model conceptualizes the field
as not just a source of noise that risks undermining intervention effects but
as also replete with naturalistic variables—such as relationships people can
develop or skills they can acquire—that can serve as potential mediators or
catalysts that can propel intervention effects forward in time. These variables
are often of necessity absent in laboratory settings. However, in real-world
settings, the long-term effects of movie interventions may depend on them
(Table 1).
This approach builds on classic theorizing in social psychology. Lewin’s
(1943) field-theory analysis posits that people operate within a force field
Table 1
Comparison of “Snapshot” and “Movie” Interventions
Snapshot Interventions
Theoretical questions

Role of real-world variables

Role of time
Size of effect in laboratory
versus field settings
Range of situations in which
intervention effects may
arise

Movie Interventions

Psychological processes that Psychological processes that
can be isolated in the
arise in field settings and
laboratory
how these interact with
social contexts over time
“Noise” that may attenuate
Mediators that may propel
intervention effects
intervention effects forward
in time
Intervention effects assumed Intervention effects may
to diminish over time
sustain or amplify over time
Assumed to be larger in the May be as large or larger in
laboratory
field settings
Narrow
Potentially broad

6

EMERGING TRENDS IN THE SOCIAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES

or tension system in which, at any moment, multiple forces act upon the
individual. The equilibrium of forces determines the individual’s attitudes
and behaviors. Because forces in the system are interrelated, adding,
changing, or removing a force can change the individual’s outcomes. An
underappreciated aspect of this theorizing is that the force field is dynamic.
A change in how a person understands or responds to a setting can change
the situation they face later. As a consequence, a well-timed, well-targeted
intervention can, in theory, change people’s experiences in the future.
Movie interventions generally initiate change by first instantiating change
within the self, for instance in a person’s core beliefs and/or construal of
the social world. Because these interventions occur in naturalistic environments, the events, experiences and interactions that take place in these settings supply input, allowing the individual to use and act on a new way of
understanding the world. In a recursive environment, doing so elicits a congruent response from the environment. Over time, the force field is restructured, allowing the effects of an initial intervention to persist without further
intervention—to “snowball.”
Consider an intervention that promotes a less hostile view of a marital conflict. If successful, this intervention might change how people interact with
their spouse—whether they treat them generously or cruelly. This in turn
may change the situation the person finds him or herself in the future—with a
well-disposed or an angry spouse. As this process repeats over time, positive
interactions become easier. Through processes such as this, a brief intervention may generate lasting effects.
Because movie interventions are designed to change recursive processes
over time, they may be most effective in settings that are inherently recursive,
such as school environments, where students build relationships and learn
academic material over time, and close and intergroup relationship contexts.
Next we review brief movie interventions in all these areas.
SCHOOL ACHIEVEMENT
Social-Belonging Intervention. In the social-belonging intervention (Walton & Cohen, 2007, 2011), first-year college students learned that many
students worry about their social belonging when they first enter college
but, with time, come to feel at home. This 1-h intervention raised the
grade-point-average of African American students over the next 3 years
as compared to randomized controls, reducing the achievement gap with
White-American students by 52%. The intervention effect increased with
time; senior year it reduced the achievement gap by 79%. Moreover, at
the end of college, African American students in the treatment condition
reported being healthier and happier than peers in the control condition.

How Brief Social-Psychological Interventions Can Cause Enduring Effects

7

How is this possible? At the end of college, participating students were
asked what they had learned in the intervention. By and large, they could
not remember the intervention message. The intervention did not work
by remaining salient in students’ minds. Instead, it changed the implicit
narrative students used to interpret early experiences in college and thus
how they engaged with others over time. Students who are underrepresented
and negatively stereotyped in school can easily worry whether “someone
like me” can belong there. By giving students a non-threatening narrative
with which to interpret social adversity on campus—Everyone worries at first
about whether they belong: It doesn’t mean I don’t belong—the intervention helps
students ride out the inevitable early struggles of the college transition,
such as feeling lonely or disrespected, to reach out and build the kind of
positive peer and mentor relationships that are necessary for success in a
demanding academic environment; indeed, research increasingly shows that
this intervention helps students see daily adversities in less negative, global
terms and helps students build better relationships in school over time (e.g.,
Walton & Cohen, 2011; Walton, Logel, Peach, Spencer, & Zanna, in press).
In this research, changing a critical psychological variable—students’
beliefs about belonging in the transition to college—surely did not improve
their outcomes years later alone. However, this change-in-belief helped
students engage with others in the academic environment in ways that
promoted better relationships. The result was that, long after the intervention, intervention-condition students literally led different lives than
control-condition students—lives that afforded greater support to succeed
in college.
Implicit Theories of Intelligence Interventions. Using an 8-session workshop,
Blackwell, Trzesniewski, and Dweck (2007) taught middle school students
effective study skills. In addition, half learned that the brain is like a
muscle—that it grows new connections and “gets smarter” when a person
works hard on challenging tasks (a “growth-mindset”). Students in the
“growth mindset” condition showed a sharp increase in math grades over
the rest of the academic year. Students in the control condition exhibited a
continued decline in math grades, which is typical in middle school.
Why was this intervention powerful? Some students believe that intelligence is fixed—you either have it or you do not. This belief leads students
to avoid challenges and, when they experience a setback, to attribute this to
a lack of ability. Thus when schoolwork is challenging students disengage
and learn less (Blackwell et al., 2007). By contrast, students who believe that
intelligence is malleable prize learning. They seek out challenges that offer an
opportunity to learn and, when they experience a setback, attribute it to a lack
of effort or the wrong strategy. Thus they redouble their effort or seek help.

8

EMERGING TRENDS IN THE SOCIAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES

By changing students’ beliefs about the nature of intelligence, the
“growth-mindset” intervention transformed how students responded to
the increasing academic difficulties of middle school. It led students to stay
engaged as learners as the work got harder. Growth-mindset interventions
can thus forestall vicious cycles in which poor performance reinforces a
student’s belief that intelligence is fixed (and “I don’t have it”). Instead,
they facilitate virtuous cycles in which students respond to challenges
with increased effort and improved learning, reinforcing the belief that
intelligence is malleable.
Value-Affirmation Interventions. In a series of trials, Cohen and colleagues
have given adolescent students 15–20 min writing exercises in which they
reflect on values. Students write either about values that are personally
important to them or about values that are not important to them but
might matter to someone else. The results show that at-risk students
who write about personally important values exhibit striking gains in
academic performance. In one study, this “value-affirmation” intervention,
delivered several times, raised the overall grade-point-average of initially
low-performing African American adolescents over the next 2 years (Cohen,
Garcia, Purdie-Vaugns, Apfel, & Brzustoski, 2009).
How does this intervention work? Laboratory research shows that reflecting on personally important values can defuse psychological threat and help
people function more effectively in difficult situations. Doing so helps people understand a psychological threat in the broader context of values that
matter to them, and thus prevents people from feeling overwhelmed by the
threat. School is an inherently evaluative environment; it is especially threatening for students who face negative intellectual stereotypes, such as African
American students. Moreover, because school is so recursive, a poor performance early on, especially when experienced as a psychological threat,
can undermine later performance. Value-affirmation interventions delivered
early in the school year can prevent ethnic-minority students who struggle
early from inferring that they cannot fit in or succeed in school. By interrupting a cycle of poor performance and feelings of nonbelonging, the intervention caused lasting benefits among initially low-performing African American students.
CLOSE RELATIONSHIPS
Close relationships are perhaps nothing more than recursive processes. One
person behaves; the other person construes that behavior. That construal
affects their behavior in turn; the first person responds. I get mad and you do
too; I am kind and you are kind too. Can we alter such recursive processes to
improve close relationships over time?

How Brief Social-Psychological Interventions Can Cause Enduring Effects

9

The “Take-a-Compliment!” Intervention. People with low self-esteem habitually question their worth. As a consequence, they may question whether
a relationship partner truly loves them. This can prevent people with low
self-esteem from truly accepting a compliment from a romantic partner—
from believing that the compliment reflects how their partner views and
values them in a global way (e.g., “He appreciates that I am thoughtful” vs
“He said I was thoughtful”; Marigold, Holmes, & Ross, 2007).
Marigold et al. (2007) and Marigold, Holmes, and Ross (2010) designed an
intervention to induce people with low self-esteem to accept a compliment
from a romantic partner. They asked young people in relationships to think
of a compliment their partner had recently given them. Then some people
were asked to describe the setting in which their partner had complimented
them—when and where. Others were asked to describe “why your partner admired you … [and] what it meant to you and its significance for your
relationship.”
What was the effect? For people with high self-esteem, which question was
asked did not matter much—they seemed to have no trouble accepting a
compliment in either case. However, for people with low self-esteem, being
asked to describe why a compliment had general significance transformed
their experience in the relationship. In this condition, low self-esteem
participants reported valuing the relationship more and feeling more secure
in it. Several weeks later, they continued to feel more secure and, further,
their partners reported they behaved more positively toward them in the
interim. In turn, participants reported that their partner had behaved more
positively toward them as well (Marigold et al., 2007, 2010). The intervention
thus changed the recursive interplay between romantic partners; it set
couples off on a better trajectory.
One caveat suggests the importance of precision in this intervention. When
people with low self-esteem were asked not “why” but “whether your partner admired you” all the benefits disappeared (Marigold et al., 2007). When
asked “why,” people with low self-esteem could explain why their partner
had meant a general meaning. However, when asked “whether,” people with
low self-esteem essentially construed the compliment as not having a global
meaning.
The Third Person Perspective Intervention. Every few months, Finkel et al.
(2013) asked married couples enrolled in a longitudinal study to reflect on
the most serious conflict in their marriage. One year into the 2-year study,
a random half of the couples were asked, in addition, to describe (i) how
“a neutral third-party who wants the best for all” would think about the
conflict, (ii) barriers that could prevent them from taking this perspective

10

EMERGING TRENDS IN THE SOCIAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES

in future conflict situations with their spouse, and (iii) how they could
overcome these barriers to adopt this perspective. Couples completed this
7-min writing exercise three times over the course of a year. Couples in
the control condition, who did not complete this exercise, continued to
show the decline in marital quality that is typical in longitudinal studies.
However, couples who completed the perspective-taking task stabilized in
their marital quality—they reported levels of passion, intimacy, love, and
satisfaction as high at the end of the intervention year as at the beginning.
Why was this intervention so effective? Couples in both conditions reported
the same levels of conflict—the intervention did not reduce the conflict couples experienced. However, the intervention prevented conflicts from spiraling out of control. One of the most damaging cycles in relationships is
known as negative affect reciprocity (Gottman, 1998), where each person gets
angry in turn, exacerbating the other’s distress. By teaching couples to take
a neutral third-party perspective, the intervention reduced couples’ distress
in conflicts. With less distress, couples were presumably better able to use
conflicts to address issues in their relationships and problem-solve, instead
of exacerbating a negative interaction.
INTERGROUP RELATIONSHIPS
People often feel anxious interacting with members of another social
group, especially if they think that these interactions will go poorly. If
people avoid such interactions as a consequence, this may only increase
their anxiety about and avoidance of intergroup interactions. Page-Gould,
Mendoza-Denton, and Tropp (2008) hypothesized that developing a single
close intergroup friendship would contradict people’s negative expectations about intergroup interactions, and could thus reduce anxiety about
intergroup interactions and improve intergroup outcomes more broadly.
They assigned Latino and White students to interact in either same-race or
cross-race dyads in a series of three meetings. Partners got to know each
well over these meetings—asking one another increasingly self-disclosing
questions and completing several cooperative tasks together. As predicted,
participants in the cross-group dyads reported less anxiety in their daily
lives when interacting across racial lines and sought out more intergroup
interactions. Developing a close intergroup friendship helped participants
learn that intergroup interactions need not go badly, reducing anxiety and
facilitating further intergroup contact.
Additional research shows that even minimal social connections across
group lines can improve intergroup attitudes and interest in intergroup
interactions in some circumstances, with effects lasting as long as 6 months
later (Brannon & Walton, 2013). In demonstrating ways positive intergroup

How Brief Social-Psychological Interventions Can Cause Enduring Effects

11

interactions and relationships can become self-reinforcing, this research illustrates how psychological interventions can set in motion enduring change.
KEY ISSUES FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
Mortensen and Cialdini’s full-cycle model effectively accounts for snapshot
interventions—nudges to change a specific decision or behavior in a specific setting. However, it does not aim to account for movie interventions,
which aim to change the self and thus behavior over time and in diverse
circumstances. Yet movie interventions are especially exciting not only for
their applied potential but also because they raise profound new theoretical
questions absent in snapshot interventions: How does the psychological process
targeted by the intervention affect recursive processes that unfold over time? How
can proximal outcomes become mediators that affect subsequent outcomes? In so
doing, movie interventions force researchers to develop theories about social
contexts and how psychological processes intersect with these contexts over
time. For instance, researchers must consider whether a context provides the
necessary affordances for an initial psychological change to carry forward. If
a student acquires a growth mindset, is she exposed to challenging material
she can learn from and “practice” her growth-mindset on? Do her teachers
notice and support a more engaged approach to learning? Similarly, if an
intervention invites a person to take a more charitable approach to a marital
conflict, is there sufficient trust for his or her spouse to respond in kind?
These theoretical questions are fundamentally interdisciplinary. They
involve how social-psychological variables (e.g., What is the key psychological
process the intervention addresses? How?) play out over time, a core concern of
developmental psychology, and how they do so in interaction with social and
structural factors, core concerns of sociology. Research at this intersection
will give rise to a new understanding of how and when social-psychological
processes contribute to major social problems in interaction with social systems. It will also help us diagnose social problems in a new way. For instance,
if a growth-mindset intervention has no impact on students’ achievement
in particular settings, we can look to those settings and ask whether key
mediators of higher performance were present—was challenging material
available to students? Were teachers supportive of students’ efforts to learn?
This research will help us develop more comprehensive theories of social
problems and, simultaneously, reach more people in need.
REFERENCES
Blackwell, L. A., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Theories of intelligence
and achievement across the junior high school transition: A longitudinal study
and an intervention. Child Development, 78, 246–263.

12

EMERGING TRENDS IN THE SOCIAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES

Braga, A. A., & Bond, B. J. (2008). Policing crime and disorder hot spots: A randomized, controlled trial. Criminology, 46, 577–607.
Brannon, T. N., & Walton, G. M. (2013). Enacting cultural interests: How intergroup
contact reduces prejudice by sparking interest in an outgroup’s culture. Psychological Science, 24, 1947–1957.
Bryan, C. J., Walton, G. M., Rogers, T., & Dweck, C. S. (2011). Motivating voter turnout
by invoking the self. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, 108, 12653–12656.
Cialdini, R. B., Reno, R. R., & Kallgren, C. A. (1990). A focus theory of normative
conduct: Recycling the concept of norms to reduce littering in public places. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 1015–1026.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaugns, V., Apfel, N., & Brzustoski, P. (2009). Recursive processes in self-affirmation: Intervening to close the minority achievement
gap. Science, 324, 400–403.
Cohen, G. L., & Sherman, D. K. (2014). The psychology of change: Self-affirmation
and social psychological intervention. Annual Review of Psychology, 65, 333–371.
Davidai, S., Gilovich, T., & Ross, L. D. (2012). The meaning of defaults for potential
organ donors. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(38), 15201–15205.
Finkel, E. J., Slotter, E. B., Luchies, L. B., Walton, G. M., & Gross, J. J. (2013). A brief
intervention to promote conflict reappraisal preserves marital quality over time.
Psychological Science, 24, 1595–1601.
Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (2013). A social psychological perspective on educational
intervention. In E. Shafir (Ed.), Behavioral foundations of policy (pp. 329–350). New
York, NY: Russell Sage.
Gottman, J. M. (1998). Psychology and the study of marital processes. Annual Review
of Psychology, 49, 169–197.
Hanks, A. S., Just, D. R., Smith, L. E., & Wansink, B. (2012). Healthy Convenience:
nudging students toward healthier choices in the lunchroom. Journal of Public
Health, 34, 370–376.
Johnson, E. J., & Goldstein, D. G. (2003). Do defaults save lives? Science, 302,
1338–1339.
Lewin, K. (1943). Defining the “Field at a Given Time”. Psychological Review, 50,
292–310.
Marigold, D. C., Holmes, J. G., & Ross, M. (2007). More than words: Reframing compliments from romantic partners fosters security in low self-esteem individuals.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 232–248.
Marigold, D. C., Holmes, J. G., & Ross, M. (2010). Fostering relationship resilience:
An intervention for low self-esteem individuals. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 624–630.
Mortensen, C., & Cialdini, R. B. (2010). Full cycle social psychology for theory and
application. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 4, 53–63.
Page-Gould, E., Mendoza-Denton, R., & Tropp, L. R. (2008). With a little help from my
cross-group friend: Reducing anxiety in intergroup contexts through cross-group
friendship. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 95, 1080–1094.

How Brief Social-Psychological Interventions Can Cause Enduring Effects

13

Thaler, R. H., & Sunstein, C. R. (2009). Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth,
and happiness. New York, NY: Penguin Books.
Walton, G. M. (2014). The new science of wise psychological interventions. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 23, 73–82.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2007). A question of belonging: Race, social fit, and
achievement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 82–96.
Walton, G. M., Logel, C., Peach, J., Spencer, S., & Zanna, M. P. (in press). Two brief
social-psychological interventions transform women’s experience, relationships,
and achievement in engineering. Journal of Educational Psychology.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A brief social-belonging intervention improves
academic and health outcomes among minority students. Science, 331, 1447–1451.
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological interventions in education:
They’re not magic. Review of Educational Research, 81, 267–301.

FURTHER READING
Dweck, C. (2007). Mindset: The new psychology of success. New York, NY: Random
House.
Murray, S. L., Homes, J. G., & Collins, N. L. (2006). The relational signature of felt
security. Psychological Bulletin, 132, 641–666.
Sherman, D. K., & Cohen, G. L. (2006). The psychology of self-defense:
Self-affirmation theory. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 38, pp. 183–242). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Steele, C. M. (2010). Whistling Vivaldi: And other clues to how stereotypes affect us. New
York, NY: Norton.
Walton, G. M., Spencer, S. J., & Erman, S. (2013). Affirmative meritocracy. Social Issues
and Policy Review, 7, 1–35.
Wilson, T. D. (2011). Redirect: The surprising new science of psychological change. New
York, NY: Little Brown.

DUSHIYANTHINI (TONI) KENTHIRARAJAH SHORT BIOGRAPHY
Dushiyanthini (Toni) Kenthirarajah is a PhD candidate in Social Psychology at Stanford University (http://stanford.edu/∼tonikent). She received a
BA with Honors in Psychology from the University of Waterloo in 2010 and
an MA in Psychology from Stanford University in 2013. Working with Gregory M. Walton and Geoffrey L. Cohen, Toni’s research examines subtle cues
that affect social perception and judgment in intergroup contexts, such as
the effects of ethnic-minority versus Anglo first names on judgments about
who should be granted U.S. Citizenship, hired for a job or what the appropriate prison sentence is in a criminal case. In other research, Toni studies
how subtle linguistic cues that signal a fixed versus growth mindset about
intelligence in critical feedback affect students’ persistence and motivation
following setbacks.

14

EMERGING TRENDS IN THE SOCIAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES

GREGORY M. WALTON SHORT BIOGRAPHY
Gregory M. Walton is an assistant professor of social psychology at Stanford
University (http://www.stanford.edu/∼gwalton). Much of his research
investigates psychological processes that contribute to major social problems
and how “wise” interventions that target these processes can address these
problems. These interventions can be brief but generate lasting effects.
For instance, one 1-h intervention he developed with Geoffrey Cohen to
bolster students’ feelings of social belonging in college raised the academic
achievement of ethnic minority students over the next 3 years. Other
research investigates the bases of academic motivation, how to promote
positive close and intergroup relationships and how to increase voter
turnout. In addition to his research, he teaches courses on psychology and
social problems, including one entitled “Wise Interventions.” He earned
his A.B. in Philosophy from Stanford and a PhD in Psychology from Yale
University. After graduate school, he worked for a year as a fellow in the
Office of Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton and then completed a postdoctoral
fellowship at the University of Waterloo.
RELATED ESSAYS
What Is Neuroticism, and Can We Treat It? (Psychology), Amantia Ametaj
et al.
Peers and Adolescent Risk Taking (Psychology), Jason Chein
Delusions (Psychology), Max Coltheart
Misinformation and How to Correct It (Psychology), John Cook et al.
Problems Attract Problems: A Network Perspective on Mental Disorders
(Psychology), Angélique Cramer and Denny Borsboom
Controlling the Influence of Stereotypes on One’s Thoughts (Psychology),
Patrick S. Forscher and Patricia G. Devine
Emerging Evidence of Addiction in Problematic Eating Behavior (Psychology), Ashley Gearhardt et al.
Insomnia and Sleep Disorders (Psychology), Elizabeth C. Mason and Allison
G. Harvey
Mental Imagery in Psychological Disorders (Psychology), Emily A. Holmes
et al.
Normal Negative Emotions and Mental Disorders (Sociology), Allan V.
Horwitz
Dissociation and Dissociative Identity Disorder (DID) (Psychology), Rafaële
J. C. Huntjens and Martin J. Dorahy
Computer Technology and Children’s Mental Health (Psychology), Philip C.
Kendall et al.

How Brief Social-Psychological Interventions Can Cause Enduring Effects

15

Understanding Risk-Taking Behavior: Insights from Evolutionary Psychology (Psychology), Karin Machluf and David F. Bjorklund
Disorders of Consciousness (Psychology), Martin M. Monti
Culture as Situated Cognition (Psychology), Daphna Oyserman
Cognitive Remediation in Schizophrenia (Psychology), Clare Reeder and Til
Wykes
Cognitive Bias Modification in Mental (Psychology), Meg M. Reuland et al.
Clarifying the Nature and Structure of Personality Disorder (Psychology),
Takakuni Suzuki and Douglas B. Samuel
Rumination (Psychology), Edward R. Watkins
Emotion Regulation (Psychology), Paree Zarolia et al.

