Chapter 11

How the Subjective Relationship Between
the Self, Others, and a Task Drives Interest
Allison Master, Lucas P. Butler, and Gregory M. Walton

Allison Master and Lucas P. Butler contributed equally to this
work.

The present chapter explores the hypothesis that an important influence on interest
is the perceived or subjective social context in which a task is completed.
There is an irony in this focus. When people evaluate their interest in a task, they
typically do so with qualities of the task and themselves in mind (Sansone, Thoman,
& Smith, 2010): Is this task novel or appealing? Do I feel capable at it? Is it relevant
to my identity in some way? This focus on the intersection of a person and a task is
also evident in people's experience of being engrossed by a task in the height of
interest (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975). We also typically talk about interest in terms of
the qualities of people (e.g., "She is interested in biology, but he is interested in history") and of tasks (e.g., "Reading my psychology textbook is more interesting than
reading my economics textbook"). Correspondingly, classic theories have emphasized the person-task intersection, such as self-efficacy theory, which emphasizes
people's self-assessed ability on a task or in a setting (Bandura, 1997). Current theories of interest have also incorporated situational factors, such as the objective social

Allison Master and Lucas P. Butler contributed equally to this work.
A. Master (l8l)
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
e-mail: almaster@uw.edu
L.P. Butler
University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA
e-mail: lpbutler@umd.edu
G.M. Walton
Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
e-mail: gwalton@stanford.edu
©Springer International Publishing AG 2017
P.A. 0' Keefe, J.M. Harackiewicz (eds.), The Science of Interest,
DOl 10.1007/978-3-319-55509-6_11

209

210

A. Master et a!.

context in which a person engages with a task, as contributing to interest (Knogler,
Harackiewicz, Gegenfurtner, & Lewalter, 2015; Renninger & Hidi, 2016; Sansone
& Thoman, 2005).
Extending this approach, we focus on the subjective social context in which a
task is completed-simply people's perception of the relationship between themselves, a task, and other people engaged in the task. We call this the triadic relationship in which a task is completed. In general, we theorize that when people perceive
themselves to be connected to others engaged in a task, or working with others on
the task rather than separately, this will inspire greater interest and engagement.
Consistent with our theorizing, research shows that both children and adults experience greater interest when working with or alongside a partner (Isaac, Sansone, &
Smith, 1999). But the social context is also subjective-that is, people perceive and
draw inferences about their relationships with other people in the setting-and these
inferences can be consequential (e.g., Steele, 1997). Imagine going for a hike with
another person. Even if the other person walks ahead of you out of sight, your experience is fundamentally different than if you were truly alone because the experience is shared. The subjective social context can also shift in substantive ways even
when people engage in a personal task. Consider a student sitting down to work on
her math homework. She may be physically alone, yet aware of her friends working
through the same problems. She could think of herself and her friends as working
on the problems together, for instance if she talked with her friends about the problems earlier in the day or anticipates going through them together the next day in
school. Alternately, without such communications, she could think of herself and
her friends as working on the same assignment but separately. As this case illustrates, even when people work alone, they may do so on terms defined by their
understanding of how the activity is situated in a broader social context.
This chapter focuses primarily on how the triadic relationship between the self,
a task, and others engaged in the task gives rise to situational interest, a psychological state influenced by the situation the person is in. This is distinguished from
individual interest, an enduring characteristic of the person (Hidi & Renninger,
2006). Interest emerges from a person's affective and cognitive responses to particular content that contribute to a desire to reengage with that content in the future
(Hidi & Harackiewicz, 2000; Renninger & Hidi, 2016). While interest is sometimes
used interchangeably with intrinsic motivation (Schiefele, 1999), we define the latter as a tendency to engage in activities for their own sake (Sansone & Thoman,
2005). We view interest and intrinsic motivation as having a recursive relationship-increased interest can lead people to increased intrinsic motivation (as measured by greater persistence and goal pursuit, even in the face of challenge), and the
experience of being intrinsically motivated can lead to greater interest (Renninger &
Hidi, 2016).

11

How the Subjective Relationship Between the Self, Others, and a Task ...

211

The Objective and Subjective Social Context
In focusing on the subjective social context, our argument implies that the social
context always plays a part in interest, and a larger part than many existing theories
credit. When previous theories have examined the role of the social context, they
have tended to emphasize the objective social context. These include the physical
presence of others, which can facilitate dominant responses to a task (e.g., Zajonc,
1965); cooperation or competition with others who are physically present
(Murayama & Elliot, 2012; Plass, O'Keefe et al., 2013; Tauer & Harackiewicz,
2004); social comparison information, which shows that people often work harder
when they compare themselves to someone more capable (Festinger, 1954; Kerr
et al., 2007; Taylor & Lobel, 1989); and situations in which people's inputs to a collective task are unmarked, which can elicit social loafing, or in which outcomes are
codependent with others who appear incompetent, which can elicit compensatory
motivation (Williams & Karau, 1991; Williams, Karau, & Bourgeois, 1993).
Alternately, previous theories have emphasized the role of inherently important
people, like one's mother, who may be associated with specific motivations
(Fitzsimons & Bargh, 2003; Iyengar & Lepper, 1999), or broad threats to one's
belonging in general, which can undermine self-regulated goal pursuit (Baumeister,
Twenge, & Nuss, 2002).
Complementing these approaches, we argue that the subjective sense that one is
connected to others engaged in a task--even to new interaction partners-can transform a person's interest (see Fig. 11.1). This transformation hinges on at least two
aspects of an individual's psychological experience of the social context. The first is
their perception of the personal connection they have (or do not have) to others
engaged with the task. People can automatically take on the goals of others (Aarts,

Task
Fig. 11.1 The triadic relationship. Interest is not just a function of the relationship between a
person and a task, but also the perceived relationship between a person, a task, and other people

212

A. Master et al.

Gollwitzer, & Hassin, 2004); we suggest that when people feel connected to others,
they will be more likely to incorporate their interests as their own. The second is a
person's perception of the relationship between themselves, others engaged in the
task, and the task. When people feel they are working together on a shared task,
their interest may increase. This approach emphasizes interest as arising not just
from the intersection between a person and a task-such as a person's confidence in
their ability-but as a consequence of the triadic relationship among a person, a
task, and the other people in the social context.
A primary feature of our approach is that it highlights people's subjective construal of the social situation-the situation as understood by the actor. It is this
construal that most directly shapes people's behavior (Ross & Nisbett, 1991). In
some cases people make sense of their relationships with others in a setting from
objective aspects of the social context (e.g., much of the developmental work; Isaac
et al., 1999). But we also examine how these perceived relationships can arise from
simple symbolic cues. These cues can create a sense of social connection with others engaged in a task or a sense of belonging in a performance domain, holding
constant actual interaction and the objective social setting (Carr & Walton, 20 14;
Murphy, Steele, & Gross, 2007; Walton, Cohen, Cwir, & Spencer, 2012).
In this chapter, we explore how the triadic relationship between the self, a task,
and others in the social context shapes situational interest and intrinsic motivation
at different stages of development. In infancy, the importance of the social context
is clearly illustrated in the overt, visible scaffolding between infants, adults, and
learning contexts, as seen in situations involving social referencing and joint attention to an object (Baldwin, 1991; Sorce, Emde, Campos, & Klinnert, 1985) and the
use of an adult as a secure base for exploration (Ainsworth, Blehar, Waters, & Wall,
1978). Next, we argue that this triadic relationship remains important for adults, but
can also arise in more subtle and complicated forms later in life. Finally, we discuss
implications for our understanding of interest, including possible targets for "wise"
interventions that could capitalize on triadic relationship processes to boost children's and adults' interest in important academic tasks (see Walton, 2014).

Theoretical Background
Why should the triadic relationship influence interest? An important reason involves
the automatic tendency of people to connect to others, the benefits of doing so, and
the fact that in doing so people often develop a shared orientation toward important
aspects of the world (see Walton & Cohen, 2011b). The need to belong is a basic
source of human motivation for adults (Baumeister & Leary, 1995) and children
(Over, 2016). One indicator of its importance is in the consequences when it is disrupted. Indeed, when people imagine themselves excluded, they experience emotional and cognitive distress, even in trivial situations (Baumeister et al., 2002;
Williams & Nida, 2011). Moreover, from infancy people show a basic orientation

11

How the Subjective Relationship Between the Self, Others, and a Task ...

213

toward and coordination with others (Csibra, 2010; Farroni et al., 2005; Morton &
Johnson, 1991). Adults unconsciously mimic the behavior of others, and this mimicry both causes social connections and results from social connections (Chartrand
& Bargh, 1999). People also overcome barriers to coordinate behavior with others.
In one study, people sitting in rocking chairs synchronized their rocking speeds with
each other, even when their chairs were designed to rock at different frequencies
(Richardson, Marsh, Isenhower, Goodman, & Schmidt, 2007). The pronouns "we"
and "us" further have a positive emotional significance that is activated automatically and unconsciously (Perdue, Dovidio, Gurtman, & Tyler, 1990). In close relationships, representations of the self and other can even merge, so that people get
the characteristics of the self confused with the characteristics of the relationship
partner (Aron et al., 2004).
People also have inclinations to share attention, behavior, and cognitions with
others when responding to events in the world or when engaged in tasks. Similar
neural mechanisms are involved in monitoring one's own and others' performance,
creating parallel responses to events that occur to one person (Sebanz, Bekkering, &
Knoblich, 2006). As noted, goals (e.g., to be helpful) can spread from one person to
another automatically (Aarts et al., 2004). Suggesting that one function of this sharing is to cement social relationships, these tendencies can be increased by even
subtle recognition of the social connections between people. In one study, participants who felt socially connected to a peer (due to shared personal preferences)
experienced more similar emotional and physiological states as that peer, and this
effect was mediated by their sense of connectedness to that person (Cwir, Carr,
Walton, & Spencer, 2011). When people simply believe that they are paying attention to or experiencing something with other people this intensifies responses to that
object or event, particularly when people feel connected to these co-observers (see
Shteynberg, 2015). In a series of studies, participants made quicker and more accurate judgments about stimuli when they believed similar others were also evaluating
the same stimuli, compared to dissimilar others or different stimuli (Shteynberg,
2010). Similarly, sharing goals or emotions with similar others (compared to dissimilar others) intensifies the pursuit of those goals and the experience of those
emotions (Shteynberg & Galinsky, 2011; Shteynberg et al., 2014).
This sensitivity to cues that connect a person to others engaged in a task is functional. It brings people closer to others and builds a sense of belonging to a community (Aron, Norman, Aron, McKenna, & Heyman, 2000; Aronson, 2004;
Baumeister & Leary, 1995). And it helps people accomplish goals that would be
impossible to accomplish alone (Asch, 1952; Vygotsky, 1978). Indeed, theorists
suggest that the capacity and desire to share intentions with others confers human
many advantages, including the development and transmission of culture and language, and sets us apart from other primates (Tomasello, Carpenter, Call, Behne, &
Moll, 2005).
Together, this evidence indicates the importance of social connections to our
experiences. The next sections explore empirical evidence for the triadic relationship in more detail.

214

A. Master et al.

Evidence from Development
Many theories of development emphasize the way in which adults create social situ. ations that engage infants and young children with tasks that promote exploration
and learning (e.g., Ainsworth et al., 1978; Vygotsky, 1978). This tradition suggests
that the triadic relationship between an individual, a task, and others in the subjective social context may play a fundamental role in interest from an early age. If so,
even young children may be more interested in tasks that are perceived to involve
social connection or engagement, and we may see continuity in this effect over the
course of development.
Indeed, from the very earliest days of life, infants selectively attend to social
stimuli such as eyes and faces, preferentially orienting towards them rather than to
non-social stimuli (Csibra, 2010; Farroni et al., 2005; Morton & Johnson, 1991).
This early sensitivity sets the stage for the essential role of social relationships and
interactions in development. From an early age, infants show a surprisingly sophisticated understanding of the social world. As early as 5 months of age, infants attend
to the goals underlying the actions of others (Woodward, 1998). During the second
year of life if not earlier they recognize that others are "like them," and that others'
actions will be based on their perceptions, just as their own actions are (Meltzoff,
2007). They also draw inferences about others' desires and preferences (Kushnir,
Xu, & Wellman, 2010; Repacholi & Gopnik, 1997). Finally, they seek to imitate
others in order to affiliate and build social bonds, for example more closely imitating when they have been primed with cues of rejection (Over & Carpenter, 2013).
Thus, from early in development, children are attentive to social stimuli and motivated to engage with others to infer others' goals, and to build relationships. From
an early age, then, children are equipped to share interests and goals with others.
Moreover, it is clear that this early sociality plays an important role in young
children's interest, and that the triadic relationship between the self, a task, and others in the social context is at its core. In the first 2 years of life, as soon as they are
capable, children are particularly interested in engaging socially with others on joint
tasks. For instance, 12-month-olds point informatively to make others aware of
something new (Liszkowski, Carpenter, & Tomasello, 2007) or to locate hidden
objects (Liszkowski et al., 2008). Fourteen-month-olds imitate others' goal-directed
actions (Meltzoff, 1995) and help others achieve their goals (Over & Carpenter,
2009; Warneken & Tomasello, 2006, 2007). In addition, 2-year-olds are highly
interested in collaborative social games (Dunham & Moore, 1995; Ross & Lollis,
1987; Warneken, Chen, & Tomasello, 2006), urging partners to continue participating even when they can accomplish the task alone (Warneken, Grafenhain, &
Tomasello, 2012). They also spontaneously help adults achieve their instrumental
(Warneken & Tomasello, 2006) and social goals (Beier, Over, & Carpenter, 2014).
Children are also interested not only in engaging with others or helping others
with their goals, but in collaborating on a shared task. They show some basic cooperative skills at 14 months, coordinating their actions with an adult partner in order

11

How the Subjective Relationship Between the Self, Others, and a Task ...

215

to achieve a goal such as retrieving a toy (Warneken & Tomasello, 2007). Between
ages 2 and 3 they begin to collaboratively solve simple physical problems (Ashley
& Tomasello, 1998; Brownell & Carriger, 1990). By 3 they prefer to work cooperatively rather than work alone (Rekers, Haun, & Tomasello, 2011). This preference
may confer benefits. In one study, 4- and 5-year-olds who worked on a task in pairs
showed more positive affect, performed better on the task, and remembered it better
than children who worked alone, especially the 5-year-olds (Perlmutter, Behrend,
Kuo, & Muller, 1989). And children who made music together (i.e., had a shared
goal in their music playing, by drumming together rather than independently) were
more likely to spontaneously engage in prosocial behavior later, suggesting a link
between social connection around a task and later social motivations (Kirschner &
Tomasello, 2010). Finally, it appears that children are sensitive to cues in interpersonal interactions that help to define their relationships with others. In one study,
preschoolers showed significantly more helping behavior when the person needing
help had first engaged them in reciprocal, rather than parallel play (Barragan &
Dweck, 2014). By middle school, the relationship may be more complex. In one
study, middle-school students showed higher situational interest when they engaged
socially in a math game, either competitively or cooperatively, than when they
played individually (Plass, O'Keefe et al., 2013). When taken together, these streams
of research show that children have a drive not only to engage socially with others
from birth but to do so in a collaborative, cooperative manner centered around the
triadic relationship between the self, a task, and other people in the social context.
These past studies have focused on the objective social context; however, recent
research also finds that young children are also responsive to subtle cues that shape
the subjective social context in which they complete a task and, moreover, these
cues inspire motivation and interest. One set of studies focused on the connection a
child may feel with peers engaged in a task (Master & Walton, 2013). Preschoolers
were given the opportunity to work on a challenging puzzle for as long as they liked.
Before beginning, children in one condition were told they were part of "the puzzles
group," thus giving them a group identity associated with the task; children in the
other condition were told that they were "the puzzles child," giving them a personal
identity associated with the task. All children then worked on the puzzle on their
own. Those in the group condition persisted nearly 30% longer than children in the
non-social identity condition. A second study found that merely being assigned to a
group but one not associated with puzzles did not produce the same increase in
motivation. Only when the group identity was associated with puzzles, creating a
triadic relationship between the self, the task, and other children, did motivation
increase. A third study extended the findings to word learning: children assigned to
a group associated with a task learned more from the task than children assigned a
personal identity associated with a task. Follow-up studies find that children also
report greater enjoyment for and are more likely to prefer tasks completed as part of
a task-oriented group (Master, Cheryan, & Meltzoff, 2017). These studies illustrate
how the triadic relationship between the self, a task, and others in the social context
can boost persistence, learning, and interest early in development.

216

A. Master et al.

A second set of studies examined whether cues that merely represent one as
working together on a task, even absent a group identity, might have similar effects
(Butler & Walton, 2013). As in the studies just described, preschool-aged children
were given the opportunity to work for as long as they liked on a challenging puzzle
and did so on their own. In one condition, however, children first viewed a video of
a child in another room starting to work on the puzzle, were told the video was live
and were told that they and the other child were "doing the puzzle together." In the
other condition, children saw the same video but were told that this was a recording
from a different day when the other child had also done the puzzle. Thus, as in the
studies on belonging to a group, the objective situation was identical across conditions--children worked alone on a puzzle task-but the construal of the situation
varied. Children led to see the situation as one in which they were collaborating
with another child worked more than 40% longer on the puzzle than children led to
think of themselves as simply working on the same task another child had also
worked on; they also reported enjoying the task more. A second study found that the
working-together condition also increased persistence and enjoyment relative to a
second control condition, one in which another child worked on the same puzzle at
the same time but without creating the same triadic relationship--one where children were told they were taking turns with the other child.
These studies provide promising evidence that perceived triadic relationships
may play an important role in even young children's situational interest.

Evidence from Adulthood
The previous section showed that the triadic relationship between the self, a task,
and others in the social context is present and psychologically meaningful early in
childhood. Cues that encourage young children simply to construe a situation as one
in which they are connected to others associated with a task or jointly engaged on a
task boosts children's motivation and situational interest.
We now turn to relevant evidence in adulthood. It is certainly possible that the
triadic relationship between the self, a task, and others in the social context wanes
in importance as adults become more independent and autonomous. Indeed, as we
grow older, we are less likely to need overt scaffolding from others. However, we
argue that the social context and real and perceived relationships with others remain
important, and do so even when they operate in the background as people focus on
a task (Csikszentrnihalyi, 1975). This may be most likely when people are considering a new, unfamiliar domain or task. First, we discuss evidence that people value
objects and experiences more if they are connected to others. We then examine
whether people show greater interest and motivation for tasks that are social, even
as a consequence of subtle cues.

11

How the Subjective Relationship Between the Self, Others, and a Task ...

217

Do We Value Social Objects and Experiences More?
Pablo Neruda's Ode to Things describes a love for all things because they "bear the
trace of someone's finger" (Neruda, 1994). Of course, we do not assign more value
to used objects, which might be less useful, or objects like t-shirts that have been
physically touched by others, which might be off-putting (Argo, Dahl, & Morales,
2006). But we perceive more value in objects that belonged to someone admirable,
such as Albert Einstein, and less value in those that belonged to someone evil like
Hitler (Newman, Diesendruck, & Bloom, 2011), an effect shown even by young
children (Gelman, Frazier, Noles, Manczak, & Stilwell, 2015). And obviously
objects that are handmade and thus less common can be more valuable than objects
from a factory. But holding all of those things constant, the mere idea that an object
has a social history, that a person, even a generic stranger, contributed to its creation,
makes it more appealing. In one study participants learned that a product was "made
by people using machines in a small factory in Nebraska," prioritizing the role of
people. This "social trace" caused people to value those objects more than objects
"made by machines run by people in a small factory in Nebraska" (Job, Nikitin,
Zhang, Carr, & Walton, 2017). Simply prioritizing the social history of the object
increased its value.
We also value activities more when they are social. One study gave adults a
choice between completing a "dull" activity (e.g., listening to audio-tones) or a
parallel "appealing" activity (e.g., listening to music). When both activities would
be done alone, unsurprisingly participants strongly preferred the appealing activity.
When the dull activity could be done with others, however, participants' preference
for that activity relative to the appealing activity rose by 40% and they reported a
smaller difference in how enjoyable they anticipated the activities being (described
in Walton & Cohen, 2011b). When a task is social, it affords opportunities for social
connections, exchanging emotions, and collaborating, placing it in a different light.
Thus, both objects and activities take on additional value and become more interesting when connected to others.

Does Social Connection Increase Our Interest and Motivation?
Objective features of the social context in which people complete a task that facilitate connections with others can increase interest and intrinsic motivation. As mentioned previously, simply working with another person increases interest in an
activity (Isaac et al., 1999). The experience of talking with others about an activity
or class can also increase people's current and future interest in that activity or class
(Thoman, Sansone, Fraughton, & Pasupathi, 2012; Thoman, Sansone, & Pasupathi,
2007). Other research has found that membership in academic groups in real-world
classrooms can promote learning and achievement (Aronson & Osherow, 1980;
Johnson & Johnson, 2009), while feeling socially connected to peers and teachers

218

A. Master et al.

in school in general predicts greater intrinsic motivation for academic tasks (e.g.,
Furrer & Skinner, 2003; Goodenow, 1992; Hamre & Pianta, 2005).
These studies examined real social interactions. However, echoing the recent
developmental research presented earlier (Butler & Walton, 2013; Master & Walton,
2013), subjective social cues can also define a triadic relationship between a person,
a task, and others in the social context and thereby increase interest. As in the developmental work, research with adults has examined cues that convey two important
representations of this triadic relationship: a sense of connection to others associated with a domain and a sense of working together with another person.

How Social Belonging Boosts Interest and Motivation Even minimal cues that
establish a sense of social connection with others can facilitate the social sharing of
interest and motivation. We call these cues "mere belonging."
One series of studies tested this hypothesis in the context of students' motivation
for math (Walton et al., 2012). In one study, participants read an article about a math
major who either shared their birthday or did not. Those for whom the math major
shared their birthday persisted longer on a math puzzle and reported greater interest
in math, an effect mediated by a greater sense of connection to math. In another
study, participants told they were part of a minimal "numbers group" persisted longer on an insoluble math puzzle than participants told they were the "numbers person." In a third study, participants who read that the math department offered
opportunities for collaboration and positive social interactions likewise showed
greater motivation in math.
These findings and follow-up studies on goal activation (Walton et al., 2012) suggest an active process in which a social connection with others increases the activation of others' goals and interest in pursuing them (see also Brannon & Walton,
2013; Cwir et al., 2011; Master & Walton, 2013). This effect can be observed even
when people's behavior is freely chosen and in private, suggesting that people have
internalized the interests and motivations of others for themselves.
How Working Together Boosts Interest and Motivation Another important representation of the triadic relationship is whether people think of themselves as working with others or separately from others. Although working together can be created
by the objective social context (Isaac et al., 1999), subtle cues can also signal a state
of working together and facilitate interest and intrinsic motivation (e.g., Butler &
Walton, 2013). For example, as noted earlier students may study on their own for a
class but, having exchanged tips and encouragement on the material with peers,
may thereby experience a feeling of working together as they study. Absent such
communications, even students working on a group project may construe their personal labor as separate from even if coordinated with other students' labor. We
argue adults as well as young children respond to cues that evoke the feeling of
working together with increased interest and motivation, and do so over and above
simply working at the same time on the same task as others.
Testing this hypothesis, in one series of studies, participants worked alone on an
insoluble puzzle. However, some participants were treated as partners working with
others on the task, while others were treated as working in parallel with others-at

11

How the Subjective Relationship Between the Self, Others, and a Task ...

219

the same time, in the same environment, and on the same task, but not as together
(Carr & Walton, 2014). Participants came to the laboratory in small groups, met,
and then went to individual rooms where they were assigned to a condition. In the
working-together condition, the experimenter told participants that the study concerned tips and puzzles and that they were "working together" with the other participants. The experimenter then explained that a coin flip (ostensibly determined by
chance) would determine whether the participant would write a tip to another participant or receive a tip from one. All participants in this condition were then told
that they had been assigned to receive a tip. The control condition was identical
except that participants were not told that they were "working together" and believed
they would write a tip for or receive a tip from the experimenter rather than another
participant. In this condition participants thus learned that they would be working at
the same time and on the same task as others in the same environment but without
cues that signaled a state of working together.
This procedure held constant an array of other factors. The recipient of the tip
was ostensibly random, and thus not a signal of the perceived ability of the recipient. The tip participants received in both conditions was provided quickly and
recounted an unsuccessful strategy for the puzzle; it thus provided minimal information about the other person's performance. In both conditions, participants also
worked alone, in separate rooms, on their own task.
Across five experiments, participants in the working-together condition persisted
48-64% longer on the puzzle, rated the task as more enjoyable, were more likely to
say that they had worked hard on it because it was interesting, were more engaged
in the task (as shown by better memory for it later), and performed better on it.
Why did the feeling of working together increase interest, intrinsic motivation,
and performance? It was not because of external pressures-there was no difference
in participants' feelings of obligation to others or sense of competition with others.
It was also not because of negative emotions-there was no evidence that working
together increased worries about being evaluated or judged based on their performance. Instead, cues of working together created a feeling of working together with
others on a challenging task. When we engage in a task jointly with others, the task
takes on social meaning that can help turn work into play (see also Shteynberg &
Galinsky, 2011).

Applications and Intervention
We have argued that the triadic relationship between the self, a task or domain, and
other people in the subjective social context can have a powerful effect on interest
and motivation from our earliest days through adulthood. In incorporating the subjective social context, this perspective complements previous research on interest
and motivation that focuses on the relationship between a person and a task, such as
how choice (Cordova & Lepper, 1996) and beliefs about individual autonomy and
competence (e.g., Bandura, 1997; Carver & Scheier, 2001) drive interest, as well as

220

A. Master et a!.

recent work emphasizing the importance of the objective social context (Knogler
et al., 2015; Renninger & Hidi, 2016; Sansone & Thoman, 2005). The crux of our
proposal is that individuals' construal of a task as one in which they feel connected
with others and jointly engaged with others can have major impacts on interest, even
from the earliest years of development.
Taken together, this research suggests promising potential targets for interventions to raise interest and motivation in important school, work, and other contexts.
Such interventions would harness the power of this triadic relationship. Although
not narrowly targeted at the triadic relationship we have discussed here, research
demonstrates that interventions to promote students' sense of belonging in school
can have powerful and lasting effects on motivation and achievement (Walton &
Cohen, 2007, 2011a; Walton, Logel, Peach, Spencer, & Zanna, 2015; Yeager et al.,
2016).
These interventions are predicated on research indicating that students who face
social stigma, negative stereotypes, or the underrepresentation of their group in
school can, as a consequence, harbor persistent doubts about whether they belong
(Walton & Cohen, 2007). This question of social belonging can lead students to
infer from even commonplace negative events like feeling lonely or receiving critical academic feedback that they do not belong in general in school. This prevents
students from engaging with others in school and developing interest in coursework
(Cheryan, Master, & Meltzoff, 2015; Mendoza-Denton, Downey, Purdie, Davis, &
Pietrzak, 2002). To address this worry, the social-belonging intervention offers students a more hopeful narrative for making sense of daily adversities. Through stories from older students, first-year students learn that worries about belonging are
normal in an academic transition and improve with time, not proof of a lack of
belonging. Students then have the opportunity to reflect on these ideas and write
about how this process of change has been true for them. In one trial, this exercise
completed in an hour-long session in the first year of college raised African
American students' achievement through graduation, halving the racial achievement gap over this 3-year period (Walton & Cohen, 201la). Although interest was
not measured, it is likely that feeling a secure sense of belonging allowed students
to relax and pursue their academic interests. Such benefits have been observed in a
variety of groups that are marginalized in academic settings, including among
women in male-dominated engineering fields (Walton et al., 2015) and among
diverse disadvantaged ethnic-minority groups and first-generation college students
(Stephens, Hamedani, & Destin, 2014; Yeager et al. 2016). This research illustrates
the importance of how students make sense of their social relationships in school.
What might an intervention that targeted the triadic relationship precisely look like?
Such an intervention would help people see themselves as connected to others
engaged in a setting or a task, or as working with others in or on it. Importantly, this
may be done through subjective cues that signal the relationships among the self, a
task, and others-it may not require a change in the objective social context (Wing
& Jeffery, 1999). This area of research is growing rapidly; here are some promising
early examples.

11

How the Subjective Relationship Between the Self, Others, and a Task ...

221

Extending the research we presented earlier on "mere belonging" (Walton et al.,
2012), one intervention provided 9th grade teachers information about personal
similarities they shared with a random subset of their students (Gehlbach et al.,
2016), which presumably led teachers to interact with these students in ways that
facilitated stronger relationships. This raised course grades for Black and Latino
students, for whom personal relationships in school may otherwise be weakest,
reducing the achievement gap between those students and White and Asian students
by 60%.
Or consider social-norm interventions. People are often thought to conform to
social norms merely because what others do is taken as a sign of what is effective
and what is sanctioned (Cialdini & Trost, 1998). However, normative appeals can
also often represent a collective effort toward a common goal and invite people to
work together toward this goal. For instance, Goldstein, Cialdini, and Griskevicius
(2008) induced more hotel guests to reuse towels with a normative appeal that
explicitly invited people to work together ("JOIN YOUR FELLOW GUESTS IN
HELPING TO SAVE THE ENVIRONMENT. Almost 75% of guests ... [reuse] their
towels more than once," capitalized in the original) as compared to an appeal that
focused only on the environmental benefits ("HELP SAVE THE ENVIRONMENT").
Did the aspect of the appeal that invited people to "join" with others to accomplish
a goal evoke a feeling of working together and contribute to its effectiveness?
Testing this hypothesis, Howe, Carr, and Walton (under review) manipulated
whether appeals in three contexts merely provided normative information ("Most
people do X") or also invited people to "join in" and "do it together." As predicted,
as compared to both a no-norm control condition and mere normative information,
participants expressed greater interest in giving to a charity and greater motivation
to reduce personal carbon emissions when exposed to working-together normative
appeals; these effects were further mediated by greater feelings of working together
with others toward a goal. Finally, in a field experiment, restrooms on a college
campus randomly assigned stickers that combined normative information with an
appeal to work together to reduce paper towel use showed significantly greater
reductions in paper towel use over 2 weeks than restrooms where the stickers provided only identical normative information.
These results suggest the power of the perceived triadic relationship to motivate
behavior in prosocial and environmental contexts. They raise intriguing questions
about past research, such as whether classic interventions commonly understood as
demonstrating the power of normative influence also evoked a sense of working
with others toward a goal (e.g., Lewin's [1947] "cheap meat" intervention). Finally,
although these studies have not examined interest and motivation in school or work
settings, in combination with laboratory research (Carr & Walton, 2014) they suggest the potential promise of working-together interventions in these settings and
the importance of research that pursues this question.

222

A. Master et al.

Conclusion
From early in life the subjective social context shapes children's approach to learning and sets the stage for the development of interest into adolescence and adulthood. Clearly more research is needed both to deepen our theoretical understanding
of these processes and to translate these lessons into interventions that can promote
students' development. However, it is clear that creating a sense of personal connection can help students develop interest and thrive in academic contexts.

References
Aarts, H., Gollwitzer, P.M., & Hassin, R. R. (2004). Goal contagion: Perceiving is for pursuing.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87, 23-37.
Ainsworth, M. D. S., Blehar, M. C., Waters, E., & Wall, S. (1978). Patterns of attachment: A psychological study of the strange situation. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Argo, J. J., Dahl, D. W., & Morales, A. C. (2006). Consumer contamination: How consumers react
to products touched by others. Journal of Marketing, 70, 81-94.
Aron, A., McLaughlin-Volpe, T., Mashek, D., Lewandowski, G., Wright, S. C., & Aron, E. N.
(2004). Including others in the self. European Review of Social Psychology, 15, 101-132.
Aron, A., Norman, C. C., Aron, E. N., McKenna, C., & Heyman, R. (2000). Couples' shared
participation in novel and arousing activities and experienced relationship quality. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 273-284.
Aronson, E. (2004). Reducing hostility and building compassion: Lessons from the jigsaw classroom. In A. G. Miller (Ed.), The social psychology of good and evil (pp. 469-488). New York:
Guilford Press.
Aronson, E., & Osherow, N. (1980). Cooperation, prosocial behavior, and academic performance:
Experiments in the desegregated classroom. In L. Bickerman (Ed.), Applied social psychology
annual (pp. 163-196). Beverley Hills, CA: Sage.
Asch, S. E. (1952). Social psychology. New York: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Ashley, J., & Tomasello, M. (1998). Cooperative problem-solving and teaching in preschoolers.
Social Development, 7, 143-163.
Baldwin, D. A. (1991). Infants' contribution to the achievement of joint reference. Child
Development, 62, 874-890.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: W. H. Freeman.
Barragan, R. C., & Dweck, C. S. (2014). Rethinking natural altruism: Simple reciprocal interactions trigger children's benevolence. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Ill,
17071-17074.
Baumeister, R. F., & Leary, M. R. (1995). The need to belong: Desire for interpersonal attachments
as a fundamental human motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 117, 497-529.
Baumeister, R. F., Twenge, J. M., & Nuss, C. K. (2002). Effects of social exclusion on cognitive
processes: Anticipated aloneness reduces intelligent thought. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 83,817-827.
Beier, J. S., Over, H., & Carpenter, M. (2014). Young children help others to achieve their social
goals. Developmental Psychology, 50, 934-940.
Brannon, T. N., & Walton, G. M. (2013). Enacting cultural interests: How intergroup contact
reduces prejudice by sparking interest in an out-group's culture. Psychological Science, 24,
1947-1957.

11

How the Subjective Relationship Between the Self, Others, and a Task ...

223

Brownell, C. A., & Carriger, M.S. (1990). Changes in cooperation and self-other differentiation
during the second year. Child Development, 61, 1164-1174.
Butler, L. P., & Walton, G. M. (2013). The opportunity to collaborate increases preschoolers'
motivation for challenging tasks. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 116,953-961.
Carr, P. B., & Walton, G. M. (2014). Cues of working together fuel intrinsic motivation. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 53, 169-184.
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (2001). On the self-regulation of behavior. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Chartrand, T. L., & Bargh, J. A. (1999). The chameleon effect: The perception-behavior link and
social interaction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 893-910.
Cheryan, S., Master, A., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2015). Cultural stereotypes as gatekeepers: Increasing
girls' interest in computer science and engineering by diversifying stereotypes. Frontiers in
Psychology, 6, 49.
Cialdini, R. B., & Trost, M. R. (1998). Social influence: Social norms, conformity and compliance.
In D. T. Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), The handbook of social psychology, Vols. 1
and 2 (4th ed., pp. 151-192). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Cordova, D. I., & Lepper, M. R. (1996).lntrinsic motivation and the process oflearning: Beneficial
effects of contextualization, personalization, and choice. Journal of Educational Psychology,
88,715-730.
Csibra, G. (2010). Recognizing communicative intentions in infancy. Mind & Language, 25,
141-168.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1975). Beyond boredom and anxiety. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Cwir, D., Carr, P. B., Walton, G. M., & Spencer, S. J. (2011). Your heart makes my heart move:
Cues of social connectedness cause shared emotions and physiological states among strangers.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 47, 661-664.
Dunham, P. J ., & Moore, C. ( 1995). Current themes in research on joint attention. In C. Moore &
P. J. Dunham (Eds.), Joint attention: Its origins and role in development (pp. 15-28). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Farroni, T., Johnson, M. H., Menon, E., Zulian, L., Faraguna, D., & Csibra, G. (2005). Newborns'
preference for face-relevant stimuli: Effects of contrast polarity. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 102, 17245-17250.
Festinger, L. (1954 ). A theory of social comparison processes. Human Relations, 7, 117-140.
Fitzsimons, G. M., & Bargh, J. A. (2003). Thinking of you: Nonconscious pursuit of interpersonal
goals associated with relationship partners. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84,
148-164.
Furrer, C., & Skinner, E. (2003). Sense of relatedness as a factor in children's academic engagement and performance. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95, 148-162.
Gehlbach, H., Brinkworth, M. E., King, A.M., Hsu, L. M., Mcintyre, J., & Rogers, T. (2016).
Creating birds of similar feathers: Leveraging similarity to improve teacher-student relationships and academic achievement. Journal of Educational Psychology, 108, 342-352.
Gelman, S. A., Frazier, B. N., Noles, N. S., Manczak, E. M., & Stilwell, S.M. (2015). How much
are Harry Potter's glasses worth? Children's monetary evaluation of authentic objects. Journal
of Cognition and Development, 16, 97-117.
Goldstein, N.J., Cia1dini, R. B., & Griskevicius, V. (2008). A room with a viewpoint: Using social
norms to motivate environmental conservation in hotels. Journal of Consumer Research,
Special Issue: Consumer Welfare, 35, 472-482.
Goodenow, C. (1992). Strengthening the links between educational psychology and the study of
social contexts. Educational Psychologist, 27, 177-196.
Hamre, B. K., & Pianta, R. C. (2005). Can instructional and emotional support in the first-grade
classroom make a difference for children at risk of school failure? Child Development, 76,
949-967.
Hidi, S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2000). Motivating the academically unmotivated: A critical issue
for the 21st century. Review of Educational Research, 70, 151-179.

224

A. Master et a!.

Hidi, S., & Renninger, K. A. (2006). The four-phase model of interest development. Educational
Psychologist, 41,111-127.
Howe, L. C., Carr, P. B., & Walton, G. M. (Under review). Normative appeals that invite people to
work together toward a common cause are more effective.
Isaac, J.D., Sansone, C., & Smith, J. L. (1999). Other people as a source of interest in an activity.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 35, 239-265.
Iyengar, S. S., & Lepper, M. R. (1999). Rethinking the role of choice: A cultural perspective on
intrinsic motivation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 349-366.
Job, V., Nikitin, J., Zhang, S. X., Carr, P. B., & Walton, G. M. (2017). Social Traces of Generic
Humans Increase the Value of Everyday Objects. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
43(6), 785-792.
Johnson, D. W., & Johnson, R. T. (2009). An educational psychology success story: Social interdependence theory and cooperative learning. Educational Researcher. 38, 365-379.
Kerr, N. L., Messe, L. A., Seok, D., Sambolec, E. J., Lount, R. B., & Park, E. S. (2007).
Psychological mechanisms underlying the Kohler motivation gain. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 33, 828-841.
Kirschner, S., & Tomasello, M. (2010). Joint music making promotes prosocial behavior in 4-yearold children. Evolution and Human Behavior; 31, 354-364.
Knogler, M., Harackiewicz, J. M., Gegenfurtner, A., & Lewalter, D. (2015). How situational is situational interest? Investigating the longitudinal structure of situational interest. Contemporary
Educational Psychology, 43, 39-50.
Kushnir, T., Xu, F., & Wellman, H. M. (2010). Young children use statistical sampling to infer the
preferences of other people. Psychological Science, 21, 1134-1140.
Lewin, K. (1947). Group decision and social change. Readings in Social Psychology, 3, 197-211.
Liszkowski, U., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2007). Pointing out new news, old news, and
absent referents at 12 months of age. Developmental Science, 10, Fl-F7.
Liszkowski, U., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2008). Twelve-month-olds communicate helpfully and appropriately for knowledgeable and ignorant partners. Cognition, 108, 732-739.
Master, A., Cheryan, S., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2017). Social group membership increases STEM
engagement among preschoolers. Developmental Psychology, 53, 201-209.
Master, A., & Walton, G. M. (2013). Minimal groups increase young children's motivation and
learning on group-relevant tasks. Child Development, 84, 737-751.
Meltzoff, A. N. (1995). Understanding the intentions of others: Re-enactment of intended acts by
18-month-old children. Developmental Psychology, 31, 838-850.
Meltzoff, A. N. (2007). 'Like me': A foundation for social cognition. Developmental Science, 10,
126-134.
Mendoza-Denton, R., Downey, G., Purdie, V. J., Davis, A., & Pietrzak, J. (2002). Sensitivity to
status-based rejection: Implications for African American students' college experience. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 896-918.
Morton, J., & Johnson, M. H. (1991). CONSPEC and CONLERN: A two-process theory of infant
face recognition. Psychological Review, 98, 164-181.
Murayama, K., & Elliot, A. J. (2012). The competition-performance relation: A meta-analytic
review and test of the opposing processes model of competition and performance. Psychological
Bulletin, 138, 1035-1070.
Murphy, M. C., Steele, C. M., & Gross, J. J. (2007). Signaling threat: How situational cues affect
women in math, science, and engineering settings. Psychological Science, 18, 879-885.
Neruda, P. (1994). Odes to common things. Boston: Little, Brown, and Company.
Newman, G. E., Diesendruck, G., & Bloom, P. (2011). Celebrity contagion and the value of
objects. Journal of Consumer Research, 38,215-228.
Over, H. (2016). The origins of belonging: Social motivation in infants and young children.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 371, 20150072.
Over, H., & Carpenter, M. (2009). Eighteen-month-old infants show increased helping following
priming with affiliation. Psychological Science, 20, 1189-1193.

11

How the Subjective Relationship Between the Self, Others, and a Task.,.

225

Over, H., & Carpenter, M. (2013). The social side of imitation. Child Development Perspectives,
7, 6-11.
Perdue, C. W., Dovidio, J. F., Gurtman, M. B., & Tyler, R. B. (1990). Us and them: Social categorization and the process of intergroup bias. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59,
475.
Perlmutter, M., Behrend, S. D., Kuo, F., & Muller, A. (1989). Social influences on children's problem solving. Developmental Psychology, 25,744-754.
Plass, J., O'Keefe, P. A., Homer, B. D., Case, J., Hayward, E., Stein, M., & Perlin, K. (2013). The
impact of individual, competitive, and collaborative mathematics game play on learning, performance, and motivation. Journal of Educational Psychology, 105, 1050--1066.
Rekers, Y., Haun, D. B., & Tomasello, M. (2011). Children, but not chimpanzees, prefer to collaborate. Current Biology, 21, 1756-1758.
Renninger, K. A., & Hidi, S. (2016). The power of interest for motivation and learning. New York;
Routledge.
Repacholi, B. M., & Gopnik, A. (1997). Early reasoning about desires: Evidence from 14-and
18-month-olds. Developmental Psychology, 33, 12-21.
Richardson, M. J., Marsh, K. L., Isenhower, R. W., Goodman, J. R., & Schmidt, R. C. (2007).
Rocking together: Dynamics of intentional and unintentional interpersonal coordination.
Human Movement Science, 26, 867-891.
Ross, H. S., & Lollis, S. P. (1987). Communication within infant social games. Developmental
Psychology, 23, 241-248.
Ross, L., & Nisbett, R. E. (1991). The person and the situation: Perspectives of social psychology.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Sansone, C., & Thoman, D. B. (2005). Interest as the missing motivator in self-regulation.
European Psychologist, 10, 175-186.
Sansone, C., Thoman, D. B., & Smith, J. L. (2010). Interest and self-regulation: Understanding
individual variability in choices, efforts and persistence over time. In R. Hoyle (Ed.), Handbook
~f personality and self-regulation (pp. 192-217). Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Schiefele, U. (1999). Interest and learning from text. Scientific Studies of Reading, 3, 257-280.
Sebanz, N., Bekkering, H., & Knoblich, G. (2006). Joint action: Bodies and minds moving
together. Trends in Cognitive Science, 10, 70--76.
Shteynberg, G. (2010). A silent emergence of culture: The social tuning effect. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 99, 683-689.
Shteynberg, G. (2015). Shared attention. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 10, 579-590.
Shteynberg, G., & Galinksy, A. D. (2011). Implicit coordination: Sharing goals with similar others
intensifies goal pursuit. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 47, 1291-1294.
Shteynberg, G., Hirsh, J. B., Apfelbaum, E. P., Larsen, J. T., Galinsky, A. D., & Roese, N.J. (2014).
Feeling more together: Group attention intensifies emotion. Emotion, 14, 1102-1114.
Sorce, J. F., Emde, R.N., Campos, J. J., & Klinnert, M.D. (1985). Maternal emotional signaling:
Its effect on the visual cliff behavior of 1-year-olds. Developmental Psychology, 21, 195-200.
Steele, C. M. (1997). A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape intellectual identity and performance. American Psychologist, 52, 613-629.
Stephens, N. M., Hamedani, M.G., & Destin, M. (20 14). Closing the social class achievement gap:
A difference-education intervention improves first-generation students' academic performance
and all students' college transition. Psychological Science, 25, 943-953.
Tauer, J. M., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2004 ). The effects of cooperation and competition on intrinsic
motivation and performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 86, 849-861.
Taylor, S. E., & Lobel, M. (1989). Social comparison activity under threat: Downward evaluation
and upward contacts. Psychological Review, 96, 569-575.
Thoman, D. B., Sansone, C.. Fraughton, T., & Pasupathi, M. (2012). How students socially evaluate
interest: Peer responsiveness influences evaluation and maintenance of interest. Contemporary
Educational Psychology, 37, 254-265.
Thoman, D. B., Sansone, C., & Pasupathi, M. (2007). Talking about interest: Exploring the role of
social interaction for regulating motivation and the interest experience. Journal of Happiness
Studies, 8, 335-370.

226

A. Master et a!.

Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., Call, J., Behne, T., & Moll, H. (2005). Understanding and sharing
intentions: The origins of cultural cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 28, 675-735.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher mental processes. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Walton, G. M. (2014). The new science of wise psychological interventions. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 23, 73-82.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2007). A question of belonging: Race, social fit, and achievement.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 82-96.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011a). A brief social-belonging intervention improves academic
and health outcomes of minority students. Science, 331, 1447-1451.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (20llb). Sharing motivation. In D. Dunning (Ed.), Social motivation (pp. 79-101). New York: Psychology Press.
Walton, G. M., Cohen, G. L., Cwir, D., & Spencer, S. J. (2012). Mere belonging: The power of
social connections. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102, 513-532.
Walton, G. M., Loge!, C., Peach, J. M., Spencer, S. J., & Zanna, M.P. (2015). Two brief interventions to mitigate a "chilly climate" transform women's experience, relationships, and achievement in engineering. Journal of Educational Psychology, 107, 468-485.
Warneken, F., Chen, F., & Tomasello, M. (2006). Cooperative activities in young children and
chimpanzees. Child Development, 77, 640-663.
Warneken, F., Grafenhain, M., & Tomasello, M. (2012). Collaborative partner or social tool? New
evidence for young children's understanding of joint intentions in collaborative activities.
Developmental Science, 15,54-61.
Warneken, F., & Tomasello, M. (2006). Altruistic helping in human infants and young chimpanzees. Science, 311, 1301-1303.
Warneken, F., & Tomasello, M. (2007). Helping and cooperation at 14 months of age. Infancy, 11,
271-294.
Williams, K. D., & Karau, S. J. (1991). Social loafing and social compensation: The effects of
expectations of co-worker performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61,
570-581.
Williams, K. D., Karau, S. J., & Bourgeois, M. J. (1993). Working on collective tasks: Social loafing and social compensation. In M. A. Hogg & D. Abrams (Eds.), Group motivation: Social
psychological perspectives (pp. 130-148). Hertfordshire, England: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Williams, K. D., & Nida, S. A. (2011). Ostracism consequences and coping. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 20,71-75.
Wing, R. R., & Jeffery, R. W. (1999). Benefits of recruiting participants with friends and increasing
social support for weight loss and maintenance. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
67, 132-138.
Woodward, A. L. ( 1998). Infants selectively encode the goal object of an actor's reach. Cognition,
69, 1-34.
Yeager, D. S., Walton, G. M., Brady, S. T., Akcinar, E. N., Paunesku, D., Keane, L., Kamentz,
D., Ritter, G., Duckworth, A. L., Urstein, R., Gomez, E., Markus, H. R., Cohen, G. L., &
Dweck, C. S. (2016). Teaching a lay theory before college narrows achievement gaps at
scale. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 113,
E3341-E3348.
Zajonc, R. B. (1965). Social facilitation. Science, 149, 269-274.

