Clinical Psychological Science
http://cpx.sagepub.com/

Preventing Symptoms of Depression by Teaching Adolescents That People Can Change: Effects of a
Brief Incremental Theory of Personality Intervention at 9-Month Follow-Up
Adriana Sum Miu and David Scott Yeager
Clinical Psychological Science published online 15 September 2014
DOI: 10.1177/2167702614548317
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://cpx.sagepub.com/content/early/2014/09/15/2167702614548317

Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com

On behalf of:

Association for Psychological Science

Additional services and information for Clinical Psychological Science can be found at:
Email Alerts: http://cpx.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Subscriptions: http://cpx.sagepub.com/subscriptions
Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav

>> OnlineFirst Version of Record - Sep 15, 2014
What is This?

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

548317

research-article2014

CPXXXX10.1177/2167702614548317Miu, YeagerImplicit Theories and Depression

Empirical Article

Preventing Symptoms of Depression by
Teaching Adolescents That People Can
Change: Effects of a Brief Incremental
Theory of Personality Intervention at
9-Month Follow-Up

Clinical Psychological Science
﻿1­–18
© The Author(s) 2014
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/2167702614548317
cpx.sagepub.com

Adriana Sum Miu1 and David Scott Yeager2
1

Department of Psychology, Emory University, and 2Department of Psychology, University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
The transition to high school coincides with an increase in the prevalence of depressive symptoms. Could this be
due in part to increasing beliefs about the fixedness of personal traits at a time of frequent social setbacks? And
could teaching adolescents that people can change help prevent the increase in depressive symptoms? A longitudinal
intervention experiment involved three independent samples of students entering high school (N = 599). A brief selfadministered reading and writing activity taught an incremental theory of personality—the belief that people’s socially
relevant characteristics have the potential to change. The intervention reduced the incidence of clinically significant
levels of self-reported depressive symptoms 9 months postintervention by nearly 40% among adolescents assigned
to the intervention condition, compared with control participants. Analyses of symptom clusters, measures of selfesteem, and measures of natural language use explored the outcomes that did and did not show treatment effects.
Moderation analyses confirmed theoretical expectations. Among adolescents assigned to the control condition, those
who endorsed more of an entity theory of personality—believing people cannot change—showed greater increases in
depressive symptoms during the year. The effect of this risk factor was eliminated by the intervention.
Keywords
cognitive theories of depression, implicit theories, universal prevention, developmental psychopathology,
psychological interventions
Received 12/3/13; Revision accepted 7/16/14

Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a serious publichealth and human-capital problem (Kessler, Chiu,
Demler, & Walters, 2005; Mathers, Fat, & Boerma, 2008).
Many lifelong cases have their origins in midadole­
scence, when the prevalence of depression rises
­substantially (Merikangas et al., 2010). Indeed, adolescence is a developmental period characterized by
school transitions filled with social adversity (Barber &
Olsen, 2004; Benner, 2011; Newman, Newman, Griffen,
O’Connor, & Spas, 2007) as well as by pubertal and
cognitive changes (Avenevoli & Steinberg, 2002). These
factors may contribute to the onset of depressive symptoms as well as eventual diagnoses of MDD (Newman
et al., 2007).

Many programs have attempted to prevent increases in
the prevalence of MDD and other internalizing symptoms
during adolescence (Muñoz, Cuijpers, Smit, Barrera, &
Leykin, 2010; Stice, Shaw, Bohon, Marti, & Rohde, 2009).
Selective and indicated preventative interventions lasting
many weeks and requiring intensive training have had
small to medium effect sizes on average (Garber et  al.,
2009; Gillham, Hamilton, Freres, Patton, & Gallop, 2006;
Horowitz & Garber, 2006). Yet universal preventative
Corresponding Author:
David Scott Yeager, Department of Psychology, University of Texas at
Austin, 108 E. Dean Keeton Stop A8000, Austin, Texas 78712
E-mail: dyeager@utexas.edu

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Miu, Yeager

2	
interventions—those delivered to large groups of adolescents regardless of level of risk—have so far yielded a
disappointing meta-analytic average (d = 0.02; Stice et al.,
2009). For example, Spence, Sheffield, and Donovan
(2003) delivered a universal preventative intervention lasting eight classroom sessions to more than 1,000 high
school students. The intervention unfortunately increased
the incidence of clinically significant levels of depressive
symptoms a year later by 2 percentage points (also see
Sheffield et al., 2006; Wong et al., 2012). This type of result
raises the possibility that there are underlying causes of
adolescence-onset depression that are not fully understood or successfully targeted by existing universal prevention approaches (see McLaughlin, 2011). A crucial
scientific and public-health objective is to close this gap in
knowledge (see Muñoz et al., 2010).
To do this, we build on cognitive theories of depression (Beck, 1976, 2008; Disner, Beevers, Haigh, & Beck,
2011; Gotlib & Joormann, 2010; Lakdawalla, Hankin, &
Mermelstein, 2007). These theories emphasize that the
hopelessness and despair that feed into depression can
result in part from the belief that one’s social adversities
are likely to be a fixed, stable part of one’s future
(Abramson, Seligman, & Teasdale, 1978; Janoff-Bulman,
1979; also see Graham & Juvonen, 1998; Tangney,
Stuewig, & Mashek, 2007). We propose that if despair has
its basis in a worldview that negative events cannot
change, then perhaps teaching adolescents about the
potential for change could provide a foundation for hope.
This might prevent adolescents from developing symptoms of depression during times of social adversity, such
as the 1st year of high school (see Benner, 2011; Crosnoe,
2011).
Indeed, a large amount of past research has focused
on implicit theories of personality, which are people’s
underlying assumptions about the malleability of personal characteristics (Chiu, Hong, & Dweck, 1997; Dweck,
1999; Erdley, Loomis, Cain, & Dumas-Hines, 1997; Yeager,
Trzesniewski, Tirri, Nokelainen, & Dweck, 2011). Past
research has consistently shown that if adolescents or
adults hold a theory that people’s traits are fixed and
unchangeable—called an entity theory of personality—
then they are more likely to show helpless responses to
peer victimization or exclusion (saying, for instance,
“Maybe I’m just not a likable person”; Erdley et al., 1997;
Yeager al., 2011; also see Rudolph, 2010; Yeager, Miu,
Powers, & Dweck, 2013). However, if adolescents are
taught a theory that people’s traits have the potential to
change and be developed—called an incremental theory
of personality—then helplessness is less likely to follow
(Yeager et  al., 2011; Yeager, Trzesniewski, & Dweck,
2013). It stands to reason then that an intervention that
teaches an incremental theory of personality—by providing teens with a belief system that facilitates their ability

to see negative social events as changeable—might prevent or slow the onset of symptoms of depression.

Implicit Theories Are Meaning Systems
That Shape Responses to Adversity
Research on implicit theories grows out of a long line of
experiments reaching back to early research on learned
helplessness in humans (Diener & Dweck, 1978; Dweck,
1975; Dweck & Leggett, 1988). Implicit theories have
been applied to understanding helpless responses to
social situations (Beer, 2002; Chiu et  al., 1997; Yeager
et al., 2011) as well as to academic situations (e.g., Dweck
& Leggett, 1988). Looking broadly across these findings,
implicit theories are known to operate as schemas for
understanding the world, acting as a “lens” for focusing
attention on fixed versus changeable causes of events
(Chiu et al., 1997; Dweck & Leggett, 1988; Molden, Plaks,
& Dweck, 2006). Following an adverse event, this focus
can lead to a corresponding set of helpless versus resilient causal attributions, emotions, and behaviors (e.g.,
Dweck, 1999; Molden & Dweck, 2006; Yeager & Dweck,
2012; for a meta-analysis of effects on motivation and
behavior, see Burnette, O’Boyle, Vanepps, Pollack, &
Finkel, 2013).
Although the current research looks directly at the
impact of implicit theories of personality on symptoms of
depression during the transition to high school and does
not explore the psychological processes that might contribute to this effect, here we present a background on
proximal social-cognitive consequences of implicit theories. Research on implicit theories of intelligence provides a helpful analogy (see, e.g., Dweck & Elliott-Moskwa,
2010). Specifically, an entity theory of intelligence—­the
belief that “smartness” is a fixed trait that you either have
or do not have—has been associated with maladaptive
explanations for failures in school (Ahmavaara &
Houston, 2007; Blackwell, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2007;
Hong, Chiu, Dweck, Lin, & Wan, 1999; Robins & Pals,
2002). This includes self-talk, such as “I’m failing because
I’m stupid” (Robins & Pals, 2002) or “I guess I’m not very
smart” (Dweck & Leggett, 1988; see Dweck, 1999).
Individuals with more of an entity theory, compared with
those with less, also show more helpless patterns of
behavior, such as avoiding challenges, hiding deficiencies, or just giving up (Blackwell et al., 2007). Moreover,
interventions that teach students an incremental, malleable theory of intelligence allow students to show greater
resilience when making a difficult school transition. In
one study, students who participated in an incremental
theory workshop in school showed a clear rebound in
their declining academic achievement roughly 3 months
posttreatment, which signified greater resilience
(Blackwell et al., 2007; see Yeager & Dweck, 2012).

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Implicit Theories and Depression	

3

Implicit Theories of Personality
Analogously, a number of past investigations have suggested that it may be possible for an implicit theory of
personality to increase risk for depression. First, implicit
theories measured on a questionnaire reliably predict
adverse responses to a social conflict. Yeager et al. (2011,
Study 1) measured an entity theory of personality and
asked adolescents to write about a time during which
they felt left out or excluded by an acquaintance.
Individuals with more of an entity theory were significantly more likely to say that they “felt bad about” themselves. Similarly, Yeager et al. (2014) found that an entity
theory of personality predicted greater negative emotionality (negative self-feelings, stress, and anxiety) after an
experience of peer exclusion—that is, ostracism by peers
during the Web-based game Cyberball (Williams & Jarvis,
2006).
Short-term experimental studies have confirmed a
causal role for implicit theories of personality. Yeager
et al. (2011, Study 3) showed that a brief “teen self-help”
article that had an incremental theory of personality
embedded within it could alter adolescent participants’
implicit theories and reduce helpless responses to a bullying scenario, including fewer reports of shame. Yeager,
Miu, et al. (2013, Study 2) used a slightly more elaborate
manipulation. Teens read a scientific article that conveyed the possibility of personality change, which was
followed by quotes from older students who endorsed
the same message. Participants then wrote a brief essay
reiterating the incremental theory. This changed implicit
theories of personality and attributions in response to a
hypothetical peer conflict. Furthermore, Yeager et  al.
(2014) showed that this incremental theory intervention
could reduce negative affect (negative self-feelings, stress,
and anxiety) after an experience of peer exclusion.
Finally, incremental theory interventions have induced
changes in responses to social difficulties up to 1 month
later. Yeager, Trzesniewski, and Dweck (2013) implemented a face-to-face school-based incremental theory
workshop that lasted six classroom sessions during a
3-week period. As expected, at a 2-week follow-up, the
incremental theory group changed their implicit theories,
whereas the control group did not. One month later, adolescents completed a seemingly unrelated activity in
which they were excluded by a peer (again, via Cyberball).
Compared with control participants, incremental theory
participants reacted less negatively and more prosocially.
Furthermore, the six-session classroom intervention
reduced depressive symptoms among victimized adolescents at a 2-week follow-up (Yeager, Trzesniewski, &
Dweck, 2013).
In sum, individual differences in an entity theory of
personality consistently predict negative affect and

helpless behavior during social adversities. Furthermore,
teaching its opposite—an incremental theory of personality—can improve short-term reactions to a peer conflict, including behavioral and self-reports of depressive
symptoms. The present research builds on this and
focuses on whether the single-session intervention used
in our earlier study (Yeager, Miu, et al., 2013) could alter
levels of depressive symptoms many months later across
the socially difficult transition to high school.

Implicit Theories During the
Transition to High School
Implicit theories may be particularly important during a
sensitive developmental period, such as high school transition. Adolescents entering high school think more about
peer relationships (e.g., Richards, Crowe, Larson, & Swarr,
1998) and are more likely to face uncertainty in peer
relationships, given that 50% of casual friendships change
during each month of freshmen year of high school
(Chan & Poulin, 2007). Without a stable social network in
a new environment, freshmen are more likely to feel anxious about the possibility of being socially excluded,
which threatens their social status ( Juvonen & Graham,
2014). In response to potential social conflicts, high
school students, compared with younger children, are
more likely to interpret social attributes as fixed and
unchangeable (e.g., Killen, Kelly, Richardson, & Jampol,
2010), which means that they are more likely to believe
social adversities or setbacks to be stable. Given the
increase of uncertainty in peer relationships and the
belief in fixed attributes, implicit theories can be especially relevant in interpreting social uncertainties during
high school transition. Building on this idea, we propose
that one helpful strategy for preventing the onset of
depressive symptoms might be to teach an incremental
theory of personality.

Brief Psychological Interventions
Somewhat in contrast to the nonsignificant effects of
comprehensive and time-intensive universal preventative
interventions for adolescents (Stice et al., 2009), the literature has produced many examples of brief but theoretically precise psychological interventions that have
affected mental and physical health or academic achievement over time (for reviews, see Cohen & Sherman, 2014;
Walton, 2014; Yeager & Walton, 2011). For instance,
research by Pennebaker (1997) and Petrie, Booth, and
Pennebaker (1998) has shown that expressive writing
exercises that last just a few minutes can affect reports of
stress and health weeks or months later and improve
immune functioning. Walton and Cohen (2011) found

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Miu, Yeager

4	
that a 1-hr attributional retraining intervention conducted
in the 1st year of college could improve minority students’ health, happiness, and grade point averages 3.5
years later at the end of senior year (for many other
examples, see Wilson, Damiani, & Shelton, 2002). Even
though the mediating mechanisms for these psychological interventions are not fully understood, they have an
important status in clinical and social psychological theory (Pennebaker, 2004; Walton, 2014).
Informed by these past studies, the present research is
the first to test the effect of a brief implicit-theories-ofpersonality intervention on longer-term depressive symptoms. This is critical to test because it is a scientific priority
to identify scalable, brief, and low-cost preventative interventions for depression (Muñoz et al., 2010). Even modest preventative effects, occurring during a critical
developmental juncture, can have important psychological and policy implications. Such effects can slow or stop
depression from gaining momentum, thus preventing
long-term losses in wages or human-capital development
(e.g., Frieden, 2010; Glasgow, Lichtenstein, & Marcus,
2003; also see Abelson, 1985; Cohen, Garcia, PurdieVaughns, Apfel, & Brzustoski, 2009). In many cases, this
possibility justifies the economic cost of even time- and
labor-intensive preventative interventions. However, the
marginal cost of teaching an incremental theory to an
adolescent over the Internet approaches zero. This means
that if the present brief intervention produced even modest treatment effects, it would have important implications for public health and human capital.

Overview of Present Research
The present research used a longitudinal, randomized
intervention experiment to test the causal effect of an
incremental theory of personality on levels of depressive
symptoms. Because the incidence of adolescent depression approximately doubles during the high school transition (Costello, Mustillo, Erkanli, Keeler, & Angold, 2003;
Lewinsohn, Rohde, & Seeley, 1998; Merikangas et  al.,
2010), we recruited ninth graders at the beginning of the
school year, before increases in depressive symptoms
were likely to occur. We hypothesized that adolescents
who did not receive the treatment would show the typical increase in depressive symptoms but that those who
learned, in the 1st few weeks of the school year, that
people can change, might be protected.
The present research involves nearly identical experiments carried out in three independent samples totaling
roughly 600 adolescents. The first experiment was small,
involving just 77 adolescents. The second, a replication,
was larger, involving 143 students. Both of these were
conducted to test other research hypotheses. However,
both included measures of depressive symptoms that

have not been reported elsewhere. Wishing to confirm
these results, we conducted another experiment, this
time involving more students (n = 379). We aggregated
the data from these three studies in what was, in effect, a
raw-data meta-analysis of original experiments. Thus,
more reliable effect size estimates were possible (for
descriptions of raw-data meta-analysis, see Cooper &
Patall, 2009; Schimmack, 2012).
These studies used a strict, active-placebo control
group. In past research, we have compared an incremental theory group with a group receiving no message or
with a group receiving a more conventional treatment,
such as a coping-skills treatment (Yeager et  al., 2011;
Yeager, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2013). Thus, in those
past studies, it was not possible to rule out the alternative
hypothesis that observed differences between the treatment and control groups were due to the possible benefits of receiving any optimistic message about growth
and improvement from senior and junior students. To
overcome this limitation, in some research, we have used
control conditions that taught an optimistic message
about change but not specifically about traits relevant to
peer exclusion or victimization (e.g., study skills or athletic ability; Yeager et al., 2014; Yeager, Miu, et al., 2013).
In the present study, we did this as well.

Method
Participants
Participants came from three schools in Northern
California (N = 599; 48% female, 52% male). Two schools
(providing Samples 1 and 3) were in upper-middle-class
neighborhoods and were generally high performing.
Students were predominately White (43%) or Asian
American (46%). Only 6% of these students were eligible
for free or reduced-price lunch, an indicator of low socioeconomic status. A third school (providing Sample 2) was
one of the lowest-income and poorest-performing
schools in the San Francisco Bay Area. Of these students,
80% were Hispanic/Latino, and 73% were eligible for free
or reduced-price lunch.1
Despite these differences in the samples, social adversities were common across samples; on a survey we conducted in the 3rd week of the school year, many students
(75%) reported being the victim of at least some physical, verbal, or social aggression, and this was not significantly different across schools. Even those students who
did not experience victimization might be aware of the
possibility that they could be “next.” Indeed, of the
minority of students reporting no victimization at baseline, nearly half reported at least some victimization at
the 9-month follow-up. Thus, there were ample opportunities for all students to experience—or at least worry

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Implicit Theories and Depression	

5
ll

l
l

l
l

l

l
l

l

n

l
l

l
l

l

ll

n
l I

l

l

n

l

l
l
l

Fig. 1.  Flowchart of experimental procedures. CDI = Children’s Depression Inventory.

about experiencing—social adversity involving peers
(also see Crosnoe, 2011), which could contribute to
depression in the absence of our intervention (Newman
et al., 2007).
Sample 1 was the first study we conducted. We
recruited all of the students in Algebra 1 in the school,
which is a lower-performing math class. All provided
consent: 82 students provided baseline data, and 77 provided follow-up depressive-symptoms data and constituted the analytic sample. Sample 2 was a replication and
involved all of the students in Algebra 1 at a different,
lower-performing school; 95% provided consent. Of the
161 students who completed the baseline survey, 143
also provided depressive-symptoms data in May. In Study
3, students entering ninth grade—regardless of math
placement—were recruited, and 96% provided consent;
427 provided baseline data and of these, 379 provided
longitudinal data. Nearly all of the students who did not
provide longitudinal data were either chronically truant
or had dropped out of high school or moved. Across
studies, 66 students did not complete both the baseline
and the follow-up studies; these students were excluded
from analyses, but the statistical significance of the results
was no different when we imputed values and included
them. A chart that details all data included or excluded
from analysis is presented in Figure S1 in the Supplemental
Material available online.

Procedure
In the 1st week of the school year, in September, parental
consent was obtained for all students. In the 3rd week,
students assented and completed an initial survey that
measured baseline characteristics (e.g., demographics
and levels of depressive symptoms). One week later, students were randomly assigned to the intervention. In
May, at the end of the school year, roughly 9 months
later, students were again surveyed to assess depressive

symptoms (see Fig. 1 for a flowchart of experimental procedures). Some of the students in Sample 2 had poor
English skills, so we provided them the option of reading
the intervention in Spanish (which had been translated
by native Spanish speakers); 7% of Sample 2 participants
chose to read the intervention in Spanish, and this did
not differ by condition and did not have an effect on
experimental outcomes.
In the current, early stage investigation of the incremental theory intervention, the primary outcome was
self-reported symptoms of depression—consistent with
many universal prevention evaluations (Stice et al., 2009).
Advantages of this approach involve the reduced possibility of sample attrition due to burdens of study participation and the resulting increase in statistical power.
Disadvantages, of course, involve the need to rely on
only one measure—for example, meeting a clinical
threshold on a self-reported measure—to assess the presence of problematic levels of depressive symptoms, as
well as an inability to assess impact within clinically diagnosed subgroups.
The intervention procedure is described in greater
detail in our previous studies (e.g., Yeager, Trzesniewski,
& Dweck, 2013) and in the Detail on the Experimental
Intervention section in the Supplemental Material. A brief
overview follows.
In the 3rd week of the school year, using a true random-number generator (www.Random.org), researchers
randomly assigned participants within classrooms—that
is, at the individual level—into intervention or control
groups. During normal class time, participants in each
group completed either an experimental intervention or
a control activity on paper (Sample 1) or computer
(Samples 2 and 3) quietly for one class period. The average completion time for the intervention was approximately 25 min. Research assistants who administered the
interventions were different from those who administered the surveys, and all members of the research team

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Miu, Yeager

6	
were blind to participants’ assigned condition throughout
the study. Teachers were blind to study hypotheses and
students’ assigned experimental conditions.2 All that was
required of the teachers or research assistants was to
keep the class working quietly. No staff person who
interacted with students (research assistants, teachers)
was briefed on any of the content of the intervention.
The treatment intervention taught an incremental theory of personality by presenting evidence that individuals
have the potential to change. It conveyed that (a) if you
are excluded or victimized, it is not due to a fixed, personal deficiency on your part; and (b) people who
exclude or victimize you are not fixed, bad people but,
instead, have complicated motivations that are subject to
change. Participants were then asked to read a brief article on actual neuroscience studies that showed that
behaviors are controlled by “thoughts and feelings in
their brains” and that such pathways in the brain can be
changed. This was done to provide adolescents with a
scientific basis for believing in the potential for change
(rather than telling adolescents the platitude that “people
can change”). Afterward, participants read two quotes
purportedly written by senior and junior students who
had previously read the same article and endorsed its
conclusions. As with the scientific summaries, the testimonials were designed to bring credibility to the incremental theory via admired role models (i.e., seniors and
juniors in one’s high school).
Finally, participants were asked to write their own version of such a narrative to share with future ninth graders
by drawing on the examples they had just read from the
seniors and juniors or on their own experiences in high
school or middle school. This “saying-is-believing” activity has been shown to facilitate the internalization of the
intervention message (see Aronson, 1999; Walton &
Cohen, 2011) and has been implemented before (e.g.,
Yeager, Trzesniewski & Dweck, 2013). After this one-time
activity, the intervention was not mentioned again to students by researchers or teachers.
The control condition was designed to be exactly parallel to the experimental condition, except that the control condition focused on malleability of athletic ability, a
nonpersonality domain that was never linked directly to
responses to exclusion or victimization, as the treatment
was. Nevertheless, athletic ability was also thought to be
important to adolescents, thus eliminating the possibility
that simple optimism about the potential for growth in
any important domain might account for our results. And,
of course, an entity-theory-of-personality control group
would have been unethical and, furthermore, would not
have allowed us to separate the negative effects of learning an entity theory from the positive effects of learning
an incremental theory.

Measures
Depressive symptoms. To measure depressive symptoms, we administered the 10-item short form of the Children’s Depression Inventory (CDI:S; Kovacs, 1992) on
the September and May surveys.3 Each CDI:S item asked
participants which of three levels of a symptom described
them best (e.g., 2 = I feel like crying every day, 1 = I feel
like crying many days, 0 = I feel like crying once in a
while). The 10 items were summed and showed adequate internal consistency (preintervention α = .82, postintervention α = .87). CDI:S scores were first analyzed
dichotomously; participants were categorized into clinically significant and nonsignificant symptom levels. We
selected a cut point of 6 out of 20 points, which corresponds to the 81st to 87th percentile of depressive symptoms (for boys and girls, respectively; Kovacs, 1992),4
because it best approximates the cut point identified by
past research as striking the optimal balance between
false positives and false negatives (Timbremont, Braet, &
Dreessen, 2004). Dichotomization of continuous measures can sometimes result in misleading conclusions if
the results are not robust to different cut points and if
they do not replicate across multiple independent samples (MacCallum, Zhang, Preacher, & Rucker, 2002).
Therefore, sensitivity analyses were conducted with a cut
point of 7 out of 20 points, and we present results for all
three replication samples in Table 1.
To supplement this primary analysis, we conducted continuous depressive-symptom analyses on each of the subscales of the CDI:S. These subscales were based on factor
analyses of the full CDI scale reported in the literature (e.g.,
Helsel & Matson, 1984; Kovacs, 1992; Saylor, Finch, Spirito,
& Bennett, 1984; Weiss & Weisz, 1988; Weiss et al., 1991).
Kovacs (1992) reported five factors, including negative
mood (e.g., I am sad all the time), ineffectiveness (e.g., I do
everything wrong), anhedonia (e.g., I feel alone all the
time), and negative self-esteem (e.g., I hate myself). The
fifth factor (Kovacs, 1992), interpersonal problems, had no
items on the CDI:S. We aggregated the relevant items corresponding to the four factors following standard procedures, thereby producing four separate subscales, each of
which ranged from 0 to 2. Exact items for each of the four
subscales are presented in the Depressive Symptoms section in the Supplemental Material.
Self-esteem. Supplementing the CDI:S items, two selfesteem items were administered on the September and
May surveys: “I feel that I am a person of worth, at least
on an equal basis with others” and “I feel that I have a
number of good qualities”; responses were made using a
scale from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree).
Items were averaged and, as expected, were negatively

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

7

49
16
304

295

304

295

75
25

42
14

54
18

Control Intervention

7.90

2.24

χ2

.005

.134

p

36

13
36

36

13
36

χ2
p

Baseline (September)
5
12
6.12 .013
41
Follow-up (May)
6
15
4.76 .029
41

Control Intervention

Sample 1

73

18
25

73

13
18

70

10
14

70

12
17

Control Intervention

Sample 2

2.44

0.01

χ2

.118

.917

p

186

44
24

186

28
15

193

33
17

193

25
13

Control Intervention

Sample 3

2.5

0.35

χ2

 
 
.113
 

 
 
.556
 

p

Note: The table presents raw data. To designate status as meeting clinically significant levels of depressive symptoms, we used a cut point of 6 out of 20 points on the short form of the
Children’s Depression Inventory; this corresponds to the 81st to 87th percentile for boys and girls, respectively (Kovacs, 1992).

n above cut point
% above cut point
 
Total n

n above cut point
% above cut point
 
Total n

Measure

All participants

Table 1.  Participants Who Met the Threshold for Clinically Significant Levels of Depressive Symptoms at Baseline and 9 Months Postintervention by Condition and
Sample

Miu, Yeager

8	
correlated with the negative self-esteem CDI:S subscale
(September: r = –.47, p < .001). In Sample 1, self-esteem
was assessed in May only. Sample 1 data could not be
used in the analyses of change scores but were used in
analyses of year-end levels.
Textual analysis of self-descriptions. In Samples 2
and 3 only, the first question on the September and May
surveys was “In general, what do people in your grade at
school think about you? Type as many or as few words
that people in general might think about you in the box
below.” Responses to this question were first spellchecked to correct common errors and increase match
rates for the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count software
(LIWC; Pennebaker, Booth, & Francis, 2007). Next, the
default LIWC dictionaries were applied to each response.
At each time point, we averaged three categories to create an index of linguistic styles that signal maladaptive
self-views: negative emotion or trait words (hurt, ugly,
nasty), past tense (went, ran, had), and discrepant thinking (should, would, could). It was predicted that thinking
of the self in terms of negative emotions or traits, dwelling on the past, and engaging in counterfactual thinking
about what one should or could be would signal maladaptive self-views (and the latter category, discrepant
thinking, has been correlated with poorer mental and
physical health in much past research; Higgins, Vookles,
& Tykocinski, 1992; Pennebaker & King, 1999). Supporting this theory, in the present research, the composite
negative self-views index from the September preintervention survey was significantly correlated with preintervention levels of depressive symptoms, r = .16, p < .001,
and self-esteem, r = –.17, p < .001.
Covariates and moderators. On the September preintervention survey, participants reported sex, race/­
ethnicity, entity theories of personality (Yeager et  al.,
2011), and self-reported frequency of bullying (for details
on the two measures, see the Implicit Theories of Personality and Peer Victimization sections in the Supplemental
Material). From school records, we obtained test scores
earned the prior year, in eighth grade.

Results
Analytic plan
All analyses were intent to treat and did not drop participants who wrote brief or incomplete summaries of the
intervention materials. Thus, the results are conservative.
Our primary interest was in a person-centered analysis
of whether the intervention prevented clinically significant levels of depressive symptoms. Treatment effects on
the incidence of serious depressive symptoms are one

policy-­
relevant analysis (Muñoz et  al., 2010) because
real-world diagnosis and treatment of MDD involves
individuals, not variables (Farrington & Loeber, 2000;
Rutter, 2003). Obtaining effect sizes that are relevant to
the real-world use of a measure is one of the rare cases
when dichotomization of continuous variables is appropriate (DeCoster, Iselin, & Gallucci, 2009).5 Treatment
effects on incidence rates are also essential for estimating the cost-­effectiveness of an intervention.
Our secondary interest was in developing theory about
the generality or specificity of effects of implicit theories
on different groupings of depressive symptoms. Thus, we
conducted variable-centered analyses of which symptom
subgroups were most affected by the incremental theory
intervention. We extended these analyses by conducting
analyses of explicit and implicit measures of individuals’
construals of themselves: explicit self-esteem and linguistic categories that signal implicit negative self-views.
Third, we carried out moderation analyses to understand the predicted mechanisms for the results. We
examined whether, as expected, the incremental theory
of personality intervention had its effects by preventing
those individuals with more of an entity theory at baseline from developing higher levels of depressive symptoms during the year. Results for all outcomes are
presented in Table 2, which presents the raw means and
proportions as well as statistical tests from models with
a number of covariates (see Tables S2 through S5 for full
regression models with and without covariates, see the
Supplemental Material).

Preliminary analyses
Randomization was effective. There were no significant
main effects of condition on covariates measured at baseline, including sex, race/ethnicity, academic test scores,
depressive symptoms (coded continuously), implicit theories, or bullying (see Table S1 in the Supplemental
Material). However, an examination of the incidence of
clinically significant depressive symptoms yielded a significant baseline difference in Sample 1 but not Samples
2 and 3 (see Table 1). Therefore, we also carried out
supplemental analyses that excluded Sample 1 (see the
Supplementary Analyses section in the Supplemental
Material).
Next, students did in fact appear to learn the incremental theory. Two coders, who were blind to experimental hypotheses and to participant identities and
characteristics, independently and reliably judged
whether participants’ responses appeared to answer the
writing prompts in the intervention materials sufficiently.
The interrater reliability was adequate (Krippendorff’s
α = .85), and inconsistencies were resolved by consensus. More than 94% of responses were judged to have

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Implicit Theories and Depression	

9

Table 2.  Effects of a Brief Implicit-Theories-of-Personality Intervention on Depressive Symptoms and Self-Views at 9-Month
Follow-Up
Treatment
Outcome at 9-month follow-up

Raw %

Clinically significant depressive
symptom
Continuous depressive symptom
Negative mood
Anhedonia
Ineffectiveness
Negative self-esteem
Self-esteem
Negative self-view

16

Control
M

Statistical test from model with covariates
M

Raw %
25

2.89
0.26
0.31
0.17
0.32
5.72
0.91

(3.54)
(0.42)
(0.47)
(0.43)
(0.40)
(1.24)
(2.46)

z

t(df)

2.67
3.44
0.35
0.34
0.26
0.36
5.56
1.86

(4.02)
(0.50)
(0.48)
(0.53)
(0.45)
(1.35)
(5.19)

p
.008

1.77
2.44
1.00
2.01
1.43
2.51
2.60

(581)
(579)
(577)
(574)
(578)
(577)
(504)

.077
.015
.317
.044
.154
.012
.009

Note: Standard deviations shown in parentheses. Effects estimated in separate regressions that controlled for a number of variables predicted to
reduce error variance in the outcome: sample, baseline values of the outcome, sex, state test scores, race/ethnicity, baseline victimization, and
baseline entity theories. For full regression models that assess treatment effects with and without covariates, see Tables S2 through S5 in the
Supplemental Material. Negative self-views only available for Samples 2 and 3.

sufficiently answered the prompt and referred to a belief
in the potential for change.
Sample responses in the treatment condition include
People can change and be a better person then [sic]
before and I think those people just try to do that
because they used to get picked on in school.
They all have a different personality and it could
change as they go on in school. For example, a
bully that is always picking on kids can be doing
that because he’s having trouble with his grades,
but if he gets help and gets better grades he can
realize what he’s done and change the way he is.
I knew that they would one day change but I didn’t
know when. I always thought . . . maybe they were
going through a hard time.
People could change over time. Maybe they had a
bad day or something.
Seeing that individuals wrote about the incremental theory as expected, we proceeded to test our primary
hypotheses concerning long-term depressive symptoms
(for other sample excerpts, see the Additional Unedited
Written Samples From Treated Students section in the
Supplemental Material).

Preventing the incidence rates of
clinically significant depressive
symptoms
In the control group, the incidence of clinically significant levels of depressive symptoms rose from September

to May by roughly 39% (September raw data: 18% above
the clinically significant cut point of 6; May: 25%), a significant increase (test of equality of proportions: z = 2.07,
p = .038). This is similar to the proportional increase typically seen for adolescents across the transition to high
school (Merikangas et  al., 2010). However, among students assigned to the incremental theory intervention
condition—who learned at the beginning of the year that
people’s socially relevant characteristics are not fixed but
have the potential for change—there was no significant
increase during the year in the prevalence of clinical levels of depressive symptoms (September: 14%; May: 16%;
z = 0.54, p = .592). As a result, at the May follow-up,
participants assigned to the incremental theory condition
were roughly 40% less likely to report clinical levels of
depressive symptoms than were participants assigned to
the control condition (16% vs. 25%), χ2(1, N = 599) =
7.90, p = .005, odds ratio = 0.55 (see Table 1). Logistic
regressions that controlled for baseline depressive symptoms and a number of additional covariates supported
this significant effect, z = 2.67, p = .008, odds ratio = 0.50
(see Table 2). The treatment effect remained even after
we excluded from analysis those participants who met
clinical levels of depressive symptoms at baseline (see
Table S8 in the Supplemental Material). Treatment effects
were significant (at p < .05) when we analyzed a cut
point of 7 out of 20 points as opposed to 6 out of 20 or
when we limited analyses to Samples 2 and 3 only (see
Table S7 in the Supplemental Material). It is interesting
that the treatment effect was not significantly moderated
by sample, level of victimization, sex, or race (all interaction effect ps > .10; exact tests are reported in Table S6 in
the Supplemental Material).
Note that the incremental theory intervention did not
reduce depressive symptoms so much as it statistically

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Miu, Yeager

10	
halted age-related increases in depressive symptoms.
This is consistent with existing theory that brief psychological interventions affect long-term outcomes by slowing negative, self-reinforcing processes before they gain
momentum (e.g., Cohen et al., 2009; Walton, 2014; Yeager
& Walton, 2011).

Effects on specific symptom clusters
To provide a more theoretically precise understanding of
these overall treatment effects, we next tested for treatment effects on subscales assessing symptom groups,
with each analyzed as continuous variables. There was a
marginally significant omnibus effect of the incremental
theory intervention on the full, continuous CDI:S, b =
−0.44, t(581) = 1.77, p = .077, d = −0.15 (see Table 2 and
Fig. S2 in the Supplemental Material). However, this marginal effect masked important heterogeneity across
symptom clusters.
In separate linear regression analyses predicting continuous subscales, there was a significant treatment effect
on May values of negative mood (I am sad all the time; I
feel like crying everyday; Things bother me all the time),
b = −0.08, t(579) = 2.44, p = .015, d = −0.20, and ineffectiveness (I do everything wrong), b = −0.08, t(574) = 2.01,
p = .044, d = −0.17 (see Table 2). The treatment effect on
May values of anhedonia (I feel alone all the time; I do not
have any friends) was not close to significant, b = −0.04,
t(577) = 1.00, p = .317, d = −0.08. The nonsignificant treatment effect on anhedonia is perhaps unsurprising because
anhedonia has a genetic and temperamental component
(Hasler, Drevets, Manji, & Charney, 2004; Loas, 1996).
Finally, the effect on negative self-esteem (Nothing will
ever work out for me; I hate myself; I look ugly; Nobody
really loves me) approached but did not reach significance, b = −0.04, t(578) = 1.43, p = .154, d = −0.12 (see
Table 2 and Fig. S3 in the Supplemental Material).
The nonsignificant finding regarding negative selfesteem was surprising. Fortunately, however, it was possible to use an additional measure of September and May
self-esteem to directly test the notion that negative selfesteem was unaffected by the intervention (recall that
self-esteem was assessed at both waves only in Samples
2 and 3). Participants assigned to the control condition
reported significantly lower self-esteem in May as compared with September (September: M = 6.11, SD = 1.02;
May: M = 5.66, SD = 1.35), t(253) = 4.89, p < .001, d =
−0.61. This signals a strong loss of self-esteem during the
year. But for participants assigned to the treatment condition, the decrease in self-esteem during the year was
present but did not reach significance at a .05 level
(September: M = 6.00, SD = 1.13; May: M = 5.83, SD =
1.24), t(262) = −1.78, p = .08, d = −0.22 (see Fig. S4 in the
Supplemental Material). A comparison of change scores

(May values minus September values) showed that the
incremental theory intervention was in fact more effective
at warding off a decline in self-esteem during the year, b =
0.26, t(514) = 2.44, p = .015, d = 0.22. Confirming this,
using data from all three samples and imputing baseline
values for Sample 1, we found a significant main effect of
the intervention on higher self-esteem in May, b = 0.24,
t(577) = 2.51, p = .012, d = 0.21 (see Table 2). Thus, the
nonsignificant finding for negative self-esteem in the
CDI:S subscale did not capture an effect that became
more apparent using this supplemental measure.

Linguistic indicators of maladaptive
self-views
Analyses of more indirect negative self-views assessed
through subtle features of language mirrored the selfreported self-esteem results. Prior to the intervention, in
September, there were no differences between participants assigned to the treatment and control conditions on
the linguistic indicators of maladaptive self-views (i.e.,
negative emotion words, talking in the past tense, and
talking in terms of what “could” or “should” have been;
raw data, incremental theory condition: M = 1.10, SD =
3.00; raw data, control condition: M = 1.35, SD = 3.50),
t(505) = 0.89, p = .374, d = 0.08 (recall that self-views
were assessed in Samples 2 and 3 only). However, in
May, at the end of the year, treated students described
themselves in significantly less maladaptive ways (raw
data, incremental theory condition: M = 0.91, SD = 2.46;
raw data, control condition: M = 1.86, SD = 5.19), t(520) =
2.60, p = .009, d = 0.23. In an ordinary least squares
regression predicting May self-views and controlling for
September self-views and a number of additional covariates (i.e., those reported in Table S2 and Fig. S5 in the
Supplemental Material), the condition effect remained
significant, b = −0.90, t(504) = 2.60, p = .009, d = 0.23.
Thus, the finding that the intervention prevented a worsening of negative self-views was confirmed by using this
more indirect assessment: nonconscious use of linguistic
categories that signal negative self-construals.

Moderation by baseline implicit
theories?
Our theory leads to the expectation that the incremental
theory intervention should have its effect chiefly by preventing an entity theory from undermining resilience and
fueling depressive symptoms. Therefore, individuals with
more of an entity theory at baseline should benefit most
(Yeager et  al., 2014, Study 3; also see Blackwell et  al.,
2007). Moderation analyses tested this possibility using
the full, continuous measure of depressive symptoms to
increase statistical precision.

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Implicit Theories and Depression	

Number of Depressive Symptoms Reported
on the CDI:S (Range: 0 to 20)

5

11
Control: Baseline Entity Theory
Treatment: Baseline Entity Theory
Control: Baseline Incremental Theory
Treatment: Baseline Incremental Theory

4.5
4.16

4
3.5
3
2.5
2

3.12
3.03

3.09
2.80
2.78

2.32
2.07

1.5
1

September

May

Assessment Occasion
Fig. 2. Results: changes in depressive symptoms from September to May of ninth grade, by
baseline implicit theories and experimental condition. Baseline implicit theories correspond to
estimated values at 1 SD above or below the mean for that scale, from models removing fixed
effects for sample. Error bars represent standard errors. CDI:S = short form of Children’s Depression Inventory.

Within the control group, an entity theory in September
was correlated with significantly more depressive symptoms at the May follow-up, b = 0.60, t(292) = 2.67, p =
.008, β = 0.14. This relation was eliminated in the treatment group, b = 0.12, t(301) = 0.68, p = .500, β = 0.04, and
the difference in correlations was significant, evidenced
by a significant Incremental Intervention × Baseline Entity
Theory interaction, b = −0.51, t(590) = 2.14, p = .033, β =
−0.10, in a model controlling for September levels of
depressive symptoms and with fixed effects for sample.
Figure 2 illustrates this interaction using values estimated at 1 SD above and below the mean in terms of
baseline theories, adjusting for sample fixed effects. It
shows that in September, before the intervention, treatment and control participants did not differ in terms of
their depressive symptoms. Furthermore, Figure 2 shows
that baseline implicit theories were a strong predictor of
baseline depressive symptoms (i.e., symptoms differed as
a function of theories in September). Next, among individuals with more of an entity theory at baseline who
participated in the control activity, there were also marked
increases in levels of depressive symptoms during the
year. Yet among adolescents with an entity theory at
baseline who were assigned to the incremental theory
intervention condition, levels were flat over time; the

intervention statistically halted the normative increase in
depressive symptoms during the freshman year (see
Fig. 2). Thus, by May, there was a treatment effect on the
continuous measure of depressive symptoms among students who began the year with more of an entity theory
(+1 SD), simple effect b = −0.93, t(590) = 2.58, p = .010,
d  = 0.21. Those students who began the year with an
incremental theory did not differ as a function of whether
they were assigned to the treatment or control condition
(see Fig. 2).
Note that the intervention did not seem to treat
depression—­that is, depressive symptoms did not appear
to decrease in any group of students over time. Instead,
the incremental theory intervention seems to have had its
effects by neutralizing a risk factor’s effects, thereby preventing an entity theory from increasing risk for depression over time.

Discussion
If the seed of depression is the belief that negative events
cannot improve, then one way to prevent depressive
symptoms from growing might be to teach the idea that
people can change. This might prevent depression from
taking root in a way that, absent timely intervention, can

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Miu, Yeager

12	
be difficult to reverse during the ensuing decades of life.
To investigate this possibility, we used a double-blind,
active-placebo-controlled, individual-level, universal, preventative experimental design. Across three replications
that included nearly 600 adolescents, a one-time intervention teaching an incremental theory of personality in
September of participants’ ninth-grade year appeared to
reduce the prevalence of clinical levels of depressive
symptoms in May of that school year by approximately
40%. This finding was robust to a number of sensitivity
analyses (see Tables S2 through S8 in the Supplemental
Material). Analyses of self-esteem mirrored these findings.
Finer-grained examinations of CDI:S symptom subscales
showed significant treatment effects on negative mood
and ineffectiveness but not on anhedonia.
Textual analyses (Pennebaker et  al., 2007) further
explored the psychological impact of the intervention on
adolescents’ self-views. Assessing subtle linguistic clues
in response to an open-ended writing prompt, we found
that treated teens were less likely to use negative emotion and trait words, to talk about the past, and to talk
about discrepancies (linguistic indicators of maladaptive
counterfactual thinking) in their self-descriptions during
the May follow-up. This index was also correlated with
depressive symptoms at baseline and at follow-up. This
means that the intervention may have influenced individuals’ self-schemata, perhaps even changing their
unconscious perceptions about themselves during times
of difficulty. This finding opens up new avenues for
research on the effects of implicit theories as well as on
mechanisms that sustain treatment effects on depressive
symptoms.
Furthermore, moderation analyses supported our theoretical account for these effects. Adolescents with more
of an entity theory of personality at baseline showed
marked increases in depressive symptoms during the
year if they were assigned to the control group. However,
those individuals who were assigned to the incremental
theory of personality intervention showed no such
increase, which suggests that the intervention was particularly effective for people with an entity belief.
Conversely, the current study did not find a significant
sex moderation of the treatment effect on depressive
symptoms or depression subscales, even though past
research has shown that females develop adolescent
depression at a higher rate than do males, possibly as a
result of greater peer stressors and stress reactivity among
females (Cyranowski, Frank, Young, & Shear, 2000;
Hankin et  al., 1998; Hankin, Mermelstein, & Roesch,
2007). Nevertheless, regardless of sex, the intervention
precisely targeted one contributor to the onset of depressive symptoms during the transition to high school—an
entity theory of personality—and reduced its impact on
depressive symptoms.

Limitations
There are clear limitations to this research. First, these
studies did not show that teaching adolescents that people can change treats depression. We found no evidence
that levels of depressive symptoms decreased for any
group of students. Instead, the intervention seemed to
slow the normative increase in depressive symptoms,
especially among students with an entity theory at
baseline.
Next, the current research does not speak to the issue
of whether an incremental theory intervention would be
helpful in therapy. Our intervention was, very intentionally, quite “stealthy” (Yeager & Walton, 2011). That is, we
did not directly tell students that it is in their best interest
to believe people can change or that it would help them
be less stressed or depressed. Instead, the intervention
asked students to author the intervention content by writing notes to future students, avoiding the implication that
they were getting treatment for depression. This sayingis-believing tactic can be helpful for promoting deeper
processing of the material and avoiding stigma (Aronson,
1999; Walton, 2014; Yeager & Walton, 2011).
Moreover, it is unknown whether individuals who are
currently depressed or who are at high risk for depression—for example, individuals who have a mother with a
history of MDD (Goodman & Gotlib, 1999)—will benefit
from an incremental theory intervention. Furthermore, we
have not documented whether pubertal timing can interact with the treatment effects on depressive symptoms.
Relatedly, it is crucial to emphasize the context dependency and developmental dependency of the present
intervention strategy. We do not expect that an incremental theory of personality would prevent risk for depression in all contexts or during all developmental periods.
Our study was built on a precise theory of the role of
social-cognitive interpretations of social adversity in spurring recursive thoughts that increase the risk for depression during high school. We predicted that if social
difficulties, such as peer exclusion, rumormongering, and
other forms of social aggression, are nearly ubiquitous—
as in the transition to high school (Barber & Olsen, 2004;
Crosnoe, 2011)—then there will be a greater tendency for
many teens to engage in thoughts that could increase
vulnerability to depression. During those times, students
may be more likely to develop depression unless they are
given a framework for understanding social events that
prevents them from engaging in those thoughts. An
implication of this account is that, potentially, the present
intervention might have little or no effect on depression
if the timing were different, perhaps even if it were delivered just a few weeks later in the first semester of high
school when negative thinking may have already taken
root (see Cook, Purdie-Vaughns, Garcia, & Cohen, 2012).

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Implicit Theories and Depression	

13

As with other brief psychological interventions that are
a part of the canon of strategies available to clinical psychologists (see Pennebaker, 2004), the mechanisms that
produced a sustained effect of this brief intervention are
not fully understood. For instance, did teens clearly
remember the specific content of the incremental theory
message during the year, or did they forget it but only
after it affected their self-schemata and began to provide
a new lens for interpreting social adversity? Or did the
intervention have the short-term effect of causing teens
to make more friends, thereby buffering them from
depressive symptoms and maladaptive self-schemas in
the long run? The intervention may also have been effective as a result of biological mechanisms, such as stress
reactivity, a predictor of higher rates of depression (e.g.,
Gotlib, Joormann, Minor, & Hallmayer, 2008). Indeed,
Yeager et al. (2014) found that ninth graders who received
an incremental theory intervention reported less stress in
response to peer ostracism. These possibilities and others
warrant further investigation (see Walton, 2014; Yeager &
Walton, 2011).
Another limitation is our use of only a brief self-report
measure of depressive symptoms. This is, of course, common in large-scale, light-touch studies like the present
research, in part because the CDI has shown convergent
validity with a clinical diagnostic interview despite its
convenience and efficiency (Timbremont et  al., 2004).
Yet it is possible that adolescents may not have full insight
into their depressive symptoms. Future research would
greatly benefit from additional measures, such as a clinical diagnostic interview or a parent report of depressive
symptoms, which would reduce false positive and false
negative rates. Although we found treatment effects 8
months later, it is always possible that the intervention
requires a booster session for even longer-term effects.
Administering booster sessions and engaging in a longerterm follow-up may be informative about treatment
effects on depressive diagnoses over time.
A final set of limitations is analytic rather than theoretical. First, the smallest of our three samples (Sample 1),
which represented 13% of our data, happened to show
significant baseline condition differences, by chance, but
only for the dichotomized measure of depressive symptoms and not for the continuous measure of depressive
symptoms. We did not exclude that sample entirely from
the present report because systematically omitting data
on the basis of the findings can lead to publication bias.
Instead, we used a number of analytic methods to show
that our conclusions did not depend on that baseline difference. Next, the treatment effect on continuous depressive symptoms in the full sample was marginally
significant (p = .07), whereas there were significant effects
(at p < .05) on the dichotomized clinically significant

symptoms variable, two of the four symptom clusters,
and the continuous depressive symptoms among students with an entity theory at baseline. Of course, a CDI:S
measure would produce greater measurement error than
would the full long-form CDI; thus, some inconsistency
across analyses should be expected as a result of random
variability alone. However, this result highlights the more
general need to replicate the present study’s results and
to more fully understand their boundary conditions
before it would be responsible to apply them broadly in
clinical or educational settings.

Implications
Although we acknowledge the limitations of this research,
it is important to emphasize a number of potential implications of this study for mental-health policy. First, the
intervention appears to have been effective at reducing
the overall percentage of students with significant levels
of depressive symptoms. Although it may be more effective to have a targeted treatment for students with an
entity theory, researchers may have difficulty in categorizing students into entity theorists reliably, given that our
study measured implicit theory on a continuous scale.
Moreover, students with an entity theory may feel stigmatized if they are pulled from class to receive the intervention. Instead, our past studies have shown that the
intervention helps reduce aggression, stress, and health
for students regardless of baseline theories (Yeager et al.,
2014; Yeager, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2013). Thus, the
intervention appears to be best used as a “universal prevention” for all students—something that has been very
difficult to accomplish in past studies (Stice et al., 2009).
In fact, Stice et al. (2009) stated, “It may be prudent to . . .
discontinue evaluation of universal prevention programs”
(p. 499). The potential suggested by the present early
stage research will hopefully breathe new life into universal prevention efforts.
Second, the present intervention was cost-effective
and highly scalable. In the two larger samples—Samples
2 and 3—the intervention was delivered via the Internet
in the school computer lab with no specialized training
of school staff. It involved only one class period (although
some students also received a background session about
the brain that, as noted, did not seem to enhance treatment effects). This does not mean that the intervention
had zero cost. In fact, a great deal of work was done in
the piloting phase to customize the intervention for the
given populations—for instance, changing the normative
quotes from peers to match local colloquialisms and programming the intervention to seem like a normal survey
that students would complete in the course of everyday
schooling (see Yeager & Walton, 2011). Effort also went

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Miu, Yeager

14	
into designing procedures that fit within the fabric of the
school day so that the experimental session could be carried out with high treatment fidelity. Nevertheless, the
intervention had near-zero marginal cost. That is, after
initial customization, there was little or no additional cost
of giving the intervention to more students within the
school. Given the relatively small investment of time and
effort, and the possibility of saving many tens of thousands of dollars in lost productivity over a lifetime for a
person who is prevented from depression in adolescence, the present intervention (or an improved version
of it) may, after replication and extension, eventually
prove to be a cost-effective option for educators and
policymakers.
The present research also has a number of theoretical
implications. First, this research reinforces social-cognitive theories of development (Olson & Dweck, 2008).
Historical data have suggested that dramatic increases in
depression during the transition to high school are inevitable (e.g., the control group in the present study; see
Benner et  al., 2011; Merikangas et  al., 2010; Newman
et al., 2007). Yet the present research confirms the classic
notion that adversities in life do not have a direct effect
on poor mental health but, instead, are filtered through a
person’s social-cognitive style (Beck, 1976). This provides
an important opportunity for intervention. It suggests that
it can be possible to weaken the effect of an environmental risk on mental health by precisely targeting relevant
social-cognitive factors before negative, self-reinforcing
patterns of thinking have an opportunity to gain momentum (Cohen & Sherman, 2014). In the present research,
we attempted to alter an implicit theory that, in much
past research, has been shown to give rise to negative
responses to social adversity, and we did it at a time
known to be laden with difficulties, such as exclusion
and victimization.6 We showed that when this was done,
the typical increases in depressive symptoms during
freshman year were slowed substantially.
Second, this research adds to a growing number of
experimental studies that have shown that, when
attempts are made to address important social problems
that have a psychological component, sometimes “less is
more.” For example, in some cases, 2 to 5 min of expressive writing exercises can be more effective than extensive counseling sessions for individuals coping with
trauma (Pennebaker, 2004), and a 7-min writing exercise
can halt the year-over-year decrease in marital satisfaction (Finkel, Slotter, Luchies, Walton, & Gross, 2013; for
many more examples, see Walton, 2014, or Wilson,
2011). It is interesting that the Stice et al. (2009) metaanalysis of depression prevention programs showed that
briefer programs were more effective than longer

programs at preventing depression and that programs
that involved homework—requiring individuals to write
at home—were more effective than those that did not.
Coincidentally, the present implicit-theories intervention
involved expressive writing and was brief. Viewed from
that perspective, the present findings are quite consistent with existing best practices.

Conclusion
It is important to replicate and extend these findings to
deepen our understanding of the moderating and mediating mechanisms of the specific symptom clusters that
are affected. Doing so is the most responsible next step
before broader application. Nonetheless, it is encouraging that the present theoretically informed strategy of
intervening to teach an incremental theory of personality
appears to have made some headway on a seemingly
intractable issue—universal prevention for depressive
symptoms during adolescence.
Author Contributions
D. S. Yeager developed the study concept and study design and
supervised all data collection, entry, and coding. A. S. Miu analyzed the data under the supervision of D. S. Yeager. A. S. Miu
prepared all tables and figures and drafted the manuscript and
the Supplemental Material. D. S. Yeager provided critical revisions. Both authors approved the final version of the manuscript for submission.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the students and teachers involved in this
research for their cooperation. We also thank Cary Catching,
April House, Ahmad Saleh, Kerry Morrissey, Shannon Morrissey,
Joseph Powers, Brian Spitzer, Rebecca Johnson, April Scott, and
Hector Villalpando for their help with data collection and entry.
We are also grateful to Chris Beevers, David Sherman, James
Pennebaker, Kali Trzesniewski, Carol Dweck, and Patricia
Brennan for their feedback or suggestions. All remaining errors
are the authors’.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The authors declared that they had no conflicts of interest with
respect to their authorship or the publication of this article.

Funding
This work received funding from the Thrive Foundation for
Youth, the Spencer Foundation, and the Raikes Foundation.

Supplemental Material	
Additional supporting information may be found at http://cpx
.sagepub.com/content/by/supplemental-data

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Implicit Theories and Depression	

15

Notes
1. Students with school-reported learning disabilities (e.g., dyslexia) or autism spectrum disorders were excluded because
they were not expected to be able to successfully self-administer the theory-change intervention in the allotted time without
any support from a teacher or researcher.
2. Students in Sample 1 and some but not all of the students in
Samples 2 and 3 participated in a preintervention workshop in
which teachers taught both the experimental and the control
groups about how the brain changes with learning. This was
done to provide a greater basis for the claim that personality lives in the brain and can be changed and to facilitate the
uptake of the treatment message. However, analyses of the data
from Samples 2 and 3 showed that participation in the preintervention workshop did not increase treatment effect sizes and
did not have a measurable impact on depressive symptoms.
3. The CDI:S was used instead of the long-form CDI because
in a prior study (Yeager, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2013), we
discovered that the long form was distressing when delivered
to nonclinical, universal populations of high school students
and resulted in participant complaints and, ultimately, sample
attrition. To minimize distress and reduce attrition rates from
the study, we used the CDI:S (note, however, that the shorter
form, if anything, should result in greater measurement error
and make it more difficult to reject the null hypothesis).
4. There is unfortunately no consensus on the clinical cut point
for the CDI:S, although a number of analysts have assessed cut
points for the long form of the CDI. For nonclinical populations, analysts have suggested long-form CDI cut points ranging from 16 to 19 of 44 possible points (Timbremont, Braet,
& Dreessen, 2004), corresponding roughly to the 80th to 90th
percentile (depending on gender) for adolescents in our target
age range (Kovacs, 1992). Our cut points approximated this as
best as possible.
5. Indeed, DeCoster et  al. (2009, p. 357) showed that at high
levels of reliability (above .8), the type of theory-driven dichotomization conducted here can outperform continuous analyses.
6. For a correlational, mediational analysis of the effects of
implicit theories on depression through maladaptive social
cognitions, using baseline survey data, see Figure S6 in the
Supplemental Material. Unfortunately, the same social-cognitive
variables were not assessed postintervention.

References
Abelson, R. P. (1985). A variance explanation paradox: When a
little is a lot. Psychological Bulletin, 97, 128–132.
Abramson, L. Y., Seligman, M. E., & Teasdale, J. D. (1978).
Learned helplessness in humans: Critique and reformulation. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 87, 49–74.
Ahmavaara, A., & Houston, D. M. (2007). The effects of selective schooling and self-concept on adolescents’ academic
aspiration: An examination of Dweck’s self-theory. British
Journal of Educational Psychology, 77, 613–632.
Aronson, E. (1999). The power of self-persuasion. American
Psychologist, 54, 875–884.
Avenevoli, S., & Steinberg, L. (2002). The continuity of depression across the adolescent transition. Advances in Child
Development and Behavior, 28, 139–173.

Barber, B. K., & Olsen, J. A. (2004). Assessing the transitions
to middle and high school. Journal of Adolescent Research,
19, 3–30.
Beck, A. T. (1976). Cognitive therapy and the emotional disorders. New York, NY: International Universities Press.
Beck, A. T. (2008). The evolution of the cognitive model of
depression and its neurobiological correlates. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 165, 969–977.
Beer, J. (2002). Implicit self-theories of shyness. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 1009–1024.
Benner, A. (2011). The transition to high school: Current knowledge, future directions. Educational Psychology Review, 23,
299–328.
Blackwell, L. S., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007).
Implicit theories of intelligence predict achievement across
an adolescent transition: A longitudinal study and an intervention. Child Development, 78, 246–263.
Burnette, J. L., O’Boyle, E. H., Vanepps, E. M., Pollack, J. M.,
& Finkel, E. J. (2013). Mind-sets matter: A meta-analytic
review of implicit theories and self-regulation. Psychological
Bulletin, 139, 655–701.
Chan, A., & Poulin, F. (2007). Monthly changes in the composition of friendship networks in early adolescence. MerrillPalmer Quarterly, 53, 578–602.
Chiu, C. Y., Hong, Y. Y., & Dweck, C. S. (1997). Lay dispositionism and implicit theories of personality. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 19–30.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Apfel, N., &
Brzustoski, P. (2009). Recursive processes in self-affirmation: Intervening to close the minority achievement gap.
Science, 324, 400–403.
Cohen, G. L., & Sherman, D. K. (2014). The psychology of
change: Self-affirmation and social psychological intervention. Annual Review of Psychology, 65, 333–371.
Cook, J. E., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L.
(2012). Chronic threat and contingent belonging: Protective
benefits of values affirmation on identity development.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102, 479–496.
Cooper, H., & Patall, E. A. (2009). The relative benefits of metaanalysis conducted with individual participant data versus
aggregated data. Psychological Methods, 14, 165–176.
Costello, E. J., Mustillo, S., Erkanli, A., Keeler, G., & Angold,
A. (2003). Prevalence and development of psychiatric disorders in childhood and adolescence. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 60, 837–844.
Crosnoe, R. (2011). Fitting in, standing out: Navigating the
social challenges of high school to get an education. New
York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Cyranowski, J. M., Frank, E., Young, E., & Shear, M. K. (2000).
Adolescent onset of the gender difference in lifetime rates
of major depression: A theoretical model. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 57, 21–27.
DeCoster, J., Iselin, A. M. R., & Gallucci, M. (2009). A conceptual and empirical examination of justifications for dichotomization. Psychological Methods, 14, 349–366.
Diener, C. I., & Dweck, C. S. (1978). An analysis of learned
helplessness: Continuous changes in performance, strategy,
and achievement cognitions following failure. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 36, 940–952.

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Miu, Yeager

16	
Disner, S. G., Beevers, C. G., Haigh, E. A., & Beck, A. T. (2011).
Neural mechanisms of the cognitive model of depression.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 12, 467–477.
Dweck, C. S. (1975). The role of expectations and attributions in the alleviation of learned helplessness. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 31, 674–685.
Dweck, C. S. (1999). Self-theories: Their role in motivation, personality, and development. Philadelphia, PA: Psychology
Press.
Dweck, C. S., & Elliott-Moskwa, E. (2010). Self-theories: The
roots of defensiveness. In J. E. Maddux & J. P. Tangney
(Eds.), Social psychological foundations of clinical psychology (pp. 136–156). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Dweck, C. S., & Leggett, E. L. (1988). A social-cognitive
approach to motivation and personality. Psychological
Review, 95, 256–273.
Erdley, C. A., Loomis, C. C., Cain, K. M., & Dumas-Hines, F.
(1997). Relations among children’s social goals, implicit
personality theories, and responses to social failure.
Developmental Psychology, 33, 263–272.
Farrington, D. P., & Loeber, R. (2000). Some benefits of dichotomization in psychiatric and criminological research.
Criminal Behaviour and Mental Health, 10, 100–122.
Finkel, E. J., Slotter, E. B., Luchies, L. B., Walton, G. M., & Gross,
J. J. (2013). A brief intervention to promote conflict reappraisal preserves marital quality over time. Psychological
Science, 24, 1595–1601.
Frieden, T. R. (2010). A framework for public health action: The
health impact pyramid. American Journal of Public Health,
100, 590–595.
Garber, J., Clarke, G. N., Weersing, V. R., Beardslee, W. R.,
Brent, D. A., Gladstone, T. R., . . . Iyengar, S. (2009).
Prevention of depression in at-risk adolescents: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical
Association, 301, 2215–2224.
Gillham, J. E., Hamilton, J., Freres, D. R., Patton, K., & Gallop,
R. (2006). Preventing depression among early adolescents
in the primary care setting: A randomized controlled study
of the Penn Resiliency Program. Journal of Abnormal Child
Psychology, 34, 195–211.
Glasgow, R. E., Lichtenstein, E., & Marcus, A. C. (2003). Why
don’t we see more translation of health promotion research
to practice? Rethinking the efficacy-to-effectiveness transition. American Journal of Public Health, 93, 1261–1267.
Goodman, S. H., & Gotlib, I. H. (1999). Risk for psychopathology in the children of depressed mothers: A developmental model for understanding mechanisms of transmission.
Psychological Review, 106, 458–490.
Gotlib, I. H., & Joormann, J. (2010). Cognition and depression: Current status and future directions. Annual Review of
Clinical Psychology, 6, 285–312.
Gotlib, I. H., Joormann, J., Minor, K. L., & Hallmayer, J. (2008).
HPA axis reactivity: A mechanism underlying the associations among 5-HTTLPR, stress, and depression. Biological
Psychiatry, 63, 847–851.
Graham, S., & Juvonen, J. (1998). Self-blame and peer victimization in middle school: An attributional analysis.
Developmental Psychology, 34, 587–599.

Hankin, B. L., Abramson, L. Y., Moffitt, T. E., Silva, P. A.,
McGee, R., & Angell, K. E. (1998). Development of depression from preadolescence to young adulthood: Emerging
gender differences in a 10-year longitudinal study. Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 107, 128–140.
Hankin, B. L., Mermelstein, R., & Roesch, L. (2007). Sex differences in adolescent depression: Stress exposure and reactivity models. Child Development, 78, 279–295.
Hasler, G., Drevets, W. C., Manji, H. K., & Charney, D. S.
(2004). Discovering endophenotypes for major depression.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 29, 1765–1781.
Helsel, W. J., & Matson, J. L. (1984). The assessment of
depression in children: The internal structure of the Child
Depression Inventory (CDI). Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 22, 289–298.
Higgins, E. T., Vookles, J., & Tykocinski, O. (1992). Self and
health: How “patterns” of self-beliefs predict types of emotional and physical problems. Social Cognition, 10, 125–150.
Hong, Y. Y., Chiu, C. Y., Dweck, C. S., Lin, D. M., & Wan, W.
(1999). Implicit theories, attributions, and coping: A meaning system approach. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 77, 588–599.
Horowitz, J. L., & Garber, J. (2006). The prevention of depressive symptoms in children and adolescents: A meta-analytic
review. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 74,
401–415.
Janoff-Bulman, R. (1979). Characterological versus behavioral
self-blame: Inquiries into depression and rape. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 37, 1798–1809.
Juvonen, J., & Graham, S. (2014). Bullying in schools: The
power of bullies and the plight of victims. Annual Review
of Psychology, 65, 159–185.
Kessler, R. C., Chiu, W. T., Demler, O., & Walters, E. E. (2005).
Prevalence, severity, and comorbidity of 12-month DSM-IV
disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 617–627.
Killen, M., Kelly, M. C., Richardson, C., & Jampol, N. S. (2010).
Attributions of intentions and fairness judgments regarding
interracial peer encounters. Developmental Psychology, 46,
1206–1213.
Kovacs, M. K. (1992). Children’s Depression Inventory-Short
Form (CDI). New York, NY: Multi-Health Systems.
Lakdawalla, Z., Hankin, B. L., & Mermelstein, R. (2007).
Cognitive theories of depression in children and adolescents: A conceptual and quantitative review. Clinical Child
and Family Psychology Review, 10, 1–24.
Lewinsohn, P. M., Rohde, P., & Seeley, J. R. (1998). Major
depressive disorder in older adolescents: Prevalence,
risk factors, and clinical implications. Clinical Psychology
Review, 18, 765–794.
Loas, G. (1996). Vulnerability to depression: A model centered
on anhedonia. Journal of Affective Disorders, 41, 39–53.
MacCallum, R. C., Zhang, S., Preacher, K. J., & Rucker, D. D.
(2002). On the practice of dichotomization of quantitative
variables. Psychological Methods, 7, 19–40.
Mathers, C. D., Fat, D. M., & Boerma, J. (2008). The global burden of disease: 2004 update. Geneva, Switzerland: World
Health Organization.

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Implicit Theories and Depression	

17

McLaughlin, K. A. (2011). The public health impact of major
depression: A call for interdisciplinary prevention efforts.
Prevention Science, 12, 361–371.
Merikangas, K. R., He, J. P., Burstein, M., Swanson, S. A.,
Avenevoli, S., Cui, L., . . . Swendsen, J. (2010). Lifetime prevalence of mental disorders in US adolescents: Results from
the National Comorbidity Survey Replication–Adolescent
Supplement (NCS-A). Journal of the American Academy of
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 49, 980–989.
Molden, D. C., & Dweck, C. S. (2006). Finding “meaning” in
psychology: A lay theories approach to self-regulation,
social perception, and social development. American
Psychologist, 61, 192–203.
Molden, D. C., Plaks, J. E., & Dweck, C. S. (2006). “Meaningful”
social inferences: Effects of implicit theories on inferential
processes. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 42,
738–752.
Muñoz, R. F., Cuijpers, P., Smit, F., Barrera, A. Z., & Leykin, Y.
(2010). Prevention of major depression. Annual Review of
Clinical Psychology, 6, 181–212.
Newman, B., Newman, P., Griffen, S., O’Connor, K., & Spas,
J. (2007). The relationship of social support to depressive
symptoms during the transition to high school. Adolescence,
42, 441–459.
Olson, K. R., & Dweck, C. S. (2008). A blueprint for social cognitive development. Perspectives on Psychological Science,
3, 193–202.
Pennebaker, J. W. (1997). Writing about emotional experiences
as a therapeutic process. Psychological Science, 8, 162–166.
Pennebaker, J. W. (2004). Theories, therapies, and taxpayers:
On the complexities of the expressive writing paradigm.
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 11, 138–142.
Pennebaker, J. W., Booth, R. J, & Francis, M. E. (2007). Linguistic
Inquiry and Word Count: (LIWC2007): A computer-based
text analysis program [Computer software]. Retrieved from
http://liwc.net
Pennebaker, J. W., & King, L. A. (1999). Linguistic styles:
Language use as an individual difference. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 1296–1312.
Petrie, K. J., Booth, R. J., & Pennebaker, J. W. (1998). The
immunological effects of thought suppression. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 1264–1272.
Richards, M. H., Crowe, P. A., Larson, R., & Swarr, A. (1998).
Developmental patterns and gender differences in the
experience of peer companionship during adolescence.
Child Development, 69, 154–163.
Robins, R. W., & Pals, J. L. (2002). Implicit self-theories in the
academic domain: Implications for goal orientation, attributions, affect, and self-esteem change. Self and Identity, 1,
313–336.
Rudolph, K. D. (2010). Implicit theories of peer relationships.
Social Development, 19, 113–129.
Rutter, M. (2003). Categories, dimensions, and the mental
health of children and adolescents. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences, 1008, 11–21.
Saylor, C. F., Finch, A. J., Spirito, A., & Bennett, B. (1984). The
Children’s Depression Inventory: A systematic evaluation
of psychometric properties. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 52, 955–967.

Schimmack, U. (2012). The ironic effect of significant results
on the credibility of multiple-study articles. Psychological
Methods, 17, 551–556.
Sheffield, J. K., Spence, S. H., Rapee, R. M., Kowalenko, N.,
Wignall, A., Davis, A., & McLoone, J. (2006). Evaluation
of universal, indicated, and combined cognitive-behavioral
approaches to the prevention of depression among adolescents. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 74,
66–79.
Spence, S. H., Sheffield, J. K., & Donovan, C. L. (2003).
Preventing adolescent depression: An evaluation of the
Problem Solving for Life program. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 71, 3–13.
Stice, E., Shaw, H., Bohon, C., Marti, C. N., & Rohde, P. (2009).
A meta-analytic review of depression prevention programs
for children and adolescents: Factors that predict magnitude of intervention effects. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 77, 486–503.
Tangney, J. P., Stuewig, J., & Mashek, D. J. (2007). Moral emotions and moral behavior. Annual Review of Psychology,
58, 345–372.
Timbremont, B., Braet, C., & Dreessen, L. (2004). Assessing
depression in youth: Relation between the Children’s
Depression Inventory and a structured interview. Journal
of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 33, 149–157.
Walton, G. M. (2014). The new science of wise psychological
interventions. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
23, 73–82.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A brief social-belonging
intervention improves academic and health outcomes of
minority students. Science, 331, 1447–1451.
Weiss, B., & Weisz, J. R. (1988). Factor structure of self-reported
depression: Clinic-referred children versus adolescents.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 97, 492–495.
Weiss, B., Weisz, J. R., Politano, M., Carey, M., Nelson, W. M.,
& Finch, A. J. (1991). Developmental differences in the
factor structure of the Children’s Depression Inventory.
Psychological Assessment: A Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 3, 38–45.
Williams, K. D., & Jarvis, B. (2006). Cyberball: A program for
use in research on interpersonal ostracism and acceptance.
Behavior Research Methods, 38, 174–180.
Wilson, T. D. (2011). Redirect: The surprising new science of
psychological change. New York, NY: Little, Brown.
Wilson, T. D., Damiani, M., & Shelton, N. (2002). Improving
the academic performance of college students with brief
attributional interventions. In J. Aronson (Ed.), Improving
academic achievement: Impact of psychological factors on
education (pp. 88–108). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Wong, P. W., Fu, K. W., Chan, K. Y., Chan, W. S., Liu, P. M.,
Law, Y. W., & Yip, P. S. (2012). Effectiveness of a universal school-based programme for preventing depression
in Chinese adolescents: A quasi-experimental pilot study.
Journal of Affective Disorders, 142, 106–114.
Yeager, D. S., & Dweck, C. S. (2012). Mindsets that promote
resilience: When students believe that personal characteristics can be developed. Educational Psychologist, 47, 1–13.
Yeager, D. S., Johnson, R., Spitzer, B. J., Trzesniewski, K. H.,
Powers, J., & Dweck, C. S. (2014). The far-reaching effects

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Miu, Yeager

18	
of believing people can change: Implicit theories of personality shape stress, health, and achievement during adolescence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
106, 867–884.
Yeager, D. S., Miu, A. S., Powers, J., & Dweck, C. S. (2013).
Implicit theories of personality and attributions of hostile
intent: A meta-analysis, an experiment, and a longitudinal
intervention. Child Development, 84, 1651–1667.
Yeager, D. S., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2013).
An implicit theories of personality intervention reduces

a­dolescent aggression in response to victimization and
exclusion. Child Development, 84, 970–988.
Yeager, D. S., Trzesniewski, K. H., Tirri, K., Nokelainen, P.,
& Dweck, C. S. (2011). Adolescents’ implicit theories predict desire for vengeance after peer conflicts: Correlational
and experimental evidence. Developmental Psychology, 47,
1090–1107.
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological
interventions in education: They’re not magic. Review of
Educational Research, 81, 267–301.

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

