See	discussions,	stats,	and	author	profiles	for	this	publication	at:	https://www.researchgate.net/publication/303716970

Teaching	a	lay	theory	before	college	narrows
achievement	gaps	at	scale
Article		in		Proceedings	of	the	National	Academy	of	Sciences	·	May	2016
DOI:	10.1073/pnas.1524360113

CITATIONS

READS

21

391

14	authors,	including:
Ezgi	N.	Akcinar

Angela	Duckworth

Stanford	University

University	of	Pennsylvania

2	PUBLICATIONS			22	CITATIONS			

74	PUBLICATIONS			6,265	CITATIONS			

SEE	PROFILE

SEE	PROFILE

Geoffrey	L	Cohen
Stanford	University
61	PUBLICATIONS			5,113	CITATIONS			
SEE	PROFILE

Some	of	the	authors	of	this	publication	are	also	working	on	these	related	projects:

Online	panels	data	quality	View	project

All	content	following	this	page	was	uploaded	by	Angela	Duckworth	on	22	June	2016.
The	user	has	requested	enhancement	of	the	downloaded	file.

PNAS PLUS

Teaching a lay theory before college narrows
achievement gaps at scale
David S. Yeagera,1,2, Gregory M. Waltonb,1,2, Shannon T. Bradyc, Ezgi N. Akcinarb, David Pauneskud, Laura Keanee,
Donald Kamentzf, Gretchen Ritterg, Angela Lee Duckworthf,h, Robert Ursteini, Eric M. Gomezj, Hazel Rose Markusb,
Geoffrey L. Cohenb,c, and Carol S. Dweckb
a
Department of Psychology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin,TX 78712; bDepartment of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305; cGraduate
School of Education, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305; dProject for Education Research That Scales, Department of Psychology, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA 94305; euAspire, Boston, MA 02109; fThe Character Lab, Philadelphia, PA 19104; gDepartment of Government, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
14853; hDepartment of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104; iGraduate School of Business, Stanford University, Stanford, CA
94305; and jDepartment of Psychology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195

Previous experiments have shown that college students benefit
when they understand that challenges in the transition to college
are common and improvable and, thus, that early struggles need
not portend a permanent lack of belonging or potential. Could
such an approach—called a lay theory intervention—be effective
before college matriculation? Could this strategy reduce a portion
of racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic achievement gaps for entire
institutions? Three double-blind experiments tested this possibility. Ninety percent of first-year college students from three institutions were randomly assigned to complete single-session, online
lay theory or control materials before matriculation (n > 9,500). The
lay theory interventions raised first-year full-time college enrollment
among students from socially and economically disadvantaged backgrounds exiting a high-performing charter high school network or
entering a public flagship university (experiments 1 and 2) and, at a
selective private university, raised disadvantaged students’ cumulative first-year grade point average (experiment 3). These gains correspond to 31–40% reductions of the raw (unadjusted) institutional
achievement gaps between students from disadvantaged and nondisadvantaged backgrounds at those institutions. Further, follow-up
surveys suggest that the interventions improved disadvantaged students’ overall college experiences, promoting use of student support
services and the development of friendship networks and mentor
relationships. This research therefore provides a basis for further tests
of the generalizability of preparatory lay theories interventions and
of their potential to reduce social inequality and improve other major
life transitions.

|

inequality behavioral science
lay theories

students feel comfortable accessing support services and reaching
out to peers and professors.
If preparatory lay theory interventions were effective, it would suggest a route for improving the college transition and, perhaps, other
life transitions. Moreover, because many colleges have structural
opportunities to reach students en masse before matriculation—
such as first-year student registration or orientation—this strategy
might remedy a portion of group disparities at institutional scale.
Not all psychological interventions are effective as preparation.
Writing expressively about emotions elicited by a past trauma helps
people cope and improves health, but expressive writing before a
trauma (e.g., a life-altering surgery) does not (12). Likewise, people
undergoing exposure therapy for anxiety disorders do not seem to
benefit from time anticipating an upcoming aversive stimulus, even
though processing emotions after exposure to the aversive stimulus
does improve outcomes (13). This may be because people have
difficulty forecasting the nature and emotional intensity of future
experiences (14).
However, lay theory interventions do not require people to
preprocess emotions. Instead, they provide a basis for assigning
Significance
In the United States, large, persistent gaps exist in the rates at
which racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic groups complete postsecondary education, even when groups are equated on prior
preparation. We test a method for preventing some of those gaps
by providing individuals with a lay theory about the meaning of
commonplace difficulties before college matriculation. Across
three experiments, lay theory interventions delivered to over
90% of students increased full-time enrollment rates, improved
grade point averages, and reduced the overrepresentation of
socially disadvantaged students among the bottom 20% of class
rank. The interventions helped disadvantaged students become
more socially and academically integrated in college. Broader
tests can now be conducted to understand in which settings lay
theories can help remedy postsecondary inequality at scale.

| field experiment | social psychology |

M

any students face significant challenges during the transition to college, increasing their risk of dropping out (1–4)
and undermining their future financial security, health, and contributions to society (5, 6). Students who contend with social and
economic disadvantages can experience worse outcomes even
when they enter with identical academic qualifications (2, 3, 7,
8). Of course, institutions provide supports and resources to help
students navigate the transition to college, but this often occurs
after they have entered the institution. Is it possible to improve
the transition in advance? Could this mitigate inequality?
Students may not benefit from additional support before a
transition, for instance, more college advising, because they have
not yet faced the challenges associated with a new role or setting.
They might also forget material taught months in advance, such
as step-by-step directions for studying or for choosing classes.
However, taking a psychological approach, it may be helpful to
provide a lay theory (9) of the transition—a starting hypothesis
that many challenges in the transition are common and not cause
to doubt one’s prospects of belonging and success (10, 11). This
kind of lay theory may help people make sense of challenges they
later face and take steps to overcome them, for instance, by helping
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1524360113

Author contributions: D.S.Y., G.M.W., S.T.B., E.N.A., L.K., D.K., R.U., H.R.M., G.L.C., and C.S.D.
designed research; D.S.Y., G.M.W., S.T.B., E.N.A., D.P., L.K., D.K., G.R., A.L.D., R.U., and E.M.G.
performed research; D.S.Y. and D.P. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; E.N.A., L.K., D.K.,
G.R., and R.U. contributed to development of materials; A.L.D. facilitated collection of primary
outcome data; D.S.Y. and S.T.B. analyzed data; and D.S.Y., G.M.W., S.T.B., H.R.M., G.L.C., and
C.S.D. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
1

D.S.Y. and G.M.W. contributed equally to this work.

2

To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: dyeager@utexas.edu or gwalton@
stanford.edu.

This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1524360113/-/DCSupplemental.

PNAS Early Edition | 1 of 8

PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES

Edited by Michael Hout, New York University, New York, NY, and approved April 26, 2016 (received for review December 10, 2015)

meaning to experiences. Just as a scientific theory allows a
researcher to understand the causes and effects they observe in
their data (15), lay theories help people interpret adversities they
encounter—what caused the adversities and what they mean for
their future (9). Even if people cannot remember step-by-step
directions long in advance, it may be memorable and helpful to
learn that struggling in class or having difficulty making friends
does not mean that they, or people like them, are unintelligent or
do not belong.
Lay theory interventions should benefit students most who
have the greatest reason to draw negative inferences from adversities in college and, therefore, may help reduce group-based inequalities (7). In the United States, students from racial/ethnic
minority groups and those who would be the first in their families to
earn a college degree (i.e., first-generation students) can face negative stereotypes about their intellectual ability, numeric underrepresentation, and other group-based threats on campus (2, 3,
7, 16). This circumstance can lead students to worry whether they
and people like them can fully belong (11, 17), will be seen as
lacking intelligence (7, 18, 19), or will be a poor cultural fit in college (20, 21). Although students from majority groups can experience personal worries about belonging and potential, they are less
likely to experience these at the group level. Such concerns seed
harmful inferences for even commonplace challenges in college such
as feelings of loneliness, academic struggles, or critical feedback:
“Maybe this means people like me do not belong or cannot succeed.” These inferences sap motivation and undermine achievement
through a cycle that gains strength through its repetition (22, 23).
This process is depicted in Fig. 1, which highlights how problematic lay theories—arising from group-based experiences that
give rise to persistent worries about belonging, potential, and cultural fit—can impede the social and academic integration critical to
success in college (4, 24), contributing to group-based inequality.
As we have suggested, a corollary of the process in Fig. 1 is that
providing people with an alternative lay theory—one that characterizes adversities as common and improvable—should reduce those
inequalities. In small-scale trials, this strategy has been effective
when carried out as treatment. Specifically, interventions teaching
an alternative lay theory have raised achievement for negatively
stereotyped racial minority and first-generation college students
(11, 18, 20), in one case reducing the racial achievement gap by half
over 3 years. Furthermore, effects appeared to be mediated by the
psychological and behavioral processes depicted in Fig. 1—for instance, asking professors or teaching assistants for help, attending
office hours, or taking chances on making friends (11, 17, 25).
Although promising, the scale and timing of past lay theory
interventions in college have been limited by the constraints of

Membership in a group facing
social disadvantage in higher
education

Experiences of challenge or
setback (e.g. critical feedback,
low score, feelings of loneliness)
With a lay theory of the
transition to college

Psychological
Interpretation

"It's common to go
through challenges like
this and overcome
them."

Withdrawal from the social/
academic environment

Behavioral
Response

Sustained engagement in the
social/academic environment

Worse achievement, lower
persistence, college completion.

Academic
Outcome

Higher achievement, greater
persistence, college completion.

succeed at my
college."

Recursive Process

Recursive Process

"I/people like me don't

Fig. 1. Theoretical model: the process through which lay theories affect
disadvantaged students’ behavior and academic outcomes across the transition to college.
2 of 8 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1524360113

face-to-face delivery. Each past trial was implemented at a selective 4-y university and involved fewer than 50 treated disadvantaged students. The present studies, by contrast, randomized
more than 90% of students at three diverse institutions to online
lay theory or control conditions (n > 9,500).
Thus, in addition to our primary contribution of testing the
potential of preparatory rather than reactive lay theory interventions, these studies provide an unparalleled test of the scalability,
replicability, and generalizability of lay theory interventions to
lessen postsecondary inequality. Further, we administer a much
broader range of measures of social and academic integration than
available in past lay theory research, directly testing the processes
predicted in Fig. 1.
Overview of Present Research
Three double-blind, randomized experiments tested the effects
of prematriculation (i.e., before arriving on campus), Internetadministered lay theory interventions on postsecondary outcomes
for students who face greater social and economic disadvantages
in college. Randomization was at the student level.
The primary objective was to test the general efficacy of preparatory lay theory interventions, so the studies tested several
variants, including (i) two used in past research with college
students (addressing social belonging and growth mindset of
intelligence) (11, 18, 26), (ii) one used previously with younger
students (addressing lay theories about critical feedback) (27),
and (iii) a novel intervention based on prior research and theory
with college students (addressing lay theories about cultural fit)
(21). All interventions had a common structure, format, and
length (Methods and SI Appendix, Appendix 1).
Each experiment had four conditions—one control and three
interventions. The primary analysis involved the contrast of receiving any intervention versus the control. Post hoc comparisons
tested for differences among them. In the one case where a difference was found, interventions were interpreted separately.
Evaluations were conducted in diverse settings—high school
seniors exiting high-performing charter school networks and attending 70+ mostly low-selectivity 2- and 4-y colleges, first-year
students at a public flagship with low 4-y graduation rates, and
first-year students at a highly selective university. Analyses focused on core first-year college outcomes appropriate to these
contexts. In each setting, students were known to be collegeready. This was crucial for testing our theory; lay theories will not
remedy inadequate preparation but may allow prepared students
to achieve in college.
As in past experiments, negatively stereotyped racial/ethnic
minority students and first-generation students were expected to
benefit. Although these groups differ in important respects, they
share a common psychological predicament in college: group-based
fears about belonging, potential, or cultural fit (7, 17, 21). However,
social and economic disadvantages are not inherent to groups but
defined by the social context (28). Therefore, in experiments 2 and
3, the groups expected to benefit were defined using (i) theory and
(ii) institutional data revealing which groups have, in the past,
performed less well at each university (see analyses in SI Appendix,
Appendix 3, pp. 30–31, and Appendix 4, pp. 49–50). In experiment
1, all students were either racial minority or first-generation students and, based on low graduation rates in previous cohorts, were
known to face disadvantages in college.
Throughout the paper, all estimates are raw percentages or
means, unadjusted for covariates. All analyses are intent-to-treat.
Statistical tests for treatment effects are from regression models
with preintervention covariates (SAT score, high-school class rank,
and gender). Significance levels do not differ without covariates.
Results
Experiment 1: Urban Charter Graduates. Participants were two cohorts of outgoing seniors at four high-performing urban charter
Yeager et al.

Fig. 2. A prematriculation social belonging intervention improves full-time
college enrollment among urban charter high school graduates in experiment 1. The growth mindset intervention was not effective in this experiment. Bars represent raw, unadjusted means or percentages.
Yeager et al.

Experiment 2: Public University. Experiment 2 extended experiment
1 by (i) testing lay theory interventions with incoming students at
a high-quality 4-y public university, instead of outgoing students
at a high school network; (ii) having interventions come from the
university instead of the high school, which may increase efficacy
(31); (iii) testing whether students from socially and economically disadvantaged backgrounds benefit disproportionately and,
thus, whether lay theory interventions remedy a portion of inequality; (iv) increasing the sample size by a factor of 12 (n =
7,335); (v) investigating the model in Fig. 1 with a broad measure
of social and academic integration; and (vi) comparing students
in the randomized cohort to students in previous and later cohorts not randomized to condition, to examine reductions in
inequality for the entire institution. For details on intervention
materials and the sample, see SI Appendix, Appendix 3. The focal
lay theory interventions were social belonging and growth
mindset of intelligence interventions. The latter was theoretically
distinct from that tested in experiment 1 in that it represented
growth mindset as the ethos of the university.
Primary outcome: Full-time enrollment. A leading predictor of on-time
graduation is first-year full-time enrollment (i.e., completing
PNAS Early Edition | 3 of 8

PNAS PLUS

active controls (P > 0.50) (see below for possible explanation).
Furthermore, the two social belonging conditions did not differ on
the basis of whether students also received a growth mindset (Z =
1.13, P = 0.26), and both social belonging conditions combined
differed significantly from the active control, logistic regression
(OR = 1.87, Z = 2.70, P = 0.007). Hence, only the social belonging intervention was effective in the present experiment.
Social belonging intervention. Why was the social belonging intervention effective? First, survey questions answered moments
after completing the social belonging materials showed that it
effectively taught the lay theory that many students feel that they
do not belong at first in college but come to do so over time (SI
Appendix, Appendix 2a, Table S5; for analogous self-reports in
experiments 2 and 3, see SI Appendix, Appendix 3, Table S9, and
Appendix 4, Table S17).
Next, an exploratory analysis of survey data at 6-mo follow-up
suggests that the social belonging intervention increased students’ social and academic integration on campus, supporting
the model in Fig. 1. Students who received a social belonging
intervention were more likely than students who did not to report that they had used academic support services, had joined an
extracurricular group, and had chosen to live on campus [composite index of social and academic integration, t(50) = 2.76, P =
0.008, d = 0.78] (Fig. 3). This index statistically mediated effects
of the social belonging intervention on year-end full-time continuous enrollment [indirect effect b = 0.15 (95% confidence
interval (CI) = 0.03, 0.29), P < 0.01] (28). There was no effect of
the mindset intervention on this metric (P > 0.50). This mediation analysis is limited by sample size, effects in only two of three
intervention conditions, and narrow scope of measures. These
are improved upon in experiment 2.
Growth mindset intervention. The growth mindset of intelligence
intervention has previously been effective when delivered via the
Internet (26, 29) but, as noted, was not here. This was not expected.
Two possibilities are germane, but we cannot definitively confirm
one or the other. One is that the intervention was redundant with
growth mindset messages already taught by the high-performing
charter network: the school already administered similar materials
and messages, and students in this population already endorsed a
growth mindset (SI Appendix, Appendix 2b, p. 28). A second is that
the growth mindset message was represented as a private belief,
not a reflection of their college’s values. Even apart from private
beliefs, the perception that an organization endorses a fixed
mindset can lead people who face negative stereotypes to worry
that their intelligence will be questioned (30).

PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES

schools (n = 584). They were admitted to more than seventy
4- and 2-y public and private colleges. This study involved initial
correlational analysis of the effects of the social belonging lay
theory, followed by an experiment testing the effects of a social
belonging lay theory intervention, customized for urban charter
students (SI Appendix, Appendix 2a). Fully crossed with this was
a growth mindset of intelligence intervention, a week later.
Correlational analysis. First, correlational data among untreated
students from the first cohort of data collection (n = 185) showed
that those who had a lay theory that they might not belong in
college (i.e., belonging uncertainty, e.g., “Sometimes I worry that
I will not belong in college”) (17) were less likely to persist
through the first year of college [logistic regression odds ratio
(OR) = 0.66, Z = −2.60, P = 0.009]. This was true controlling for
a number of covariates (SI Appendix, Appendix 2b, Table S7).
No other personality trait or lay theory, including growth mindset
(see below), predicted college persistence in this sample, nor did
intelligence quotient, net of SAT, and grade point average
(GPA). Beyond prior preparation, it was not students’ traits or
attitudes that predicted success in the transition to college. It was
the presence of an initial doubt about whether they would fit in
(for related analyses, see ref. 3).
Primary intervention outcome: Full-time enrollment. Among students
from both cohorts, only 32% of students in the randomly assigned
active control condition were enrolled full-time continuously for the
first year of college, even though 100% were admitted to college.
For students who received any preparatory lay theory intervention,
that number was 41%, a significant increase (logistic regression
OR = 1.59, Z = 2.17, P = 0.030).
Post hoc tests revealed that this treatment contrast masked
significant heterogeneity (growth mindset only = 36%; social
belonging only = 45%; social belonging plus growth mindset =
41%) (Fig. 2). The growth mindset-only condition showed significantly poorer outcomes compared with the two social belonging conditions (Z = 2.00, P = 0.046) and did not differ from

A

B

C

Fig. 3. Prematriculation lay theory interventions improve disadvantaged students’ social and academic integration in college in the first year. (A) Experiment
1: social belonging, participants from two conditions that received a social belonging intervention; control, participants from two conditions that did not
receive a social belonging condition (because the growth mindset intervention did not affect full-time enrollment or survey responses, as noted in the text).
(B and C) Experiments 2 and 3: any intervention, participants receiving any of the three interventions; control, participants receiving no intervention. Bars
represent raw means or percentages, unadjusted for covariates. The y axes for unstandardized scores represent full scale ranges.

12+ credits both semesters of the first year) (32). Therefore, as in
experiment 1, this was the primary outcome.
First, inequality at this institution in the randomized control
group was large. Disadvantaged students in the control condition
were 10 percentage points less likely to complete the first year
full-time enrolled in both terms compared with advantaged students (69% versus 79%; raw values; χ2(1) = 27.32, P < 0.001)
(Table 1).

Next, the one-time prematriculation lay theory interventions cut this inequality by 40%, increasing the percentage
of full-time enrolled disadvantaged students over the first year
to 73%, a significant increase compared with the randomized
control group (OR = 1.23, Z = 2.26, P = 0.024). Unlike experiment 1, there was no heterogeneity across intervention
conditions, meaning that they appeared to be equally effective
(mindset only = 74%; belonging only = 72%; social belonging

Table 1. Percent completing fall semester full-time enrolled in experiment 2, by year or condition
Study year or condition
2011:
2012:
2012:
2013:
2014:

no intervention (n = 6,896)
randomized control (n = 2,062)
randomized intervention (n = 5,356)
no intervention (n = 6,719)
nonrandomized intervention (n = 6,244)

Advantaged students
90%
90%
90%
88%
90%

Disadvantaged students
81%
82%
86%***
81%
84%***

***P < 0.001, significantly different from disadvantaged students who did not receive the intervention.
4 of 8 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1524360113

Yeager et al.

100%
95%

Experiment 2: Large Public University
First-Year Continuous, Full-Time Enrollment,
Fall and Spring

Experiment 3: Selective University. Experiment 3 extended these
results by (i) testing preparatory lay theory interventions at a
selective private university (n = 1,592); (ii) examining an outcome appropriate for selective colleges (cumulative first-year
GPA instead of full-time enrollment because fewer than 1% of
participating students at this institution fail to persist through
their first year); (iii) testing social belonging and two other lay
theory interventions, focused on cultural fit and the experience
of receiving critical feedback, but not growth mindset; and (iv)
providing a more detailed assessment of social and academic
integration than available in experiment 2 and assessing this at
the end of the academic year instead of during the fall term. This
precludes mediational analyses but assesses the durability of
benefits.
Primary outcome: First-year GPA. In the randomized control condition, disadvantaged students earned lower GPAs than advantaged

4.00

Experiment 3: Selective Private University
First Year Cumulative GPA, Fall through Spring

3.90
3.80

90%

3.70
85%
3.60
80%

3.50
3.40

75%

3.30

70%

3.20
65%
79%

80%

69%

73%

Control

Intervention

Control

Intervention

(N = 1,310)

(N = 3,372)

(N = 752)

(N = 1984)

60%

Advantaged students
Disadvantaged students
Experimental Condition, by Demographic Group

3.10
3.00

3.62

3.61

3.33

3.42

Control

Intervention

Control

Intervention

(N = 303)

(N = 881)

(N = 103)

(N = 309)

Advantaged students
Disadvantaged students
Experimental Condition, by Demographic Group

Fig. 4. Prematriculation lay theory interventions narrow first-year achievement gaps when delivered to entire incoming classes (>90%). Each experiment
involved three intervention conditions that are presented in composite form because they did not differ significantly. Experiment 2 intervention condition
separate effects: mindset only, 74%; belonging only, 72%; social belonging plus growth mindset, 73%. Experiment 3 intervention condition separate effects:
social belonging, 3.39; cultural fit, 3.47; critical feedback, 3.39. Bars represent raw, unadjusted means or percentages.
Yeager et al.

PNAS Early Edition | 5 of 8

PNAS PLUS

who received the randomized treatment (86%) and who received
the nonrandomized treatment (84%) both differed from all untreated disadvantaged students (Ps < 0.001), and this produced
significant disadvantaged group × condition interactions (Ps <
0.001) because there was no corresponding increase for advantaged students (intervention year, 90%; nonintervention years,
88–90%). Hence, the lay theory interventions appear to have led
to full-scale reduction in institutional inequality.
Social and academic integration. Among the quarter of students
randomized to the control group, disadvantaged students were
more likely to be identified as at risk for dropping out due to
their reports of social and academic integration (disadvantaged
students: 13% at risk of dropping out; advantaged students: 8%),
a marginally significant inequality (Z = 1.92, P = 0.055). However, among the three-quarters of students randomized to a lay
theory intervention, only 7% of disadvantaged students were
designated at risk, a significant decrease (Z = 2.46, P = 0.014),
eliminating the group difference (Fig. 3). This improvement in
social and academic integration mediated the intervention effect
on continuous full-time full-year enrollment among disadvantaged students [indirect b = 0.01 (95% CI = 0.001, 0.03), P =
0.040] (28).

PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES

plus growth mindset = 73%; all pairwise contrasts among intervention conditions Ps > 0.50).
There was no effect of the lay theory interventions among
advantaged students (OR = 1.03, Z = 0.22, P = 0.79), nor was
there expected to be, replicating past research (11). However,
because the trend for advantaged students was positive, the
group × condition interaction did not reach significance (Z =
1.59, P = 0.11), as in some past research (18) (Fig. 4).
Why was the growth mindset lay theory intervention beneficial
here (SI Appendix, Appendix 3, Table S10) but not in experiment
1? One possibility is that this sample had not been systematically
exposed to prior growth mindset messaging (although we do not
have a direct test of this). A second and related possibility is that
a growth mindset was more consequential for this sample: here,
unlike experiment 1, growth mindset predicted full-time enrollment in the control group (SI Appendix, Appendix 3, p. 36) (belonging uncertainty was also a significant predictor, P < 0.01,
replicating experiment 1). Third, here the growth mindset message
signaled the beliefs of key people in the institution (e.g., professors), as shown by analyses of the manipulation check items (30).
Furthermore, students’ beliefs about the university’s growth
mindset ethos predicted outcomes in the control group net of SAT
scores (SI Appendix, Appendix 3, p. 36).
The condition that combined growth mindset and belonging
treatments was no more (or less) effective than either intervention on its own, replicating findings from analogous research
(26). One explanation for this comes from manipulation check
analyses, which suggest that by teaching two messages in a single
session, neither came through as clearly as when they were
taught alone (SI Appendix, Appendix 3, p. 40).
Full-scale institutional change. Year-over-year comparisons (n =
14,216 advantaged and disadvantaged students) examined
whether the lay theory interventions could contribute to reductions in institutional-level inequality when delivered to the entire
incoming student body without randomization (analyses focused
on full-time fall term enrollment because spring term data were
unavailable for the nonexperimental years; Table 1). There were
no over-time changes among disadvantaged students who did not
receive an intervention (81–82%), but disadvantaged students

students (disadvantaged students: M = 3.33 on a 4.0 scale; advantaged students: M = 3.62; raw means), planned contrast t(1,591) =
6.99, P < 0.001, d = 0.80—a significant achievement gap.
However, receiving a lay theory intervention raised disadvantaged students’ first-year GPAs by 0.09 grade points to 3.42, a
significant improvement [t(1,591) = 2.16, P = 0.031, d = 0.25].
Like experiment 2, post hoc tests found no heterogeneity across
treatment conditions (all contrast ps > 0.30; social- belonging =
3.39; cultural fit = 3.47; critical feedback = 3.39). The improvement from the combined preparatory lay theory interventions corresponds to a 31% reduction in the raw achievement
gap (47%, covariate-adjusted; SI Appendix, Appendix 4, Table
S17). There was no intervention effect for advantaged students,
t < 1, and the subgroup × condition interaction was significant
[F(1,1588) = 4.04, P = 0.045] (Fig. 4).
Previous national surveys found that disadvantaged students at
elite colleges disproportionally end up in the lowest quintile of
class rank (the bottom 20%) (2). Replicating this, in the control
condition, 46% of disadvantaged students fell in the bottom
quintile for first-year GPA. This percentage was reduced to 29%
by the lay theory interventions [χ2(1) = 8.76, P = 0.003] (for
results for all class rank increments, see SI Appendix, Appendix 4,
Figs. S4 and S5). There was no harm or benefit on class rank for
advantaged students (χ2 < 1).
Comparison with preintervention years. Historical data were obtained
for two preintervention years (n = 3,029). The cumulative firstyear GPAs of disadvantaged students randomized to the control
condition in the study year did not differ from those in the prior
years (3.33 vs. 3.32, respectively; P > 0.80). However, disadvantaged students who received a lay theory intervention earned
significantly higher GPAs relative to peers from nonintervention
years [planned contrast t(4517) = 4.02, P < 0.001, d = 0.26].
Social and academic integration. Analyses of a spring survey, completed roughly 11 mo postintervention, showed that treated
disadvantaged students reported greater social and academic
integration on campus at the end of the first year—having made
more close friends, being more likely to have developed a close
mentor relationship, being more involved in extracurricular groups,
and making greater use of academic support services—compared
with randomized controls [composite index planned contrast
t(473) = 3.20, P = 0.001, d = 0.72] (SI Appendix, Appendix 4,
Table 21) (Fig. 3).
Although consistent with our process model (Fig. 1), these
responses were collected after most grades had been recorded
and so cannot be used in mediation analysis of first-year GPA.
However, friends, mentors, and extracurricular involvement are
important outcomes in their own right and facilitate later college
achievement, as well as postcollege opportunities above and beyond classroom performance (4, 24).
Discussion
The present research has two major contributions. First, it shows
that preparatory lay theory interventions can be effective in the
college transition. Second, it directly informs theory about societal inequality (6).
Preparatory Intervention. Three institutional-scale, double-blind,

randomized, active-controlled experiments showed improvement
in disadvantaged students’ achievement in the first year of
college. In experiments 2 and 3, the treatments reduced raw
achievement gaps by 31–40%. These effects were obtained with
samples of 90%+ of incoming students and reproduced when the
intervention was administered to all students on a nonrandomized
basis (experiment 2). Extending past research, they represent the
most rigorous replication of lay theory interventions to date. These
characteristics make the quality of these data unusually high and
highly relevant for policy as well as for cumulative science.
6 of 8 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1524360113

On a practical level, these effect sizes are important. When a
single college student does not graduate, he or she can forfeit
between $500,000 to $1 million dollars in lifetime wages (33).
Likewise, colleges and universities invest significant resources to
recruit and retain students from underrepresented groups, and
society bears financial responsibility for adults who cannot find
work due to a lack of training. The present effects thus signify the
recovery of meaningful financial losses for individuals, colleges,
and the public. Moreover, once evaluated in a given context,
the present interventions can be administered at low marginal
cost on an ongoing basis. Indeed, this has occurred in the postintervention years with the schools that participated in these
experiments. This said, the present results derive from a specific
set of postsecondary settings. A critical next step, for both theory
and application, is to systematically interrogate settings to determine where effects are greater or weaker.
Can preparatory lay theory interventions improve other major
life transitions? This is an exciting possibility. If a new mother
struggles to cope with a difficult baby, will she benefit from
knowing in advance that this does not make her a bad mother but
is common and can improve with time? If a veteran struggles to
find work, will he or she benefit from hearing in advance stories
about struggles other veterans faced returning to civilian society
and how they overcame these? What kinds of people are most at
risk for drawing harmful inferences in these and other major life
transitions (e.g., to retirement and in divorce), who may benefit
most from lay theory interventions? Is it possible to deliver such
interventions at a socially meaningful scale? Research to answer
these questions could uncover new ways to reduce long-standing
social problems.
Societal Inequality. Educational attainment is the best predictor of

upward mobility in the developed world (6); thus, inequality in
the rates at which qualified students from different racial, ethnic,
and social class backgrounds complete college threatens the ideal
of meritocracy and undermines both individuals’ life prospects
and national economic growth (2, 3, 8). Our findings directly
speak to ongoing debates about the bases of inequality in sociology, economics, and law.
For instance, sociologists have found that prior social and
economic disadvantages faced by African-American, Latino, and
lower-social class college students predict their belief that people
in college will view them as not having the intellectual potential
to succeed. These beliefs, in turn, predict poor college achievement and persistence (2, 3). Relatedly, using correlational data,
economists have estimated that nearly half of dropouts after the
first year of college among socioeconomically disadvantaged
students can be attributed to a loss of confidence in the first term
(1). However, the lack of causal evidence for these relationships
led one leading scholar to lament, “How strong is the evidence
that beliefs matter? Unfortunately, not very strong” (ref. 8,
p. 69). Using random assignment experiments, the present research directly confirms the role of student beliefs (aka lay theories) arising from social disadvantage in causing postsecondary
inequality, at least within the settings studied here.
Next, one influential economic model suggests that struggling
first-year students learn that they truly lack intellectual ability,
which allows them to make the informed choice to withdraw (1).
Our experiments show that this choice need not reflect a lack of
ability. When students learned that early difficulties are common
and not necessarily diagnostic of a lack of ability or belonging,
they showed they could succeed.
Our research also complements so-called behavioral economic
approaches, which show that remedying procedural barriers (like
simplifying the completion of financial aid forms and text messages
to remind students to pay registration fees or select courses) can
increase college persistence (34, 35). These are not thought to
operate through the mechanisms depicted in Fig. 1 and therefore
Yeager et al.

Implications, Limitations, and Future Directions. A critical misinterpretation of our research would be to conclude that psychological disadvantage is simply in the head. To the contrary,
worries about belonging and potential are pernicious precisely
because they arise from awareness of real social disadvantage
before and during college, including biased treatment, university
policies and practices that inadvertently advantage some groups
of students over others, and awareness of negative stereotypes
and numeric underrepresentation (2–4, 7). Some lay theory
interventions highlight how students’ experiences can differ
along group identity lines and how students can overcome groupspecific challenges to belong and succeed (20, 25). Further, in
implementing lay theory interventions, institutions recognize
how awareness of social disadvantage can facilitate threatening
interpretations of adversities disproportionately for students
from disadvantaged backgrounds. These interventions represent
institutional efforts to help all students navigate challenges in
college effectively.
Another misinterpretation would be to think of lay theories
interventions as “magic bullets” that will work universally for all
racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic minority students in all settings
without adaptation or that they work alone, absent other student
supports (23). Lay theory interventions should be effective only
when (i) materials successfully redirect problematic lay theories
in a given context (hence the customization carried out in each
study) (29); (ii) student motivation is hindered by the targeted
lay theory in a given context; and (iii) colleges afford instructional opportunities, relationship opportunities, and financial
supports necessary for better outcomes (23).
A critical question then is, in what types of institutions will
different groups of students benefit most and least from which lay
theory interventions? The present research did not fully answer this,
but it did find variability that may be informative for future theory
development and replication attempts. A growth mindset intervention was ineffective in experiment 1, where students had already
been taught a growth mindset and where the mindset intervention
was not represented as reflective of their colleges’ values. However,
it was effective in experiment 2, where students had not been systematically exposed to growth mindset ideas and where a growth
mindset was represented as the ethos of the university. Firstgeneration Asian-American students benefitted in experiment 2
but performed well and were not classified as disadvantaged in
experiment 3.
We did not test whether students who were unprepared for
college or who did not desire a college credential would benefit
from the intervention because they were not expected to. It will
be exciting in future research to expand to more heterogeneous
samples of students and institutions, and, ideally probabilitybased samples, to allow for generalizable inferences.
Finally, it is essential to recognize that there are many psychologically meaningful events in the transition to college, which
can either support or thwart students’ growth and belonging.
Preparatory interventions have a special importance because
they provide students a first lens for making sense of events they
later experience. However, how a professor introduces difficult
course material, provides critical feedback, or responds to a
Yeager et al.

PNAS PLUS

struggling student; how a dean welcomes the entering class; and
how a university frames an academic probation letter, among
many other events, can have independent effects (27, 28). These
all represent opportunities to improve the psychological environment of college and thus student success.
Methods
General Intervention Procedures for All Experiments. Each intervention used
the same basic grammar to teach a lay theory (SI Appendix, Appendix 1). Each
(i) clearly described specific difficulties in college and persuasively represented these as common and as changeable; (ii) provided vivid stories from
upper-year students who experienced and overcame common struggles;
(iii) conveyed data—either results of surveys or summaries of the neuroscience of
learning—in support of these messages; and (iv) allowed participating students
to take ownership of the lay theory after having reflected on the stories and
data by writing about challenges they anticipated and how these challenges are
common and likely to change over time. These essays, students were told, might
be shared with future students to improve their transition (exemplary ones
were). This final element, called the “saying-is-believing” technique, allows
students to personalize generic materials, promoting internalization (10, 17,
18). The institutional review boards at the University of Texas at Austin and
at Stanford University approved all procedures. Students provided active
consent on the first page of the surveys. The data reported in this paper are
tabulated in the SI Appendix and are available upon request from the
authors to investigators, provided that requestors secure the necessary
institutional review board approvals.
Experiment 1.
Participants and procedure. Experiment 1 included two consecutive cohorts of
seniors (n = 584, or 97% of students) graduating from high-performing “noexcuses” public urban charter high schools. This charter network has consistently produced large gains in state test scores compared with local district
schools, it graduates almost all of its students, and college admission is a
requirement for graduation. Hence, students were, by some standards,
college-ready. However, only approximately one-fourth earn any postsecondary credential within 6 y.
Participants were predominately African-American (88%) and first-generation college students (67%) (all but one student were one, the other, or
both). Continuous (fall and spring) full-time enrollment was tracked through
an objective, third-party database: the National Student Clearinghouse (NSC).
The NSC does not report GPA (39).
Intervention. From students’ perspectives, the intervention was a survey about
the transition to college in which they would hear from upper-year students.
To control for placebo effects, all students were told the survey might be
interesting and might help them succeed in college. Students completed it in
their classrooms in May of their senior year of high school. After this session,
students were not contacted again by researchers. Students in cohort 1 were
later recruited by school staff (blind to condition) for the fall survey.
One-half of students were randomized to a social belonging lay theory
intervention within gender × high school GPA (high vs. low) strata. The exact
stories were based on prior research but revised extensively through a design thinking process (29) described in SI Appendix, Appendix 2a. The other
half of participants were randomized to a control condition, which included
similar tasks but focused on adjusting to the physical rather than social environment of college (e.g., weather and campus buildings). It also involved
reading stories from upper-year students and writing an essay to future students transitioning to college. As noted, fully crossed with the social belonging
intervention was a growth mindset of intelligence intervention. This was
delivered 1 wk later (SI Appendix, Appendix 2a).
Fall survey. For the first cohort of students (n = 172), staff at the partner
charter network contacted students in late fall of their first year of college to
invite them to complete a survey assessing social and academic integration
on campus. The survey link was sent to students via email, text message, and
social media. Thirty percent of students in this cohort completed the survey
(n = 52 students). See SI Appendix, Appendix 2a, for questions.
Experiment 2.
Participants and procedure. Participants were 7,335 (91%) of the first-year
students entering a high-quality public university. Over 85% were in the top
10% of their high school class, but only 50% typically graduated in 4 ys (32).
Students completed online orientation materials in private between May and
August in the summer before entering college. The materials were embedded
among other preorientation tasks, including reporting immunization records,
PNAS Early Edition | 7 of 8

PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES

represent a complementary (not competing) cause of and remedy
for postsecondary inequality.
Finally, in law, some scholars and Supreme Court justices have
argued that it does racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic minority
students a disservice to admit them to elite institutions where
they will subsequently earn low class rank or drop out (36, 37).
However, experiment 3 showed that low class rank is not automatic for students from disadvantaged backgrounds. When selective colleges create environments in which students’ belonging
and potential are not constantly in question, they can admit a
diverse class, and members of this class can succeed (38).

signing the honor code, registering for classes, etc. The presentation of the intervention mirrored experiment 1.
Interventions. Randomization to one of four conditions occurred with equal
probability within gender × SAT (high vs. low) × college major × race/ethnicity
strata. The social-belonging intervention (11) was based on prior research and
adapted to fit the prematriculation context. The growth-mindset intervention
(18, 26) used neuroscientific information to convey that intelligence is not a fixed
quantity but can be developed with effort on challenging tasks. In the combined
condition, participants read growth mindset intervention content and upperyear student stories drawn from the belonging condition. The control condition
mirrored experiment 1 and past research (11).
Survey. Independent of the research team, the university hired a private firm
to administer a web-based survey to all first-year students 2 mo into the fall
semester. The survey was never associated with the present intervention and
differed significantly in format and presentation. All first-year students were
told in an email that they were required to complete it; 1,722 students (23%)
did so. Student-level data on an aggregated “at-riskness” index were
obtained by the research team (SI Appendix, Appendix 3).
Experiment 3.
Participants and procedure. Participants were 1,592 matriculating students
(90% of the incoming class) at a highly selective private university. Analogous
to experiment 2, the intervention materials were embedded as a link on the
matriculation website hosted by the university’s undergraduate advising office.
Between mid-May and early June, students were required to complete a number
of forms on this website. Randomization to one of four conditions occurred with
equal probability within gender × race/ethnicity strata.
Interventions. Students were randomized to a control condition, to a socialbelonging intervention nearly identical to that tested in experiment 2, or to
one of two other lay theory interventions, which addressed contextually
specific beliefs relevant to social and academic belonging. One was a cultural
1. Stinebrickner R, Stinebrickner T (2014) Academic performance and college dropout:
Using longitudinal expectations data to estimate a learning model. J Labor Econ
32(3):601–644.
2. Espenshade TJ, Radford AW (2009) No Longer Separate, Not Yet Equal: Race and Class
in Elite College Admission and Campus Life (Princeton Univ Press, Princeton).
3. Massey DS, Charles CZ, Lundy G, Fischer MJ (2011) The Source of the River: The Social
Origins of Freshmen at America’s Selective Colleges and Universities (Princeton Univ
Press, Princeton).
4. Tinto V (1994) Leaving College: Rethinking the Causes and Cures of Student Attrition
(Univ of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL).
5. Hayward MD, Miles TP, Crimmins EM, Yang Y (2000) The significance of socioeconomic status in explaining the racial gap in chronic health conditions. Am Sociol Rev
65(6):910–930.
6. D’Addio AC (2007) Intergenerational Transmission of Disadvantage: Mobility or
Immobility Across Generations? A Review of the Evidence for OECD Countries
(Organ for Econ Co-op and Dev, Paris).
7. Steele CM (1997) A threat in the air. How stereotypes shape intellectual identity and
performance. Am Psychol 52(6):613–629.
8. Morgan SL (2005) On the Edge of Commitment: Educational Attainment and Race in
the United States (Stanford Univ Press, Stanford, CA).
9. Ross L, Nisbett RE (1991) The Person and the Situation: Perspectives of Social
Psychology (Pinter & Martin Ltd, London), 2nd Ed.
10. Wilson TD, Linville PW (1985) Improving the performance of college freshmen with
attributional techniques. J Pers Soc Psychol 49(1):287–293.
11. Walton GM, Cohen GL (2011) A brief social-belonging intervention improves academic and health outcomes of minority students. Science 331(6023):1447–1451.
12. Pennebaker JW, Chung CK (2011) Expressive writing and its links to mental and
physical health. The Oxford Handbook of Health Psychology, ed Friedman HS (Oxford
Univ Press, London), pp 417–437.
13. Tiwari S, Kendall PC, Hoff AL, Harrison JP, Fizur P (2013) Characteristics of exposure
sessions as predictors of treatment response in anxious youth. J Clin Child Adolesc
Psychol 42(1):34–43.
14. Wilson TD, Gilbert DT (2005) Affective forecasting: Knowing what to want. Curr Dir
Psychol Sci 14(3):131–134.
15. Kuhn TS (1970) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (Univ of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL).
16. Murphy MC, Steele CM, Gross JJ (2007) Signaling threat: How situational cues affect
women in math, science, and engineering settings. Psychol Sci 18(10):879–885.
17. Walton GM, Cohen GL (2007) A question of belonging: Race, social fit, and achievement. J Pers Soc Psychol 92(1):82–96.
18. Aronson JM, Fried CB, Good C (2002) Reducing the effects of stereotype threat on
African American college students by shaping theories of intelligence. J Exp Soc
Psychol 38(2):113–125.
19. Dweck CS, Leggett EL (1988) A social-cognitive approach to motivation and personality. Psychol Rev 95(2):256–273.
20. Stephens NM, Hamedani MG, Destin M (2014) Closing the social-class achievement
gap: A difference-education intervention improves first-generation students’ academic performance and all students’ college transition. Psychol Sci 25(4):943–953.

8 of 8 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1524360113

View publication stats

fit intervention. This emphasized that although college has an independent cultural focus (e.g., “choose your path”), students can maintain interdependent social relationships with home communities and join interdependent
communities in college. This message was designed to forestall the inference
for students coming from interdependent cultural communities (many ethnic minority and first-generation college students) that early social difficulties mean that they have a fundamental cultural mismatch with college (21).
The second was a critical feedback intervention. This emphasized that critical
academic feedback from professors and other instructors reflects instructors’
high standards and confidence students can meet those standards, not a
negative judgment of the student or his or her potential (27).
Survey. In the spring of students’ first year, a follow-up survey was conducted
with participating students. Students were invited to participate in exchange
for a small token (a class sticker). A total of 31% of the sample (n = 491 out
of 1,592) elected to do so. The survey also included additional items assessing
attitudinal/affective measures such as feelings of belonging and perceived
stress; for consistency with experiments 1 and 2, and to understand behavioral
outcomes, analyses reported here focus on behavioral measures of social and
academic integration.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Aspire, KIPP, Mastery, and Yes Prep charter
schools and the Stanford University d.school for assistance piloting and prototyping interventions. We thank PERTS for logistical and IT support. We also
thank students and colleagues who contributed to design processes, including
K. Belden, R. Crandall, C. Gabrieli, J. Gabrieli, A. Ericcsson, A. House, J. Powers,
A. Royalty, C. Steele, and U. Treisman, and those who assisted with data
collection and analysis, including J. Beaubien, K. Breiterman-Loader, C. Macrander,
S. Keller, M. Niemasz-Cavanagh, P. McGowan, and O. Zahrt-Omar. Critical
feedback was provided by B. Bigler, R. Crosnoe, C. Muller, J. Pennebaker, and
the social and personality area at the University of Texas at Austin. This
research received support from the William and Melinda Gates Foundation,
Stanford University, and the University of Texas at Austin.
21. Stephens NM, Fryberg SA, Markus HR, Johnson CS, Covarrubias R (2012) Unseen disadvantage: How American universities’ focus on independence undermines the academic
performance of first-generation college students. J Pers Soc Psychol 102(6):1178–1197.
22. Cohen GL, Garcia J, Purdie-Vaughns V, Apfel N, Brzustoski P (2009) Recursive processes in self-affirmation: Intervening to close the minority achievement gap. Science
324(5925):400–403.
23. Yeager DS, Walton GM (2011) Social-psychological interventions in education: They’re
not magic. Rev Educ Res 81(2):267–301.
24. Coleman JS (1988) Social capital in the creation of human capital. Am J Sociol 94:95–120.
25. Walton GM, Logel C, Peach JM, Spencer SJ, Zanna MP (2015) Two brief interventions
to mitigate a “chilly climate” transform women’s experience, relationships, and
achievement in engineering. J Educ Psychol 107(2):468–485.
26. Paunesku D, et al. (2015) Mind-set interventions are a scalable treatment for academic underachievement. Psychol Sci 26(6):784–793.
27. Yeager DS, et al. (2014) Breaking the cycle of mistrust: Wise interventions to provide
critical feedback across the racial divide. J Exp Psychol Gen 143(2):804–824.
28. Murphy MC, Walton GM, From prejudiced people to prejudiced places: A socialcontextual approach to prejudice. Frontiers in Social Psychology Series: Stereotyping
and Prejudice, eds Stangor C, Crandall C (Psychology Press, New York).
29. Yeager DS, et al. (2016) Using design thinking to improve psychological interventions:
The case of the growth mindset during the transition to high school. J Educ Psychol
108(3):374–391.
30. Murphy MC, Dweck CS (2010) A culture of genius: How an organization’s lay theory
shapes people’s cognition, affect, and behavior. Pers Soc Psychol Bull 36(3):283–296.
31. Castleman BL, Owen L, Page LC (2015) Stay late or start early? Experimental evidence
on the benefits of college matriculation support from high schools versus colleges.
Econ Educ Rev 47:168–179.
32. Diehl R (2012) Final Report of the Task Force on Undergraduate Graduation Rates
(Univ of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX).
33. Julian TA (2012) Work-Life Earnings by Field of Degree and Occupation for People
with a Bachelor’s Degree: 2011 (US Census Bureau, Washington, DC).
34. Castleman BL, Page LC (2015) Summer nudging: Can personalized text messages and
peer mentor outreach increase college going among low-income high school graduates? J Econ Behav Organ 115:144–160.
35. Bettinger EP, Long BT, Oreopoulos P, Sanbonmatsu L (2012) The role of application
assistance and information in college decisions: Results from the H&R Block FAFSA
experiment. Q J Econ 127(3):1205–1242.
36. Sander R, Jr, ST (2012) Mismatch: How Affirmative Action Hurts Students It’s Intended
to Help, and Why Universities Won’t Admit It (Basic Books, New York).
37. Liptak A (2015) Supreme court justices’ comments don’t bode well for affirmative action.
NY Times. Available at www.nytimes.com/2015/12/10/us/politics/supreme-court-torevisit-case-that-may-alter-affirmative-action.html. Accessed December 10, 2015.
38. Walton GM, Spencer SJ, Erman S (2013) Affirmative meritocracy. Soc Issues Policy Rev
7(1):1–35.
39. Dynarski SM, Hemelt SW, Hyman JM (2013) The Missing Manual: Using National
Student Clearinghouse Data to Track Postsecondary Outcomes (Natl Bur of Econ Res,
Cambridge, MA), NBER Work Pap 19552.

Yeager et al.

581709

research-article2015

EPAXXX10.3102/0162373715581709Borman et al.Self-Affirmation at Scale

Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis
March 2016, Vol. 38, No. 1, pp. 21­–42
DOI: 10.3102/0162373715581709
© 2015 AERA. http://eepa.aera.net

An Effort to Close Achievement Gaps at Scale Through
Self-Affirmation
Geoffrey D. Borman
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Jeffrey Grigg
Johns Hopkins University
Paul Hanselman
University of California, Irvine
In this districtwide scale-up, we randomly assigned seventh-grade students within 11 schools to
receive a series of writing exercises designed to promote values affirmation. Impacts on cumulative
seventh-grade grade point average (GPA) for the district’s racial/ethnic minority students who may
be subject to stereotype threat are consistent with but smaller than those from prior smaller scale
studies. Also, we find some evidence of impact on minority students’ standardized mathematics test
scores. These effects address a substantial portion of the achievement gap unexplained by demographics and prior achievement—the portion of the gap potentially attributable to stereotype threat.
Our results suggest that persistent achievement gaps, which may be explained by subtle social and
psychological phenomena, can be mitigated by brief, yet theoretically precise, social-psychological
interventions.
Keywords:	 stereotype threat, self-affirmation, scale-up, randomized trial, achievement gap

Several recent high-profile but small-scale
experimental studies have shown that relatively
simple, brief, but well-conceptualized socialpsychological interventions, which focus on
individual and socially constructed beliefs that
affect school outcomes, can have important
impacts on secondary and postsecondary students’ short- and longer term educational outcomes (Cohen, Garcia, Apfel, & Master, 2006;
Cohen, Purdie-Vaughns, Apfel, & Brzustoski,
2009; Sherman et al., 2013; Yeager & Walton,
2011). Typically, the interventions target student
beliefs that may depress academic performance,
such as stereotype threat, which overwhelmingly
affect minority students. Although these efforts
are rooted in decades of social-psychological
research and theory, to many researchers and
policymakers in the educational enterprise, the

power of such brief mind-set interventions is difficult to understand and, to some extent, lacking
in face validity, as most educational treatments
involve far more costly and comprehensive
reforms of curriculum, instruction, or school and
classroom organization. The puzzle is complicated because the prior small-scale experiments
were not specifically designed to assess whether
the interventions are capable of making a difference at scale and how varying school settings
may moderate the effects of any treatmentinduced psychological changes.
Indeed, of the numerous theories that have
been advanced in the literature to explain the persistent inequalities in academic achievement
between African American and Hispanic students
and their White peers, stereotype threat (C. M.
Steele & Aronson, 1995) simultaneously offers a

Borman et al.

compelling explanation for these achievement
gaps and an avenue to intervene and narrow them.
Stereotype threat systematically undermines the
performance of negatively stereotyped individuals, such as African Americans and Hispanics in
academic subjects or women in mathematics. In
this way, individual psychological processes in
response to socially constructed stereotypes may
contribute to persistent social inequalities (C. M.
Steele & Aronson, 2004). A number of interventions have been developed to mitigate the harm
produced by stereotype threat in real-world settings, including schools (Cohen et al., 2006; Good,
Aronson, & Inzlicht, 2003; Walton & Cohen,
2007; Yeager & Walton, 2011). One of the most
promising of these interventions focuses on student self-affirmation (Liu & Steele, 1986; C. M.
Steele, 1988; C. M. Steele & Liu, 1983) through
expressive writing. Prior research conducted in
three classrooms in a single school found that values affirmation reduced the gap in grade point
average (GPA) between Black and White students
by 40% (Cohen et al., 2006), an effect that persisted over 2 years (Cohen et al., 2009).
In this article, we report on the initial findings
from the first districtwide evaluation of a valuesaffirmation writing intervention developed by
Cohen and his colleagues. This study offers two
major advances to literature on the social-psychological dimensions of racial/ethnic achievement gaps. First, the intervention was conducted
in all of the middle schools in a single school
district, making it the most expansive single test
of such interventions among secondary students
to date. The scale of this initiative offers a realistic field-based appraisal of the potential impacts
of self-affirmation on racial/ethnic minority students. Some but not all of these students suffer
from stereotype threat, which is likely to result in
a lower bound estimate of the impact of stereotype threat and self-affirmation on non-White
students. Second, in addition to GPA, we investigate the potential impacts of self-affirmation on
standardized achievement tests administered at
the beginning and the end of the school year.
These additional outcomes illustrate how stereotype threat and self-affirmation can influence test
performance in real-world settings and how the
impacts of self-affirmation may unfold during
the school year.

22

We find that students who may be subject to
racial/ethnic stereotype threats respond positively to self-affirmation. We find evidence that
self-affirmation positively influences cumulative
student GPA among potentially threatened students, which is consistent with the original study
findings (Cohen et al., 2006; Cohen et al., 2009).
There is no evidence of an impact on reading
achievement, but self-affirmation does show
promise for improving the achievement of students who may suffer from stereotype threat in
mathematics.
Background
A Pattern of Disengagement
GPA, motivation, academic engagement, and
achievement goals appear to decline during middle school for all students, and African American
and Latino students appear to suffer steeper
declines in school performance than their Asian
and White peers (Anderman, 2003; Borman,
Stringfield, & Rachuba, 2000; Cook, PurdieVaughns, Garcia, & Cohen, 2012; Sherman et al.,
2013; Shim, Ryan, & Anderson, 2008).1 Student
achievement appears to mirror this trend.
Although there are empirical exceptions (see
Reardon & Galindo, 2009), substantial evidence
suggests that achievement gaps between White
and non-White students persist and even grow as
they progress through school (Benson & Borman,
2010; Downey, von Hippel, & Broh, 2004; Fryer
& Levitt, 2004; Jencks & Phillips, 1998). The
National Assessment of Educational Progress
(NAEP) shows that achievement gaps persist
between Black and White students (Vanneman,
Hamilton, Baldwin Anderson, & Rahman, 2009)
and between Hispanic and White students
(Hemphill, Vanneman, & Rahman, 2011) and
that differences in mathematics (but not reading)
achievement appear to grow between age 9 and
age 13. Recent work in social psychology suggests that stereotype threat may contribute to
these patterns of disengagement and inequality.
Stereotype Threat
Claude Steele and Joshua Aronson coined the
term “stereotype threat” in a seminal article published in 1995. As they originally described,

Self-Affirmation at Scale
[W]henever African American students perform an
explicitly scholastic or intellectual task, they face the
threat of confirming or being judged by a negative
societal stereotype—a suspicion—about their group’s
intellectual ability and competence. . . . And the selfthreat it causes—through a variety of mechanisms—
may interfere with the intellectual functioning of
these students, particularly during standardized tests.
(p. 797)

Stereotype threat also has been shown to
affect stereotyped individuals’ performance in a
number of domains beyond academics, such as
White men in sports (e.g., Stone, Lynch,
Sjomeling, & Darley, 1999), homosexual men in
providing child care (Bosson, Haymovitz, &
Pinel, 2004), and women in negotiation (Kray,
Galinsky, & Thompson, 2002), but within the
academic realm, it is thought to depress the performance of women in mathematics and related
fields and African Americans and other nonAsian racial/ethnic groups in all academic areas.
Students who are aware that they belong to a
group that is perceived to perform poorly academically often fear behaving in a way that fits
the negative cultural image associated with a
group stereotype, thereby marking them as inferior. This largely unconscious fear elicits anxiety
and other counterproductive responses that can
severely interfere with thinking and performance
on standardized tests or other evaluative activities in the classroom.
Although evidence continues to accumulate
regarding the specific mechanisms through
which stereotype threat depresses academic performance, most researchers agree that physiological and psychological mechanisms such as stress
responses, self-monitoring, and self-regulation
are at play (Schmader, Johns, & Forbes, 2008),
which are in turn manifest in test-taking behaviors (Scherbaum, Blanshetyn, Marshall-Wolp,
McCue, & Strauss, 2011). In addition, Aronson
(2002) noted that perceptions of negative stereotypes lead many individuals to engage in activities such as self-handicapping (Smith, 2004),
challenge avoidance (Good et al., 2003), and
self-suppression (Pronin, Steele, & Ross, 2004;
C. M. Steele, 1997). Beyond these correlates
with poor academic performance, stereotype
threat has also been linked to high blood pressure
among African Americans (Blascovich, Spencer,
Quinn, & Steele, 2001) and social distancing,
particularly from the stigmatized social group of

which the participants are members (Pronin et
al., 2004). Meta-analyses of dozens of laboratory
experiments suggest that standard measures of
ability underestimate the true abilities of Black
and Latino students by about one quarter of a
standard deviation (Nguyen & Ryan, 2008;
Walton & Cohen, 2003). A meta-analysis of field
experiments suggests that the psychological
threats that African American and Hispanic students suffer while taking standardized tests cause
them to underperform by one fifth of a standard
deviation (Walton & Spencer, 2009).
Recent work has extended the initial concern
with performance to address how stereotype
threat might implicate ongoing learning. In other
words, stereotype threat may be a form of “double jeopardy” that interferes with both short-term
performance and long-term knowledge acquisition (Taylor & Walton, 2011). Boucher, Rydell,
Van Loo, and Rydell (2012) found that the mathematics learning of women—but not men—was
compromised by negative stereotypes about
women’s math ability. Also, Taylor and Walton
(2011) found that African American students—
but not White students—who studied under
threatening conditions fared worse on a followup assessment that was conducted under nonthreatening conditions. The implication of these
findings is that removing threats during evaluative situations alone will not be sufficient if negative stereotypes are pervasive. Short-term
underperformance due to stereotype threat may
lead students to alter their career and/or professional aspirations and their sense of belonging in
academic domains and contexts (J. Steele, James,
& Barnett, 2002) and to “protectively disidentify” from academics (Aronson, 2002; Major,
Spencer, Schmader, Wolfe, & Crocker, 1998; C.
M. Steele, 1997), which in turn could lead to
increasing learning deficits (Appel & Kronberger,
2012). In this way, disengagement with the task
or the context in which the task is to be performed
can lead to growing disadvantages among negatively stereotyped students and may play a prominent role in the patterns of disengagement and
widening achievement gaps.
Members of nonstereotyped groups may also
respond to stereotypes, although in their case
their performance is boosted by “stereotype lift,”
the converse of stereotype threat (Walton &
Cohen, 2003). Introducing negative stereotypes
23

Borman et al.

about other groups—which happens “more or
less automatically” during evaluative tests
(Walton & Cohen, 2003, p. 456)—may improve
performance unless the negative stereotype is
removed. This phenomenon has been observed in
laboratory settings but not in field experiments.
Although it is possible that removing the effect of
stereotype threat could negatively affect the performance of White and Asian students, field
experiments have not revealed a trade-off between
the performance of White students and African
American or Latino students (Cohen et al., 2006;
Cohen et al., 2009; Sherman et al., 2013). The
possibility, however, suggests that we should
evaluate whether an intervention to reduce stereotype threat influences all student subgroups.
Self-Affirmation
Self-affirmation (Liu & Steele, 1986; C. M.
Steele, 1988; C. M. Steele & Liu, 1983) is one way
in which students may be able to cope with stereotype threat in a productive way. Closely related to
“compensatory self-inflation” (Greenberg &
Pyszczynski, 1985), self-affirmation helps individuals bolster other dimensions of their self-worth
to compensate for the harm done by stereotype
threat (Sherman & Cohen, 2006; C. M. Steele,
1988). In the absence of a means to repair their
self-image, students may respond to stereotype
threat in defensive and unproductive ways, such as
disidentification with academics (Appel &
Kronberger, 2012; Sherman & Cohen, 2006).
Values affirmation—in which individuals
focus on things that are important to them—is an
especially promising form of self-affirmation
that has been shown to have beneficial effects on
numerous outcomes in laboratory experiments,
mostly involving undergraduate students in the
United States (McQueen & Klein, 2006).2
Because self-worth is multidimensional (Crocker
& Wolfe, 2001), individuals can compensate in
one area—that is, values—for a deficit in
another—that is, group identity—and thereby
maintain a positive overall sense of themselves
(Sherman & Cohen, 2006). There are a number
of ways to engage in values affirmation, but
expressive writing is the most commonly used
approach, especially among large groups of students as one would find in a school setting
(Yeager & Walton, 2011).
24

One field-based trial of self-affirmation exercises, in particular, is of key policy and evaluative concern; because of its relatively brief and
simple administration yet remarkably positive
results, it has garnered a great deal of both positive attention and skepticism. In results published
in Science, Geoffrey Cohen and his colleagues
(Cohen et al., 2006; Cohen et al., 2009) reported
that brief self-affirmation tasks aimed at affirming students’ personal values reduced the Black–
White GPA gap by as much as 40%. Specifically,
having middle school students write a series of
brief essays affirming their personal values over
the course of the school year improved the performance of African American students in four
core academic subjects: science, social studies,
math, and English. The three classrooms in a
suburban northeastern middle school in which
the research took place were composed of
approximately half African American and half
European American students. The seventh-grade
students were placed at random into intervention
and comparison groups near the start of the
school year. Both groups were given structured
15-min writing assignments a total of 3 to 4 times
during the academic year. These assignments
primed the students to think about important
qualities and values; students selected three values (e.g., sports talent, family, sense of humor)
and explained in writing why they were personally important. Compared with control group students (who wrote about other non-self-affirming
topics, such as why values they considered unimportant might be important to others), the African
American students in the affirmation group had
substantially higher GPAs, both during the school
year in which the interventions were deployed
(Cohen et al., 2006) and 2 years later (Cohen
et al., 2009).
How might a relatively small and inexpensive
intervention lead to such substantial changes in
academic performance? As proximal, relatively
“quick wins” accumulate, the researchers note
that recursive processes acting like chain reactions then carry forward the initial effects of the
intervention (Cohen et al., 2009). As PurdieVaughns and her colleagues (2009) argued, a
small improvement early in the year due to the
intervention might, for example, give children a
little extra confidence, and this confidence might
lead to further gains in performance in a repeating

Self-Affirmation at Scale

cycle. Teachers may also play a role. Even though
they do not know the experimental condition to
which students were randomized, small early
improvements may cause teachers to see students
as more able and worthy of attention and mentoring, thus amplifying the effects of the invention
via teacher expectancy effects (Purdie-Vaughns
et al., 2009).
Indeed, the greatest impacts of self-affirmation
came in the final term of the school year, which
Cohen and his colleagues offer as evidence of a
beneficial recursive process for students exposed
to the self-affirmation intervention: “Findings
suggest that because initial psychological states
and performance determine later outcomes by
providing a baseline and initial trajectory for a
recursive process, apparently small but early alterations in trajectory can have long-term effects”
(Cohen et al., 2009, p. 400). By enhancing students’ feelings of personal worth, the authors surmised, the exercise changed their perception of
bias at school and shifted how they interpreted
their academic successes and failures. These steps
particularly protected African American students
who had been struggling in school. Instead of feeling discouraged and falling into a pattern of disengagement, it as though the psychologists gave
Black students an inoculation against the threat
presented by negative stereotypes.
This research—which was reviewed by the
What Works Clearinghouse (WWC) and deemed
consistent with WWC evidence standards
(WWC, 2010)—demonstrated that African
American students who completed the writing
exercises about their values increased their average seventh- and eighth-grade GPA by a quarter
of a letter grade (0.24 points), a change that was
statistically significant and equivalent to an
effect size of approximately d = 0.30. Among
low-achieving African American students, the
effect was somewhat larger, with an increase in
average seventh- and eighth-grade GPA of 0.41
points. In addition, the intervention reduced the
likelihood that low-achieving African American
students would be assigned to a remedial program or retained in grade (5% vs. 18%). The
intervention did not have a statistically significant effect on the academic outcomes of White
students.
More recently, Sherman et al. (2013) reported
on a similar long-term field experiment of

self-affirmation conducted with Latino and
White students. The authors reported findings
from two studies from two schools in which they
randomly assigned values-affirmation writing
exercises to White and Latino students and
treated GPA as the outcome of interest (by term
and cumulatively). The authors observed no
treatment effect for GPA among the White students, but affirmed Latino students had higher
GPAs than nonaffirmed, control Latino students.
In Study 1, the cumulative GPA of affirmed
Latino middle school students (Grades 6–8) was
0.22 points higher than nonaffirmed Latino students at the end of the first year, representing a
22% reduction in the initial White/Latino GPA
gap, a difference that persisted for the 3-year
duration of the study (Sherman et al., 2013). At
the end of the first year of Study 2, the cumulative GPA among affirmed Latino seventh-grade
students was 0.38 points higher than that of nonaffirmed Latino control students, which represents approximately a 30% reduction in the
White–Latino GPA gap (Sherman et al., 2013).
The direction and magnitude of the impacts of
self-affirmation found by Sherman and his colleagues (2013) among Latino students are similar
to those found by Cohen and his colleagues
(2006, 2009) among African American students.
Stereotype threat appears to influence both
African American and Latino students, and interventions to address stereotype threat appear to
benefit both African American and Latino students similarly (Cohen et al., 2006; Cohen et al.,
2009; Good et al., 2003; Sherman et al., 2013).
Scaling Up Self-Affirmation
Our districtwide sample includes both African
American and Latino students, and we have little
theoretical or empirical reason to believe that the
two groups will respond to self-affirmation significantly differently from one another, on average. Consequently, in our analyses, we contrast
two groups of students: those who are potentially
subject to stereotype threat and those who are not
potentially subject to stereotype threat. We deliberately use the word potentially because we recognize that these racial/ethnic classifications are
merely proxies for students who are suffering
from stereotype threat. Not all students who could
experience stereotype threat in fact do experience
25

Borman et al.

it. Stereotype threat includes a number of boundary conditions that we cannot identify in the field,
such as awareness of the stereotype (C. M. Steele
& Aronson, 1995) or identification with the
domain (Aronson et al., 1999). Laboratory experiments can screen participants on these conditions, but field experiments cannot do so as
readily. The students we identify as being potentially subject to stereotype threat—and therefore
potentially benefiting from self-affirmation—will
vary substantially in their susceptibility to stereotype threat and their responses to the self-affirmation treatment. We can, however, evaluate the
extent to which self-affirmation benefits, on average, a sample of students who are potentially
suffering from stereotype threat and evaluate
whether they benefit from being assigned selfaffirmation writing exercises in school. As a
result, our results offer a conservative estimate
of the impact of self-affirmation on students
who are subject to stereotype threat because,
presumably, the larger effects of self-affirmation
on threatened students may be diluted by the null
effects on nonthreatened students.
This estimate, however, offers a realistic
expectation of what a district with large achievement gaps might expect if it introduces these
activities to its curriculum. Recent evidence
from the NAEP suggests that the academic
achievement gaps between Whites and Blacks
(Vanneman et al., 2009) and Whites and
Hispanics (Hemphill et al., 2011) in Wisconsin—
where the experiment was conducted—are
among the largest in the United States. If the
results from this remarkably inexpensive and
relatively simple intervention can be replicated
and better understood, it could hold tremendous
potential for closing persistent achievement gaps
both in Wisconsin and in the United States.
Our overarching research question—Can
self-affirmation mitigate the effects of stereotype
threat on non-White students in a real-world
setting?—is applied to several standard measures of students’ academic performance. Three
measures of school success provide distinct
evidence concerning how self-affirmation may
affect both learning and test performance. As
our literature review suggested, stereotype
threat may operate through two distinct mechanisms: by increasing test anxiety and thus lowering the validity of test scores and by provoking
26

academic disengagement and thus reducing
actual learning. Our analyses of the cumulative
effects of self-affirmation on year-end GPA assess
the potential for self-affirmation to operate recursively—potentially affecting learning—as suggested by the work of Cohen et al. (2009), Sherman
et al. (2013), and Taylor and Walton (2011). In
separate analyses, we assess impacts on a fall standardized test given after a low dosage of treatment
and a spring standardized test after a higher dosage. Specifically, we ask (a) to what extent two
doses of the affirmation intervention affect reading and mathematics scores on a state standardized test; (b) the extent to which four doses affect
reading, language use, and mathematics scores on
a different standardized test; and (c) the extent to
which four doses affect the cumulative GPA of
seventh-grade students. We test two hypotheses
for each of these three outcome measures.
Hypothesis 1: Does self-affirmation impact
students who are not potentially subject to
stereotype threat?
Prior research generally finds no impact of
self-affirmation on these students (primarily
White; Cohen et al., 2006; Cohen et al., 2009;
Sherman et al., 2013), but the possibility of “stereotype lift” suggests that the impact of self-affirmation could be negative for White and Asian
students (Walton & Cohen, 2003). Our null
hypothesis is that there is no difference associated
with affirmation for students who are not potentially subject to stereotype threat. We evaluate this
hypothesis with the “self-affirmation” estimates in
the statistical models that interact an indicator of
students’ status as a potentially threatened racial/
ethnic minority with assignment to self-affirmation. A related question is whether self-affirmation
affects all students on average regardless of their
racial/ethnic background, which we evaluate in
models that do not include interaction terms.
Hypothesis 2: Does the impact of being
assigned to self-affirmation differ for students who are potentially subject to stereotype threat?
Prior research suggests that African American
and Latino students respond differently to selfaffirmation than White students (Cohen et al.,

Self-Affirmation at Scale

2006; Cohen et al., 2009; Sherman et al., 2013).
Our null hypothesis is that all students respond
equivalently to self-affirmation regardless of
their racial/ethnic background. We evaluate this
hypothesis with a statistical interaction term
between treatment condition and an indicator of
students’ status as a potentially threatened racial/
ethnic minority. We also ask a closely related
question: Is there a self-affirmation treatment
effect for the subgroup of students who are
potentially subject to stereotype threat? Prior
research indicates self-affirmation positively
affects the GPA of African American and Latino
students (Cohen et al., 2006; Cohen et al., 2009;
Sherman et al., 2013). Our null hypothesis is that
there is no impact of self-affirmation on African
American and Latino students. We evaluate this
hypothesis by using a postestimation strategy to
compute marginal effect estimates from our statistical interaction model, thereby providing estimates of the effects of self-affirmation for
students who are potentially subject to stereotype
threat.
Method
Madison Writing and Achievement Project
(MWAP)
To evaluate these hypotheses, we use data
from the MWAP, a multiyear, districtwide randomized field trial of self-affirmation writing
conducted in the Madison Metropolitan School
District (MMSD). The study involved the entire
seventh grade in 2011–2012, which consisted of
80 classrooms taught by more than 50 teachers in
11 middle schools. To our knowledge, MWAP is
the first evaluation of self-affirmation writing to
be conducted across an entire school district. The
design of the study is shown in Figure 1.
The intervention consisted of a sequence of
four writing exercises students completed in
school over the course of the school year.
Following Cohen and his colleagues (2006,
2009; Sherman et al., 2013), one half of the students was randomly assigned to complete a selfaffirmation writing exercise while the other half
was assigned to a similar, but nonaffirming control writing exercise. We implemented a randomized block design, in which the 11 schools served
as blocks, and randomization was conducted at
the student level within each of the blocks. We

randomized students after securing parental consent and student assent. The self-affirmation
assignments varied slightly over the course of the
year to maintain student interest. The first exercise took place as close to the beginning of the
school year as was feasible (Cook et al., 2012;
Critcher, Dunning, & Armor, 2010). The remaining exercises were intended to take place prior to
assessments: the Wisconsin Knowledge and
Concepts Exam (WKCE) in November and the
Measures of Academic Progress (MAP) in
February and May. Nonconsented students completed an expository writing exercise provided
by the research team so that all students were
writing at the same time.
The first two writing exercises were structured,
the third was open-ended, and the fourth exercise
was tailored to the student based on his or her
choices in the first or second exercise (see Sherman
et al., 2013). The structured exercises asked students to choose two or three items that are most
important to them from an 11-item list, and the
comparison students were offered an identical list
and asked to identify the two or three least important items and write about how they might be
important to someone else.3 Both structured exercises included follow-up questions to reinforce
their reflection. The open-ended exercise presented students with a paragraph summarizing the
kinds of things that can be important to people,
using examples from the structured exercise list.
Students in the affirmation condition were then
asked to describe something that is important to
them. Students in the comparison condition were
presented with a paragraph summarizing the kinds
of things students do in the morning before they
go to school and were asked to describe what they
did that day before school. The tailored exercise
presented an item that the student had chosen in
the first two structured exercises and asked the
student to reflect on it and describe how it is now
important to them later on in the school year. The
item we selected to present to each student in the
tailored exercise was identified as the selection
about which the student wrote most extensively in
the second exercise. Students in the comparison
condition wrote an expository essay describing
what they do after school.
Our methods were intended to replicate, as
closely as possible, the trainings and implementations conducted by Cohen and colleagues
27

Figure 1.  MWAP study design and data collection.
Note. MWAP = Madison Writing and Achievement Project; WKCE = Wisconsin Knowledge and Concepts Exam.

(Cohen et al., 2006, 2009). We worked with principals and teachers to develop final versions of
the prompts, with the intention of offering intervention materials that resembled those that they
would assign their students as normal instructional routine. The instructions and script provided to teachers were further intended to frame
the writing activities as typical classroom activities, and our trainings and materials urged teachers to present the exercises as such and avoid any
mention of the activity as an external research
project. MMSD has adopted social-emotional
standards, and schools and teachers may adopt
strategies to raise attention to concerns similar to
those addressed by self-affirmation, yet our anecdotal observations and continued interactions
with the participating schools and staff revealed
no other systematic efforts underway to address
stereotype threat.
At the beginning of the school year, administrators at each school (principal and/or learning
coordinator) decided which classrooms the intervention would be fielded in; seven schools
elected for English/language arts classrooms and
four chose homeroom classes. We provided brief
training sessions (no more than 1 hour) with the
corresponding teachers at each school. The training provided teachers with the instructions necessary to administer the exercises as intended
and provided them with a script and responses to
students’ frequently asked questions.
Teachers distributed the writing exercises to
students during the school day as part of normal
classroom activities, and each administration
took 15 to 20 minutes. Students were provided
28

with personalized copies of the exercises to maintain fidelity of the random assignment. Each exercise included an identical cover sheet to disguise
the condition to which students were assigned,
and all versions of the exercises were designed to
have a similar appearance. Students completed
the assignments quietly and independently; teachers collected completed exercises and eventually
returned them to the research staff without
reviewing student responses. Exchanges of materials were conducted via school administrators or,
in the few cases in which research staff interacted
directly with classroom teachers, when students
were not present. Classroom teachers were not
informed of the condition to which their students
were assigned or of the study’s hypotheses
(including any mention of stereotype threat).4
Data
All student demographic and outcome data
were provided to us by MMSD. We evaluate the
impact of self-affirmation on three outcomes,
each consistent with a different strain of stereotype threat theory. First, consistent with the original formulation of stereotype threat (C. M. Steele
& Aronson, 1995), the evaluative, high-stakes
nature of standardized tests may prove to be
especially threatening to students (C. M. Steele
& Aronson, 1995), which may curtail the performance of racial and ethnic minorities subject to
stereotype threat. If self-affirmation buffers students from the impact of stereotypes and allows
them to demonstrate their true abilities, this
effect should be apparent on the WKCE.5

Self-Affirmation at Scale

Second, we can evaluate the potential “recursive” nature of self-affirmation (Cohen et al.,
2009) by investigating impacts on students’ cumulative GPAs in seventh grade. GPA represents how
classroom teachers feel students are meeting their
expectations, and can reward not only knowledge
and skill but also classroom participation, homework completion, attendance, and behavior
(Coleman, 1997; Sizer, 1984). Grades, therefore,
reveal how well students negotiate “both the social
and pedagogical aspects” of a school (Schiller,
1999). MMSD provided student transcript data
from sixth and seventh grade; the transcripts
include each course the student was enrolled in
and the letter grade the student earned in each of
the four quarters of the school year. As shown in
Figure 1, the report cards are filed at the end of
each term, in November, February, April, and
June. Following MMSD protocol, we compute a
student’s GPA by translating the letter grade into a
score (e.g., A = 4, B = 3, etc.) and then creating a
weighted average based on the number of credits
earned per course and quarter.6
MMSD seventh graders also take the
Northwest Evaluation Association MAP, a computer adaptive test administered at multiple time
periods during the school year.7 In practice, teachers may use the information from these formative
assessments to help tailor instruction to individual
students or classrooms. Students take three MAP
tests (Reading, Language Usage, and
Mathematics) in the fall and spring, and one MAP
test (Reading) in the winter. Reading and
Mathematics are self-explanatory; Language
Usage covers writing and grammar. MAP scores
are produced using a Rasch measurement model,
which yields an equal-interval scale. The 2011–
2012 school year was the first year of MAP adoption in MMSD, and some students in our analytical
sample were randomized to self-affirmation after
their fall MAP tests. For these two reasons, we
use the spring 2012 MAP Reading, Language
Usage, and Mathematics scores as outcomes.
These scores inform both the original and recursive theories of stereotype threat; by the time of
the spring assessment, the students had completed
multiple self-affirmation exercises over the
course of the year, including a final one shortly
before the spring MAP testing. In addition, we
believe that to the extent that self-affirmation

buffers potentially stereotyped students and
allows them to exhibit their true abilities on the
earlier fall and winter formative assessments, that
teachers using the data for formative purposes
could develop more realistic insights into potentially stereotyped students’ academic capacities
and, as a result, hold higher expectations for the
students’ future performances in the classroom
and on later standardized tests.
The most important variable for this analysis is
an identifier of students who are potentially subject to stereotype threat, which we construct using
administrative race/ethnicity data. We do not
expect that all students will be affected by selfaffirmation equally. In fact, prior research in middle schools has found no impact of self-affirmation
on White students and substantial impacts on
GPA for Black (Cohen et al., 2006; Cohen et al.,
2009) and Latino students (Sherman et al., 2013).
Our sample includes students identified as White,
Asian, American Indian, African American,
Hispanic, Pacific Islander, and students who identified with multiple groups. We expect that White
and Asian American students are not threatened
by academic stereotypes (and could benefit from
stereotype lift) and that American Indian, African
American, Hispanic, and Pacific Islander students
may be subject to stereotype threat.8
We divide the sample into two groups: students potentially subject to stereotype threat
(American Indian, African American, Hispanic,
and Pacific Islander) and students not subject to
stereotype threat (White and Asian). Multiracial
students are assigned to one of the two groups
based on the racial/ethnic categories they identify. For example, multiracial students identified
as African American and White or Asian and
Hispanic are assigned to the group that is potentially vulnerable to stereotype threat, but multiracial students identified as White and Asian are
not.9 We also include indicators of student gender, free/reduced-price lunch status, limited
English proficiency status, and disability status
as statistical controls to improve the precision of
our analytical models.
Sample
The official count on the third Friday of
September 2011 tallied 1,706 seventh-grade

29

Borman et al.

students, all of whom were invited to participate
in the study. Student enrollment began during
student registration at each of the 11 middle
schools in August 2011 prior to the start of the
academic year. We obtained parental consent and
student assent for 1,048 students (61%) by the
end of October, prior to the administration of the
second of the writing exercises.10 These students
constitute the baseline for our attrition analyses.
The small number of students who enrolled in the
study after the second writing exercise are not
included in the analysis.
We conduct analyses on two samples, a GPA
sample and a test score sample. The GPA sample
includes 1,012 students with a GPA recorded in
the fourth and final term of sixth grade (preintervention) and at least the first three terms of GPA
data in seventh grade.11 These students constitute
97% of the consented sample of 1,048 and 59%
of the entire MMSD seventh-grade population of
1,706. The test score sample consists of 926 students with complete seventh-grade test scores
(WKCE Reading, WKCE Mathematics, and
spring MAP scores in Reading, Language Usage,
and Mathematics) as well as sixth-grade outcomes for WKCE Reading and Mathematics. All
students in both the GPA sample and test score
sample also had complete demographic information. The number of consented students omitted
due to missing data is relatively small and welldefined, namely, it is restricted to current MMSD
students who moved into the district after
November of their sixth-grade year and a small
number of students who did not take both tests in
seventh grade. Overall, missing data claimed 3%
of the consented students for the GPA analysis
and 12% of the students for the test score analysis. The rates of attrition due to missing data are
equivalent by experimental condition, as well as
by the experimental condition and potentially
threatened status, in both the GPA and test score
samples.12
Descriptive statistics for the GPA sample are
reported in Table 1 (an equivalent report for the
test score sample is shown in Table A1 in the
online appendix, available at http://epa.sagepub
.com/supplemental). The first column of Table 1
shows the overall sample means and, for the
prior measures of achievement, standard deviations. Fifty percent of the sample is female, 16%
has been identified as having limited proficiency
30

in English, 14% has been identified as requiring
services for some form of disability, and 43% of
the sample is eligible for free/reduced-price
lunch.13 Thirty-seven percent of the GPA sample
is composed of students from racial/ethnic
groups that could be subject to stereotype threat
(Black, Hispanic, American Indian, Pacific
Islander, or a Multiracial student identified as
belonging to one of these categories). The standard deviations of the sixth-grade achievement
test scores for the 926 students with available
measures are 54.45 in Reading and 56.49 in
Mathematics. Finally, the mean sixth-grade GPA
in the sample is 3.24, with a standard deviation
of 0.65.
As Table 1 also shows, the experiment has
good internal validity: The two experimental
groups are balanced on demographics and prior
achievement. The second and third columns
show the means for the experimental conditions
(self-affirmation vs. comparison) and the p values testing the differences between the experimental conditions. This information provides an
indication of the baseline equivalence of the two
groups and, thus, the internal validity of the
experiment. None of the differences were statistically significant (see Tables 1 and A1). The selfaffirmation group scored higher on the
sixth-grade standardized tests, but the differences
are not statistically significant and we use sixthgrade achievement as a control variable in our
statistical models to address any potential imbalance in prior achievement and to increase statistical precision. The two groups were comparable
with respect to sixth-grade GPA.
We also examine how similar the MWAP
sample is to the population of MMSD seventhgrade students to evaluate the external validity of
the sample. Demographic characteristics available for Grades 6 to 8 in MMSD suggest that the
MWAP sample has a higher proportion of White
students (55% vs. 44%) and a smaller proportion
of students identified as Black (18% vs. 23%)
and eligible for free/reduced-price lunch (43%
vs. 52%). With respect to prior achievement,
53% and 49% of the MWAP sample scored at an
“advanced” level on the Reading and Mathematics
WKCE, respectively, as compared with the districtwide means of 43% and 40%. A comparable
proportion of students scored at the “proficient”
level, with 34% of the MWAP sample and 36%

Table 1
Demographic and Prior Achievement Variables for Overall Sample and by Experimental Condition

Female
Limited English
proficiency
Special education
services
Free/reduced lunch
eligible
Potentially threatened
racial/ethnic group
Hispanic
American Indian
Asian
African American
Pacific Islander
White (non-Hispanic)
Multiracial
Grade 6 reading
 
Grade 6 math
 
Grade 6 GPA
 

Overall mean

Self-affirmation mean

Comparison mean

p value (T − C)

0.50
0.16

0.49
0.14

0.52
0.17

.23
.19

0.14

0.14

0.14

.85

0.43

0.43

0.43

.80

0.37

0.37

0.37

.94

0.17
0.04
0.11
0.20
0.00
0.57
0.08
511.75
(54.45)
526.21
(56.49)
3.24
(0.65)

0.16
0.03
0.12
0.21
0.00
0.57
0.08
514.00
(54.28)
528.66
(56.04)
3.23
(0.65)

0.18
0.05
0.10
0.18
0.00
0.57
0.07
509.45
(54.58)
523.71
(56.89)
3.25
(0.66)

.43
.18
.34
.13
.55
.88
.64
.20
 
.18
 
.54
 

Note. Standard deviations in parentheses. nGPA = 1,012 (513 [51%] assigned to self-affirmation writing); nREADING/MATH = 926
(468 [51%] assigned to self-affirmation writing). Race/ethnicity indicators are not mutually exclusive and sum to greater than
1.00. Binary variables tested with two-sample proportion test and scale variables tested with two-sample t test (H0: T − C = 0).
GPA = grade point average.

of the MMSD population achieving this performance level. A substantial proportion of the
MWAP sample scored at the “minimal” or
“basic” level in Reading and Mathematics, with
5% minimal in Reading, 12% minimal in
Mathematics, 8% basic in Reading, and 9% basic
in Mathematics. These rates were higher in
MMSD overall, with 8% minimal in Reading,
19% minimal in Mathematics, 13% basic in
Reading, and 11% basic in Mathematics. On the
whole, the MWAP sample is somewhat more
advantaged than the districtwide MMSD middle
school population, but it still includes substantial
numbers of poor students (as indicated by free or
reduced-price lunch status), students with disabilities, English-language learners, and students
at the low end of the achievement distribution.
As is shown in Table 2, membership in a
potentially threatened racial/ethnic group is

strongly associated with prior achievement. In
other words, there is strong evidence of an unconditional racial/ethnic achievement gap in the
MWAP sample. Potentially threatened students
lag behind Asian and White students on all measures of preintervention, sixth-grade academic
performance, including Reading and Mathematics
test scores, and GPA. Specifically, potentially
threatened groups score lower than Asian and
White students by 50 scale score points in
Reading, 52 points in Mathematics, and 0.66 GPA
points. The nonthreatened students have an average GPA of 3.5 (B+/A–) and the potentially
threatened students have an average GPA of 2.8
(B–). These unconditional gaps on measures of
prior academic performance are equivalent in size
to nearly one standard deviation.
Descriptive statistics for the seventh-grade
outcome variables are shown in Table 3. As
31

Table 2
Prior Achievement Gaps by Stereotype Threat Vulnerability

Sixth-grade GPA
n
Sixth-grade Reading
n
Sixth-grade Math
n

Potentially
threatened

Not potentially
threatened

2.82
374
479.29
328
492.41
328

3.48
638
529.55
598
544.75
598

Difference

Pooled standard
deviation

−0.66

(0.65)

−50.27

(54.45)

−52.34

(56.49)

t
−17.82
 
−14.97
 
−15.04
 

Note. Total nGPA = 1,012; nREADING/MATH = 926; pooled standard deviation from Table 1. GPA = grade point average.

Table 3
Student Achievement Outcomes

Seventh-grade GPA-cumulative
Seventh-grade Reading
Seventh-grade Math
Spring MAP Reading
Spring MAP Language Usage
Spring MAP Math

M

SD

Minimum

Maximum

3.13
527.22
540.53
221.68
220.22
230.62

0.75
57.29
48.21
15.90
14.19
19.25

0.46
310
330
145
154
153

4
780
671
261
256
308

Note. nGPA = 1,012; nREADING/MATH = 926. GPA = grade point average; MAP = Measures of Academic Progress.

shown in Figure 1, the WKCE data were collected in November of the seventh-grade year
and the GPA measures were collected at the end
of each term. Cumulative seventh-grade GPA is
shown along the top row, the WKCE scale scores
in Reading and Mathematics are shown next, followed by the spring MAP scores in Reading,
Language Usage, and Mathematics. A few features of these variables are worth noting. First,
the mean values of the scale scores in Reading
and Mathematics increased from sixth to seventh
grade, but the mean GPA in the sample decreased
from 3.24 in sixth grade (see Table 1) to 3.13 in
seventh grade.14 Data from each of the four terms
comprising cumulative GPA show a slight
decrease over the course of the year, from 3.20
and 3.22 in the first and second terms to 3.16 in
both the third and fourth terms. This decline in
mean GPA during middle school and during the
academic year is both concerning and consistent
with prior research (e.g., Anderman, 2003; Cook
et al., 2012; Sherman et al., 2013).
32

Analysis
To evaluate whether self-affirmation affected
student achievement differentially by student
racial/ethnic background, we estimated the following multilevel model in which assignment to
self-affirmation interacts with student membership in a racial/ethnic group that is potentially
subject to stereotype threat:

(

) (

Yij = α + β Affirmedij + γ Threatenedij

(

+ δ Affirmedij ×Threatenedij
+

∑ϕX

ij

)

)

+ u j + εij .

In this model, Yij represents the GPA or standardized test score of students within schools, α
represents the model intercept (the grand mean
for the reference group), β is the coefficient representing the impact of self-affirmation for the
reference (not potentially threatened) subgroup,
γ represents the average difference for the outcome associated with membership in a racial/
ethnic group potentially subject to stereotype

threat, δ represents the interaction between selfaffirmation and racial/ethnic group membership,
∑ϕX ij includes the set of additional covariates
in the model (i.e., prior achievement, gender,
free/reduced-price lunch (FRL) status, limited
English proficiency, and special education status), uj is the school-specific error, and εij is the
student-specific error term.
The coefficient δ tells us whether potentially
threatened students responded to self-affirmation
differently than majority students responded. The
coefficient γ for membership in a potentially
threatened group tells us whether there is an
achievement gap between majority and potentially threatened students net of the other covariates and absent the intervention. To determine
whether self-affirmation has an impact on potentially threatened students, we estimate marginal
effects of self-affirmation. We transform the
parameter estimates from the impact model to
estimate the average effect of self-affirmation
for the students who are potentially subject to
stereotype threat and the students who are not
subject to stereotype threat, at the average values
of each racial/ethnic group’s covariates.15 We
estimate these margins at the group means
because the preexisting differences on some of
the covariates—namely, prior achievement—are
large. Given that potentially threatened students
lag nonthreatened students by approximately one
standard deviation, there are few examples of
potentially threatened students with prior
achievement at the sample mean. The full results
from our statistical models are presented in the
online appendix (Tables A2–A4 in the online
appendix, available at http://epa.sagepub.com/
supplemental); we present the marginal effect
estimates and effect sizes in Table 4 and the GPA
results in Figure 2. We calculated effect sizes
using the overall standard deviations of the outcomes reported in Table 3.
Results
Our first set of research questions addressed
whether self-affirmation affected all students,
on average, as well as White and Asian students who were not potentially subject to stereotype threat. With one exception, the
academic outcomes of affirmed and nonaffirmed students overall and of affirmed and

Table 4
Estimated Interactions Between Assignment to SelfAffirmation and Student Membership in a Racial/
Ethnic Group That Is Potentially Subject to
Stereotype Threat

Cumulative seventhgrade GPA 
Fall Reading test
 
Fall Math test
 
Spring Reading test
 
Spring Math test
 
Spring Language
Usage test 

Estimates

d

0.082*
[0.008, 0.155]
−0.046
[−7.415, 7.323]
4.224*
[0.939, 7.510]
−0.140
[−2.933, 2.654]
1.512
[−0.603, 3.627]
0.417
[−1.546, 2.379]

0.11
 
0.00
 
0.09
 
0.01
 
0.08
 
0.04
 

Note. nGPA = 1,012; nTESTS = 926; multilevel models of students in 11 schools. 95% confidence intervals based on deltamethod standard errors in parentheses. GPA = grade point
average.
*p < .05.

nonaffirmed White and Asian students were
statistically indistinguishable (see Tables A2–
A4 in the online appendix, available at http://
epa.sagepub.com/supplemental). The single
exception was a positive and statistically significant impact estimate for all students on the
spring Language Usage test (1.113; 95% confidence interval [CI] = [0.214, 2.012]). This is as
we expected and is consistent with prior
research as the response of self-affirmation is
typically localized among students who are
vulnerable to stereotype threat.
Our second set of questions investigated
whether the impact of self-affirmation differed
for students who were and were not potentially
subject to stereotype threat and whether there
was evidence of a net impact among the potentially threatened subgroup. Table 4 summarizes
the interaction terms, δ, that test the differential
responses to treatment by racial/ethnic background; the full results are shown as Model 2 in
Tables A2 to A4 (in the online appendix, available at http://epa.sagepub.com/supplemental).
Table A5 (in the online appendix, available
at http://epa.sagepub.com/supplemental) reports
33

Figure 2.  GPA estimates by term, threat status, and experimental group.
Note. GPA = grade point average.

the conditional margins—estimated at the group
mean values of the covariates to recognize the
large differences in prior achievement between
the two groups—to evaluate the impact of selfaffirmation among the potentially threatened
subgroup.
GPA is the primary outcome examined and
reported in prior research (Cohen et al., 2006;
Cohen et al., 2009; Sherman et al., 2013).
Consistent with prior research, we find differential impacts of self-affirmation on cumulative
seventh-grade GPA. As shown in Table 4, the
estimated interaction between self-affirmation
and students’ potentially threatened racial/ethnic
background is 0.82 (95% CI = [0.008, 0.155]),
which corresponds to an effect size of 0.11. The
marginal effect—the estimated impact of selfaffirmation among the potentially threatened
subgroup—is also statistically significant and of
34

a similar magnitude (0.065; 95% CI = [0.001,
0.128]; see Table A5 in the online appendix,
available at http://epa.sagepub.com/supplemen
tal). Supplemental analyses show that—also
consistent with prior research—most of this
cumulative difference is manifested later in the
school year. Figure 2, which shows the estimated
margins for each of the four subgroups of interest, reveals the estimated marginal effect is largest in the final term of seventh grade (0.130;
95% CI = [0.039, 0.220]). As Figure 2 also
shows, this difference is produced by a decline
in GPA in the second half of the year, and especially in the fourth quarter, among students who
were potentially vulnerable to stereotype threat
and assigned to the control condition. If selfaffirmation benefited students who were potentially vulnerable to stereotype threat, it did so by
maintaining their GPA and heading off this

Self-Affirmation at Scale

decline. This is similar to the result noted by
Sherman and his colleagues: The apparent benefit of self-affirmation is that it prevents the
declines in performance that many students—
especially those subject to stereotype threat—
suffer (Sherman et al., 2013). Figure 2 also
starkly illustrates the large differences in school
performance across groups in the sample.
We extend the analysis of the potential effects
of self-affirmation on academic outcomes to
include standardized tests, both at the beginning
and the end of seventh grade. We find suggestive
evidence of impacts of self-affirmation for potentially threatened students on Mathematics standardized tests but not for the Reading or
Language Usage outcomes. We begin with the
state reading and mathematics tests, which students took in November 2011, shortly after the
second writing exercise. The estimated interaction effect for Reading test scores is essentially
zero (−0.046; 95% CI = [−7.415, 7.323]). For the
fall Mathematics test outcome, though, we find
that students identified as potentially subject to
stereotype threat responded differently to selfaffirmation; the estimated interaction is positive
and statistically significant (4.224; 95% CI =
[0.939, 7.510]). This interaction corresponds to
an effect size of 0.09. The estimated marginal
effect on the fall Mathematics standardized test is
smaller and not statistically significant, however
(2.948; 95% CI = [−0.043, 5.938]; d = 0.06). In
other words, we find a statistically significant
differential response to self-affirmation on fall
Mathematics achievement but marginal evidence
of a net impact of self-affirmation within the
potentially threatened subgroup.
We also evaluate the impacts of self-affirmation on the spring 2012 MAP test outcomes for
those students who may be vulnerable to stereotype threat. As with the fall Reading test, the estimated interaction effect for the spring Reading
outcome is close to 0 (−0.140; 95% CI = [−2.933,
2.654]). The estimated interaction effect for
Language Usage is also small and not statistically
significant (0.417; 95% CI = [−1.546, 2.379]).
The marginal effect estimate for Language
Usage—the combination of two estimates—is
positive but not statistically significant (1.386;
95% CI = [−0.209, 2.980]; d = 0.10). Recall that
there was evidence of a main effect for treatment
(1.113) for the entire sample on this outcome.

Finally, there is marginal evidence of a treatment
impact on spring MAP scores in Mathematics for
potentially threatened students. The estimated
interaction is 1.512 (95% CI = [−0.603, 3.627]; d
= 0.08) and the estimated marginal effect is similar
(1.578; 95% CI = [−0.128, 3.284]; d = 0.08).
Interpreting the Impacts
In addition to quantifying effects as standardized mean differences, or effect sizes, as reported
in the previous section, one can interpret the
impacts as a proportion of the preexisting unconditional achievement gap (see Cohen et al., 2006;
Cohen et al., 2009; Sherman et al., 2013) or relative to the residual or “unexplained” gap in
achievement by race/ethnicity. The unconditional
or “raw” achievement gap represents the accumulation of disadvantages that accrued to students over the course of their lives, including
early childhood influences, nutrition, poverty,
and so on. The “unexplained” gap adjusts for the
fact that students from different racial/ethnic
backgrounds have different circumstances and
experiences that produce different achievement
levels. Observable student characteristics and
their performance on preintervention measures
of academic performance account for most—but
not all—of the achievement differences we
observe in seventh grade. These differences in
achievement observed among the comparison
students constitute the “unexplained” gap and
may be due to social and psychological experiences that unfold during seventh grade.
To illustrate, the estimated interaction term
(0.082) and marginal effect (0.065) for the cumulative GPA outcome correspond to effect sizes of
0.11 and 0.09, respectively. As sixth graders, students who were potentially subject to stereotype
threat had GPAs that were 0.66 lower than those of
their peers (see Table 2); the marginal effect estimate of 0.065 is equivalent to 10% of this gap.
Finally, the residual achievement gap in seventhgrade cumulative GPA that is not explained by
demographic characteristics or a student’s sixthgrade WKCE Mathematics test score is 0.101 (see
Table A2 in the online appendix, available at
http://epa.sagepub.com/supplemental). This estimate demonstrates that stereotype-threat-vulnerable students who had been equal to their White
and Asian peers perform worse a year later. By
35

Borman et al.

this standard, self-affirmation reduced the “unexplained” achievement gap by 64% (0.065 / 0.101
= 0.64). Relative to the overall raw gap in achievement, the impact of self-affirmation is modest, but
it accounts for a substantial portion of the achievement gap that cannot be accounted for by demographic characteristics other than race/ethnicity
and prior sixth-grade achievement.
Our estimate of the net impact of self-affirmation on cumulative GPA, which is equivalent to a
0.065 advantage on seventh-grade GPA, is smaller
than the previously reported impacts, which range
from 0.22 (Sherman et al., 2013, Study 1) to 0.38
(Sherman et al., 2013, Study 2).16 The authors of the
prior research found larger unadjusted gaps in sixthgrade GPA (e.g., Sherman et al., 2013, observed a
GPA gap of 1.02), and reported that the impact of
self-affirmation corresponds to 22% to 38% of the
raw gap, which is substantially larger than the 10%
we found. It is common among social-psychological interventions to find evidence of larger treatment impacts on GPA as time goes on (e.g., see
Aronson, Fried, & Good, 2002; Wilson & Linville,
1982, 1985). Evidence from our study suggests a
similar result but, again, our end-of-year impact
estimate (d = 0.13) is smaller than similar estimates
from prior research, such as an effect size of d =
0.57 reported by Sherman et al. (2013).
The suggestive marginal effect estimates on
the Mathematics tests (2.948 and 1.578 in the
fall and spring, respectively) represent standardized effect sizes of 0.06 in the fall and 0.10 in the
spring. The fall math impact estimate represents
6% of the unconditional achievement gap on the
sixth-grade test (2.948 / 52.34 = 0.06) and 56%
of the “unexplained” achievement gap (2.948 /
5.311 = 0.56). Spring MAP scores are not available from the prior year, but the marginal effect
estimate represents 54% of the “unexplained”
achievement gap (1.578 / 2.927 = 0.54).
Discussion
In this article, we report on a randomized field
trial of self-affirmation writing conducted at
unprecedented scale. Self-affirmation did not
influence White and Asian students’ school outcomes, which confirmed our expectations and is
consistent with prior research. Students potentially vulnerable to stereotype threat respond differently to self-affirmation than White and Asian
36

students, though, and self-affirmation positively
affects the academic performance of students
who may be vulnerable to stereotype threat, particularly as measured by GPA. The magnitudes
of these impact estimates are smaller than those
found in earlier studies, but the direction is consistent with theory and prior research. We also
found some support for the hypothesis that selfaffirmation influences student academic performance over time.
The fact that we found smaller impacts than
previous research is not surprising. Scaling up
educational interventions and reform models is
difficult and often unsuccessful (Elias, Zins,
Graczyk, & Weissberg, 2003; Glennan, Bodilly,
Galegher, & Kerr, 2004). We have taken the steps
to take an important social-psychological intervention to scale across an entire school district—
the first such effort at scale-up. It is extremely
valuable to understand if the effects of the original small-scale field studies replicate when they
are scaled up to serve a large number of students,
classrooms, and schools. As Bryk, Gomez, and
Grunow (2011) contended, “[T]he history of
educational innovation is replete with stories that
show how innovations work in the hands of a
few, but lose effectiveness in the hands of the
many” (p. 130). Thus, the most basic evidence of
whether or not these interventions can produce
impacts when implemented at scale is a crucial
and fundamental question that was previously
without an answer.
Self-affirmation writing is arguably easier to
implement and replicate with fidelity than a comprehensive schoolwide reform model, but correct
implementation is still essential to its success
(Yeager & Walton, 2011). Prior field research was
conducted in one school at a time with a handful
of teachers; our current study was conducted in 11
schools with more than 50 teachers in 80 classrooms. It is not surprising that small-scale field
experiments conducted by the developers of these
materials yielded larger impacts than those found
in our study. School districts may expect impacts
on the order of what we report here if they adopted
self-affirmation as part of their curricula: modest
impacts on GPA for non-White and non-Asian
students, without harming the performances of
White and Asian students, along with the possibility of additional impacts on standardized tests
within the mathematics domain. This is not an

Self-Affirmation at Scale

estimate of self-affirmation or stereotype threat
under ideal conditions, but rather what one might
expect in a real-world setting at scale with minimal teacher training and curricular integration.
No one claims that stereotype threat accounts
for the entirety of the achievement gap (Sackett,
Hardison, & Cullen, 2004; C. M. Steele, 1997; C.
M. Steele & Aronson, 2004) or that self-affirmation can close it completely (Yeager & Walton,
2011), but self-affirmation may help narrow the
gap at little to no additional cost to districts as part
of an overall strategy to achieve equity. Our findings show that self-affirmation can substantially
narrow the residual achievement gap that cannot
be explained by demographic characteristics or
prior achievement, and this is the portion of the
achievement gap implicated by stereotype threat
(Cohen & Sherman, 2005; C. M. Steele &
Aronson, 1995). If implementing a series of brief
expressive writing exercises can covertly address
this gap by substituting for other in-class writing
activities, it would appear well worth it to do so.
We found suggestive evidence of an impact of
self-affirmation on mathematics tests but not on
reading and language tests. Self-affirmation writing does not plausibly develop mathematics ability, but there are two reasons why self-affirmation
might affect math achievement and not reading.
First, stereotyped students may not find a reading
test to be as threatening as a mathematics test.
The residual achievement gaps in reading are
smaller than in mathematics, and, in fact, we did
not find a statistically significant residual gap
along race/ethnicity for the fall reading test (see
Table Al in the online appendix, available at
http://epa.sagepub.com/supplemental). Perhaps
taking a mathematics test is more stressful for students, which compounds the self-monitoring and
other harmful processes that stereotype threat
induces in vulnerable students. Many laboratory
experiments, after all, use mathematics tests to
create an evaluative situation in which stereotype
threat can thrive. At least 25 of the 43 dependent
variables in the studies reviewed by Walton and
Cohen (2003) are mathematics tests. If mathematics tests are more threatening than reading tests
for seventh-grade students, then self-affirmation
is more likely to help students demonstrate their
true abilities in mathematics than in reading.
Second, there is some evidence from research
on summer learning (Cooper, Charlton, Valentine,

& Muhlenbruck, 2000) and teacher quality
(Aaronson, Barrow, & Sander, 2007) that mathematics performance is more responsive to
school inputs than reading, perhaps because students have alternative venues for learning to read
(e.g., the family). Affirmed students could be
more receptive to mathematics instruction and
therefore could be learning more mathematics. In
this fashion, self-affirmation may indirectly cultivate learning.
Although most education research has relied on
standardized achievement tests to measure intervention impacts, recent work suggests that grades
and attendance—not test scores—are the middlegrade factors most strongly connected with both
high school and college success (Allensworth,
Gwynne, Moore, & de la Torre, 2014). These
authors concluded that a one-point difference in
eighth-grade GPAs, which is similar to the selfaffirmation impact of seven-tenths of a point that
we observed for cumulative seventh-grade GPA,
corresponds to a 20 percentage point difference in
the likelihood of passing ninth-grade math. We
also find larger GPA impacts at the end of the year,
which Sherman and his colleagues (2013) cited as
evidence of a recursive process, or learning, as the
impact of self-affirmation builds over time.
However, a single year of data may not be sufficient to settle this question, and Cohen et al. (2009)
and Study 1 from Sherman et al. (2013) used multiple years of data. Recall that students were
assigned as many as four writing exercises, with
the final “tailored” exercise near the end of the
school year (see Figure 1). Although the early affirmations appear to be most important (Cook et al.,
2012; Critcher et al., 2010), the effects at the end of
the year could be evidence of a recursive process, a
“dosage” effect that depends on the accumulation
of the impacts of the exercises over the course of
the year, or the impact of each “booster” exercise
along the way. Although our exploratory analyses
revealed the largest quarterly GPA impact in the
final quarter of the year, further analyses of future
outcomes for these students across later grades will
offer stronger tests of the hypothesis that the impact
of self-affirmation grows steadily over time.
Conclusion
Our primary question was whether self-affirmation affects the academic performance of
37

Borman et al.

students who are identified as belonging to racial/
ethnic groups that may be subject to stereotype
threat. We find evidence of positive impacts of
self-affirmation for these students—particularly
on mathematics tests—that are consistent with but
smaller than those found in prior field research on
self-affirmation. Self-affirmation writing appears
to be a replicable and extremely cost-effective
strategy for reducing achievement gaps. Recent
syntheses of research on the impacts of more complex and costly curricular and instructional interventions on elementary and middle school students
have suggested that typical impacts on broadscope standardized achievement tests range from
an effect size of about d = .08 to d = .15 (Lipsey et
al., 2012). As another example, a meta-analysis of
the achievement impacts of 29 widely replicated
whole-school reform models suggests that typical
impacts from independently conducted evaluations using experimental or quasi-experimental
comparison groups yielded effect sizes of d = .09
(Borman, Hewes, Overman, & Brown, 2003).
Understood in this context, observed self-affirmation impacts for potentially threatened minority
students of d = .11 for cumulative GPA and d = .09
for fall Mathematics achievement are within the
range of effect sizes observed for other educational interventions. The delivery mechanism for
the self-affirmation treatment relies on several
sheets of paper on which the self-affirming writing prompt is provided to students, a brief teacher
training session to help teachers administer the
intervention, and the 15 to 20 min of class time
during which students engage in self-affirmation
writing. Although a comprehensive cost-effectiveness analysis is beyond the scope of this article, it
is clear that the impacts of self-affirmation can be
achieved at a small fraction of the cost of wholeschool reforms, which, more than 10 years
ago, Borman et al. (2003) estimated to cost
approximately US$86,000 during the first year of
implementation.
The impacts also account for a substantial
amount of the racial/ethnic achievement gap that
cannot be explained by demographics and prior
achievement, which is the portion of the achievement gap for which stereotype threat is believed
to be the culprit. Our results suggest that a nonzero proportion of the achievement gap in middle
school is explainable by seemingly subtle psychological factors that affect African American
38

and Latino students within their school climates.
Our intervention work further suggests that such
psychological factors appear to be malleable and
that we can effectively buffer students from stereotype threat. We find suggestive evidence that
self-affirmation functions “recursively” to influence learning but cannot rule out that cumulative
GPA impacts are a result of the sequence of exercises distributed over the course of the school
year. Perhaps more intensive efforts to reduce
racism and prejudice, by transforming schools to
make them places that are less identity-threatening
for young students of color, might reduce achievement gaps even more powerfully. Given how easily self-affirmation writing can be integrated into
everyday classroom practice, though, it appears
that self-affirmation through expressive writing
can be a viable strategy for narrowing achievement gaps between sterotype-threatened minority
students and their White and Asian peers.
Authors’ Note
The findings and conclusions are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the supporting agencies.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article.

Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: Research on this article was supported
by grants from the Institute of Education Sciences,
U.S. Department of Education (R305A110136 and
R305C050055) and Spencer Foundation (201500044).

Notes
1. We use the word “Latino” to refer to Latino/a
Americans and Hispanic Americans. We refer to students of “Hispanic” race/ethnicity when they are
identified as such in federal data (such as National
Assessment of Educational Progress [NAEP]) and in
the data we receive from the school district. We use
the words “White” and “European American” as well
as the words “Black” and “African American” interchangeably. We generally use the words “Latino,”
“African American,” and “White” in our own writing
to refer to different racial/ethnic classifications, but
when we refer to the work of others, we use the terms

Self-Affirmation at Scale
the original authors used (e.g., “Black/White achievement gap”). We recognize that all of these groups are
heterogeneous and that individual student experiences
vary substantially within these groups.
2. Another form of self-affirmation focuses on personal characteristics or attributes (e.g., “I am good at
basketball”) rather than values (e.g., “I like playing
basketball”); values affirmation is more widely used
(McQueen & Klein, 2006).
3. The list of items for the first exercise included
Enjoying Sports, Being Good at Art, Being Creative,
Being Independent, Living in the Moment (or Enjoying
Today), Belonging to a Social Group (such as your
community, racial group, or school club), Listening
to Music or Playing Music, Following Politics or
Government, Being with Friends or Family, Being
Religious, and Having a Sense of Humor. The second
exercise re-sorted the list and added Being Smart or
Getting Good Grades (see Cohen, Garcia, Apfel, &
Master, 2006; Sherman et al., 2013).
4. Classroom teachers were told that the study evaluated how expressive writing contributed to academic
learning.
5. Students take the Wisconsin Knowledge and
Concepts Exam (WKCE) in early November of each
year; Madison Metropolitan School District (MMSD)
provided us with each consented student’s scale score
on the WKCE in Reading and Mathematics in both
sixth and seventh grade. The scores follow a normal
distribution.
6. Academic courses that meet daily are given
a weight of 0.25 per quarter; elective courses are
included in the weighted grade point average (GPA),
but most electives meet less often (either fewer days
per week or fewer quarters per year). For example, an
elective such as Chorus that meets 2 days per week is
given a weight of 0.10 for the purpose of calculating
GPA. The GPA values have a minimum of 0.0 for a
student who failed every class and a maximum of 4.0
for a straight-A student. The distribution of GPA values is censored at 4.0. Our approach is consistent with
MMSD practice but differs from prior research (e.g.,
Cohen et al., 2006; Cohen, Purdie-Vaughns, Apfel,
& Brzustoski, 2009; Sherman et al., 2013), which
computes GPA for “core” subjects (math, science,
language arts, and social studies; see Sherman et al.,
2013, p. 597); we include grades from all classes and
provide greater weight to core subjects. Recalculating
the GPA to “core” subjects only does not substantively
change the results.
7. http://www.nwea.org/products-services/assessments/
map%C2%AE.
8. We empirically assessed the legitimacy of
our coding of students’ potentially threatened status by investigating reported eligibility for free/
reduced lunch and prior (preintervention) academic

achievement across each racial/ethnic group. In these
data, Asian students resemble White students academically and economically, whereas American Indian and
Pacific Islander students resemble Black and Hispanic
students.
9. We conducted a number of sensitivity analyses
to test this classification decision. We did not find
meaningful differences within the potentially threatened group (e.g., African Americans vs. Hispanic students). We also reclassified multiracial students by,
for instance, assigning students identified as African
American and White to the group that is not potentially
vulnerable to stereotype threat and found substantively
similar results. As one might expect, the magnitudes of
the impacts of self-affirmation for multiracial students
were between those of the potentially threatened and
not potentially threatened groups, which yielded larger
impact estimates for the potentially threatened group
when the multiracial students were reassigned. These
supplemental sensitivity analyses are available from
the authors on request.
10. A total of 988 students (58% of 1,706) were
enrolled prior to the first writing exercise and 60 students were enrolled between the first and second writing exercise.
11. Term 4 GPA is missing for 20 seventh graders;
the results without them are substantively and statistically similar.
12. In the GPA sample, the rate of attrition was 3%
in the self-affirmation group and 4% in the comparison group, χ2(1, N = 1048) = 0.06, p = .81. Among
the potentially threatened students, the rate of attrition
was 5% for those assigned to self-affirmation and 4%
for the comparison group, χ2(1, N = 390) = 0.46, p =
.50. In the test score sample, the rate of attrition was
12% in the self-affirmation group and 12% in the comparison group, χ2(1, N = 1048) = 0.02, p = .88. Among
the potentially threatened students, the rate of attrition
for the test score sample was 17% for those assigned
to self-affirmation and 15% for the comparison group,
χ2(1, N = 390) = 0.31, p = .58.
13. Students with “severe and profound” disabilities did not participate in the study. MMSD
practices “full inclusion,” in which all students are
served together in regular classrooms to the greatest extent possible. By virtue of delivering the writing exercises in classrooms during the school day,
accommodations were available to all students with
disabilities.
14. Recall that the test score samples included only
students with both sixth- and seventh-grade scores and
that the GPA sample included only students with GPAs
recorded in the last term of sixth grade and at least the
first three terms of seventh grade.
15. We conducted this analysis using the margins command in Stata Version 12. The command

39

Borman et al.
takes the derivative of the self-affirmation estimate
at fixed values of the other covariates in the model.
Postestimation of standard errors was conducted using
the delta method (Oehlert, 1992). See Greene (2012)
or Wooldridge (2010) for more information.
16. Cohen et al. (2006, Study 1 and 2 combined)
reported a cumulative GPA impact of 0.30.

References
Allensworth, E., Gwynne, J., Moore, P., & de la Torre,
M. (2014). Looking forward to high school and
college: Middle grade indicators of readiness in
Chicago Public Schools. Chicago, IL: Consortium
on Chicago School Research, University of
Chicago. Retrieved from https://ccsr.uchicago.edu/
publications/looking-forward-high-school-andcollege-middle-grade-indicators-readiness-chicago
Anderman, L. H. (2003). Academic and social perceptions as predictors of change in middle school students’ sense of school belonging. The Journal of
Experimental Education, 72, 5–22.
Appel, M., & Kronberger, N. (2012). Stereotypes and
the achievement gap: Stereotype threat prior to
test taking. Educational Psychology Review, 24,
609–635.
Aronson, J. (2002). Stereotype threat: Contending and
coping with unnerving expectations. In J. Aronson
(Ed.), Improving academic achievement (pp. 279–
301). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Aaronson, D., Barrow, L., & Sanderc, W. (2007).
Teachers and student achievement in the Chicago
public high schools. Journal of Labor Economics,
25, 95–135.
Aronson, J., Fried, C. B., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing
the effects of stereotype threat on African American
college students by shaping theories of intelligence. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
38, 113–125.
Aronson, J., Lustina, M. J., Good, C., Keough, K.,
Steele, C. M., & Brown, J. (1999). When white
men can’t do math: Necessary and sufficient factors in stereotype threat. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 35, 29–46.
Benson, J., & Borman, G. D. (2010). Family and
contextual socioeconomic effects across seasons:
When do they matter for the achievement growth
of young children? Teachers College Record, 112,
1338–1390.
Blascovich, J., Spencer, S. J., Quinn, D., & Steele, C.
(2001). African Americans and high blood pressure: The role of stereotype threat. Psychological
Science, 12, 225–229.
Borman, G. D., Hewes, G. M., Overman, L. T., &
Brown, S. (2003). Comprehensive school reform

40

and achievement: A meta-analysis. Review of
Educational Research, 73, 125–230.
Borman, G. D., Stringfield, S., & Rachuba, L. (2000).
Advancing minority high achievement: National
trends and promising programs and practices
(ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED
438 380). New York, NY: The College Board.
Bosson, J. K., Haymovitz, E. L., & Pinel, E. C. (2004).
When saying and doing diverge: The effects of
stereotype threat on self-reported versus nonverbal anxiety. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 40, 247–255.
Boucher, K. L., Rydell, R. J., Van Loo, K. J., & Rydell,
M. T. (2012). Reducing stereotype threat in order
to facilitate learning. European Journal of Social
Psychology, 42, 174–179.
Bryk, A. S., Gomez, L. M., & Grunow, A. (2011).
Getting ideas into action: Building networked
improvement communities in education. In M. T.
Hallinan (Ed.), Frontiers in sociology of education (pp. 127–162). Dordrecht, The Netherlands:
Springer.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., & Master, A.
(2006). Reducing the racial achievement gap: A
social-psychological intervention. Science, 313,
1307–1310.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Apfel,
N., & Brzustoski, P. (2009). Recursive processes in
self-affirmation: Intervening to close the minority
achievement gap. Science, 324, 400–403.
Cohen, G. L., & Sherman, D. K. (2005). Stereotype
threat and the social and scientific contexts of the
race achievement gap. American Psychologist, 60,
270–271.
Coleman, J. S. (1997). Output-driven schools:
Principles of design. In J. S. Coleman, B. Schneider,
S. Plank, K. S. Schiller, R. Shouse, H. Wong, &
S.-A. Lee (Eds.), Redesigning American education
(pp. 13–38). Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Cook, J. E., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., & Cohen,
G. L. (2012). Chronic threat and contingent belonging: Protective benefits of values affirmation on
identity development. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 102, 479–496.
Cooper, H. M., Charlton, K., Valentine, J. C., &
Muhlenbruck, L. (2000). Making the most of summer school: A meta-analytic and narrative review.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 65(1, Serial No. 260), 1–27.
Critcher, C. R., Dunning, D., & Armor, D. A. (2010).
When self-affirmations reduce defensiveness:
Timing is key. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 36, 947–959.
Crocker, J., & Wolfe, C. T. (2001). Contingencies of
self-worth. Psychological Review, 108, 593–623.

Self-Affirmation at Scale
Dee, T. S. (2011). Social identity and achievement
gaps: Evidence from an affirmation intervention.
Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness,
8, 149–68.
Downey, D. B., von Hippel, P. T., & Broh, B. A.
(2004). Are schools the great equalizer? Cognitive
inequality during the summer months and the
school year. American Sociological Review, 69,
613–635.
Elias, M. J., Zins, J. E., Graczyk, P. A., & Weissberg,
R. P. (2003). Implementation, sustainability,
and scaling up of social-emotional and academic
innovations in public schools. School Psychology
Review, 32, 303–319.
Fryer, R. G., & Levitt, S. D. (2004). Understanding
the black-white test score gap in the first two years
of school. Review of Economics and Statistics, 86,
447–464.
Glennan, T. K., Jr., Bodilly, S. J., Galegher, J. R., &
Kerr, K. A. (2004). Expanding the reach of education reforms: Perspectives from leaders in
the scale-up of educational interventions. Santa
Monica, CA: RAND.
Good, C., Aronson, J., & Inzlicht, M. (2003).
Improving adolescents’ standardized test performance: An intervention to reduce the effects of stereotype threat. Journal of Applied Developmental
Psychology, 24, 645–662.
Greenberg, J., & Pyszczynski, T. (1985).
Compensatory self-inflation: A response to the
threat to self-regard of public failure. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 273–280.
Greene, W. H. (2012). Econometric analysis. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Hemphill, F. C., Vanneman, A., & Rahman, T. (2011).
Achievement gaps: How Hispanic and White students in public schools perform in mathematics and
reading on the National Assessment of Educational
Progress (NCES 2011-459). Washington, DC:
National Center for Education Statistics, Institute
of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of
Education.
Jencks, C., & Phillips, M. (1998). The Black White test
score gap. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution
Press.
Kray, L. J., Galinsky, A. D., & Thompson, L. (2002).
Reversing the gender gap in negotiations: An exploration of stereotype regeneration. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 87,
386–410.
Lipsey, M. W., Puzio, K., Yun, C., Hebert, M. A.,
Steinka-Fry, K., Cole, M. W., . . . Busick, M. D.
(2012). Translating the statistical representation of the effects of education interventions into
more readily interpretable forms (NCSER 2013-

3000). Washington, DC: National Center for
Special Education Research, Institute of Education
Sciences, U.S. Department of Education.
Liu, T. J., & Steele, C. M. (1986). Attributional analysis as self-affirmation. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 51, 531–540.
Major, B., Spencer, S., Schmader, T., Wolfe, C., &
Crocker, J. (1998). Coping with negative stereotypes about intellectual performance: The role of
psychological disengagement. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 24, 34–50.
McQueen, A., & Klein, W. M. P. (2006). Experimental
manipulations of self-affirmation: A systematic
review. Self and Identity, 5, 289–354.
Nguyen, H. D., & Ryan, A. M. (2008). Does stereotype threat affect test performance of minorities and
women? A meta-analysis of experimental evidence.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 93, 1314–1334.
Oehlert, G. W. (1992). A note on the delta method.
The American Statistician, 46, 27–29.
Pronin, E., Steele, C. M., & Ross, L. (2004). Identity
bifurcation in response to stereotype threat:
Women and mathematics. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 40, 152–168.
Purdie-Vaughns, V., Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Sumner,
R., Cook, J. C., & Apfel, N. H. (2009, September
23). Improving minority academic performance:
How a values-affirmation intervention works.
Teachers College Record. Retrieved from http://
www.tcrecord.org/content.asp?contentid=15774
Reardon, S. F., & Galindo, C. (2009). The HispanicWhite achievement gap in math and reading in
the elementary grades. American Educational
Research Journal, 46, 853–891.
Sackett, P. R., Hardison, C. M., & Cullen, M. J. (2004).
On interpreting stereotype threat as accounting for
African American-White Differences on cognitive
tests. American Psychologist, 59, 7–13.
Scherbaum, C. A., Blanshetyn, V., Marshall-Wolp, E.,
McCue, E., & Strauss, R. (2011). Examining the
effects of stereotype threat on test-taking behaviors. Social Psychology of Education, 14, 361–375.
Schiller, K. S. (1999). Effects of feeder patterns on
students’ transition to high school. Sociology of
Education, 72, 216–233.
Schmader, T., Johns, M., & Forbes, C. (2008). An integrated process model of stereotype threat effects on
performance. Psychological Review, 115, 336–356.
Sherman, D. K., & Cohen, G. L. (2006). The psychology of self defense: Self affirmation theory.
In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental
social psychology (pp. 183–242). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Sherman, D. K., Hartson, K. A., Binning, K. R.,
Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., Taborsky-Barba,

41

Borman et al.
S., . . . Cohen, G. L. (2013). Deflecting the trajectory and changing the narrative: How self-affirmation affects academic performance and motivation
under identity threat. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 104, 591–618.
Shim, S. S., Ryan, A. M., & Anderson, C. J. (2008).
Achievement goals and achievement during early
adolescence: Examining time-varying predictor
and outcome variables in growth-curve analysis.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 100, 655–671.
Sizer, T. R. (1984). Horace’s compromise: The
dilemma of the American high school. Boston,
MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Smith, J. L. (2004). Understanding the process of stereotype threat: A review of mediational variables
and new performance goal directions. Educational
Psychology Review, 16(3), 177–206.
Steele, C. M. (1988). The psychology of self-affirmation: Sustaining the integrity of the self. In L.
Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social
psychology (Vol. 21, pp. 261–302). New York,
NY: Academic Press.
Steele, C. M. (1997). A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape intellectual identity and performance.
American Psychologist, 52, 613–629.
Steele, C. M., & Aronson, J. (1995). Stereotype threat
and the intellectual test performance of African
Americans. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 69, 797–811.
Steele, C. M., & Aronson, J. A. (2004). Stereotype
threat does not live by Steele and Aronson (1995)
alone. American Psychologist, 59, 47–48.
Steele, C. M., & Liu, T. J. (1983). Dissonance processes as self-affirmation. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 45, 5–19.
Steele, J., James, J. B., & Barnett, R. C. (2002).
Learning in a man’s world: Examining the perceptions of undergraduate women in male-dominated
academic areas. Psychology of Women Quarterly,
26, 46–50.
Stone, J., Lynch, C. I., Sjomeling, M., & Darley, J.
M. (1999). Stereotype threat effects on Black and
White athletic performance. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 77, 1213–1227.
Taylor, V. J., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Stereotype
threat undermines academic learning. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 37, 1055–1067.
Vanneman, A., Hamilton, L., Baldwin Anderson, J.,
& Rahman, T. (2009). Achievement gaps: How
black and white students in public schools perform in mathematics and reading on the National
Assessment of Educational Progress (NCES
2009-455). Washington, DC: National Center
for Education Statistics, Institute of Education
Sciences, U.S. Department of Education.

42

Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2003). Stereotype lift.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 39,
456–467.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2007). A question
of belonging: Race, social fit, and achievement.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92,
82–96.
Walton, G. M., & Spencer, S. J. (2009). Latent ability: Grades and test scores systematically underestimate the intellectual ability of negatively
stereotyped students. Psychological Science, 20,
1132–1139.
What Works Clearinghouse. (February, 2010). WWC
quick review of the article “recursive processes in
self-affirmation: Intervening to close the minority achievement gap.” Retrieved from http://
ies.ed.gov/ncee/wwc/pdf/quick_reviews/selfaf
firm_020910.pdf
Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. (1982). Improving
the academic performance of college freshmen:
Attribution theory revisited. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 42, 367–376.
Wooldridge, J. M. (2010). Econometric analysis of
cross section and panel data. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Socialpsychological interventions in education: They’re
not magic. Review of Educational Research, 81,
267–301.

Authors
Geoffrey D. Borman is a professor of education
policy and director of the Institute of Education
Sciences (IES)–funded Interdisciplinary Training
Program in predoctoral research at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison. His interests include randomized
field trials, educational inequality, and potential policy
responses to address inequalities in educational opportunities and outcomes.
Jeffrey Grigg is a postdoctoral fellow at the Johns
Hopkins University School of Education. His research
interests include student mobility and transitions, student engagement, and intergenerational inequality.
Paul Hanselman is a postdoctoral fellow with the
Irvine Network on Interventions in Development at the
University of California, Irvine. His research addresses
how educational inequalities develop in school and the
related impacts of specific policies and interventions,
with a particular focus on effect heterogeneity.
Manuscript received January 14, 2014
Revision received December 27, 2014
Accepted February 19, 2015

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Original Article

Examining the Effects of Task
Instructions to Induce Implicit
Theories of Intelligence
on a Rational Thinking Task
A Cross-Cultural Study
Ivar Bråten,1 Andreas Lien,1 and John Nietfeld2
1

Department of Education, University of Oslo, Norway

2

College of Education, North Carolina State University, USA

Abstract: In two experiments with Norwegian undergraduates and one experiment with US undergraduates, we examined the potential effects
of brief task instructions aligned with incremental and entity views of intelligence on students’ performance on a rational thinking task. The
research demonstrated that even brief one-shot task instructions that deliver a mindset about intelligence intervention can be powerful
enough to affect students’ performance on such a task. This was only true for Norwegian male students, however. Moreover, it was the task
instruction aligned with an entity theory of intelligence that positively affected Norwegian male students’ performance on the rational thinking
task, with this unanticipated finding speaking to the context- and culture-specificity of implicit theories of intelligence interventions.
Keywords: implicit theories of intelligence, mindsets, rational thinking, cognitive reflection test, task instructions

People’s implicit theories concerning their personal attributes have been linked to motivation, cognition, and
performance (Dweck, Chiu, & Hong, 1995; Dweck & Leggett, 1988; Molden & Dweck, 2006; Yeager & Dweck,
2012). In education, implicit theories of intelligence have
been at the forefront, highlighting that students’ lay
assumptions about the malleability or stability of their intelligence may have short- and long-term academic consequences (Yeager & Dweck, 2012). Thus, many studies
have indicated that a belief in malleable intelligence is
academically beneficial, whereas a belief in fixed intelligence hinders task performance and academic achievement (for review, see Yeager, Paunesku, Walton, &
Dweck, 2013). Some of these studies have involved interventions to induce or promote implicit theories of intelligence that seem “strikingly small” (Walton, 2014, p. 73);
still, such brief interventions have produced practically
significant effects (Yeager et al., 2013).
We continue this line of work by examining whether
minimal interventions in the form of brief task instructions
aligned with malleable and fixed views of intelligence
might have immediate effects on students’ performance
on a rational thinking task. Our research contributes to
Zeitschrift für Psychologie (2017), 225(2), 146–156
DOI: 10.1027/2151-2604/a000291

the literature in several ways. First, few other published
studies have examined the effects of such brief task instructions (see, however, Cimpian, Mu, & Erickson, 2012;
Martocchio, 1994; Wood & Bandura, 1989). Second, no
prior studies examined the effects of such instructions on
a rational thinking task, which seems well suited for this
purpose because it is saturated with processing requirements in terms of motivation, effort, deeper-level strategies,
and self-regulation (Kahneman, 2011; Stanovich, 2016).
Third, our research examines the effects of brief task
instructions to induce implicit theories of intelligence with
both Norwegian and US students, with prior cross-cultural
work on this issue essentially lacking (Yeager et al., 2013).
There is thus a clear need to investigate the extent to which
such interventions have similar effects across cultures. For
example, as recently noted by Braasch, Bråten, Strømsø,
and Anmarkrud (2014), the belief that intelligence is fixed
may be culturally sensitive in the sense that it operates
differently across cultures. More generally, cultures involve
additional belief and value systems that potentially make
constructs within particular theoretical perspectives differentially relevant to task engagement and performance
(McInerney, 2011).
Ó 2017 Hogrefe Publishing

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

I. Bråten et al., Implicit Theories and Rational Thinking

Our research was framed by Dweck’s (1999; Dweck &
Molden, 2005; Molden & Dweck, 2006) meaning system
theory, which describes how implicit, lay theories about
the malleability or stability of human attributes, such as
intelligence or personality, give meaning to situations in
which these attributes are involved. Specifically, in achievement situations, the implicit theories that people endorse
about intelligence are considered to impact their goals,
conceptions of learning, and responses to challenges and
difficulties. Thus, when people tend to believe that intelligence is a malleable quality that can be grown and developed over time – that is, hold an incremental theory of
intelligence – they are also more likely to adopt learning
goals, conceive of effort and strategies as key controllable
factors in learning, approach challenging tasks with motivation and effortful, strategic self-regulatory processing, and
respond to difficulties and setbacks with intact or even
increased motivation to learn, increased effort, and adaptive strategic processing (Dweck & Master, 2008; Yeager
& Dweck, 2012). However, when people tend to believe
that everyone has a fixed, unchangeable amount of intelligence – that is, hold an entity theory of intelligence – they
are also more likely to adopt the goals of looking smart
and avoiding looking dumb, conceive of innate ability as
an uncontrollable key factor in learning, approach challenging tasks with low effort (because high effort means low
intelligence) and shallow processing, and respond to difficulties and setbacks with decreased motivation, even less
effort, and maladaptive strategic processing (Dweck,
1999; Dweck & Master, 2008; Dweck & Molden, 2005;
Yeager & Dweck, 2012).1
Based on this framework, experimental studies have
been conducted in which students have been taught an
incremental theory of intelligence in various ways, for
example, by meeting with mentors encouraging them to
view intelligence as malleable and then exchanging emails
with them throughout the school year (Good, Aronson, &
Inzlicht, 2003), by participating in a series of workshops
persuading them to see intelligence as a malleable quality
rather than a fixed capacity (Aronson, Fried, & Good,
2002; Blackwell, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2007, Study 2),
by reading persuasive scientific articles concerning the
malleability of intelligence (Hong, Chiu, Dweck, Lin, &
Wan, 1999; Nussbaum & Dweck, 2008), and by participating in 20–30-min reading and writing exercises communicating a growth mindset that were delivered over the
Internet directly to students (Yeager & Dweck, 2012;
Yeager et al., 2013). In brief, this research has indicated that
1

147

teaching an incremental or growth mindset about intelligence can promote adaptive motivation and strategic
processing in the face of challenge and difficulty (Blackwell
et al., 2007; Hong et al., 1999; Nussbaum & Dweck, 2008),
as well as academic achievement (Aronson et al., 2002;
Blackwell et al., 2007; Good et al., 2003; Yeager et al.,
2013), with positive effects on achievement particularly
pronounced for groups likely to experience stereotype
threat, such as African-Americans with respect to intellectual abilities in general and female students with respect
to mathematics and numerical problem solving (Yeager &
Walton, 2011).
Of special interest are experimental studies in which
implicit theories of intelligence have been induced or
primed through brief task instructions. Wood and Bandura
(1989) introduced a challenging managerial simulation task
to business graduate students by informing them in writing
that decision-making skills develop through practice and
that the task provided a vehicle for cultivating such skills
(incremental condition) or that decision-making reflects
basic cognitive capacities and that the task provided a
vehicle for gauging such capacities (entity condition).
Results showed that participants in the incremental condition outperformed those in the entity condition on measures of self-regulation (self-efficacy, goal-setting, strategy
use), as well as with respect to decision-making during task
performance. Martocchio (1994) presented adults with
instructions signaling the importance of practice (incremental condition) or the importance of being smart (entity
condition) at three different time points during a 3-hr
course on computer skills. Positive effects of the incremental condition were observed on computer anxiety and computer efficacy beliefs but not on declarative knowledge
acquisition. Cimpian et al. (2012) showed that just informing children before starting on challenging problem-solving
tasks that an entire social group was good at those tasks,
signaling that performance depended on some natural talent rather than controllable factors (such as effort), seemed
to undermine children’s achievement on those tasks relative to controls who were told that a particular individual
was good at the tasks.
In addition, a few unpublished studies speak to the
potential effects of inducing implicit theories of intelligence
through brief task instructions (Aronson, 1997, 1999; cited
in Aronson et al., 2002, p. 116). For example, Aronson
(1999) had college students take a challenging verbal test
and informed them prior to the test that the ability being
tested was highly expandable or fixed. Compared to

Implicit theories about intelligence are also discussed in terms of academic mindsets in Dweck and colleagues’ recent work (e.g., Dweck, 2006;
Yeager & Dweck, 2012; Yeager et al., 2013), with growth and fixed mindsets about intelligence corresponding to implicit incremental and entity
theories of intelligence. Because the use of mindsets instead of implicit theories can be characterized as a terminological rather than a
conceptual renewal, and because mindsets about and implicit theories of intelligence are also used interchangeably in recent work (e.g., Yeager
& Dweck, 2012), we will, similarly, treat the terms as synonymous. For further discussion of this issue, see Lüftenegger & Chen (2017, this issue).

Ó 2017 Hogrefe Publishing

Zeitschrift für Psychologie (2017), 225(2), 146–156

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

148

controls just told that the test measured verbal ability,
participants in the incremental condition reported less
anxiety and solved more items and participants in the entity
condition reported more anxiety and solved fewer items.
Moreover, Yeager et al. (2013) reported on a large-scale
study in which task instructions were modified on a website
presenting students with brief videos about mathematical
concepts and offering them to take a test on those concepts
afterwards. Over a period of several months, a randomly
selected group was shown a growth mindset statement at
the top of the screen (e.g., “Remember, the more you practice the smarter you become”) whenever they did a unit of
fraction problems. Relative to controls, students given such
brief growth messages solved a larger number of fraction
problems correctly during this period, with the effect of
the growth messages maintained when students finished
the section on fractions and moved on to other mathematical concepts without getting any growth mindset messages.
Specifically, compared to students who saw no growth
messages, those who did increased the rate at which they
solved fraction problems correctly by 4.5%, and this gain
was just as strong when students moved on to other
mathematical concepts than fractions and did not receive
growth messages anymore.
An open question concerns to what extent the brief interventions discussed above, at least when delivered only once,
really change global, more stable beliefs or implicit theories
about intelligence. Thus, although interventions consisting
of a series of workshops (Aronson et al., 2002; Blackwell
et al., 2007) have demonstrated such changes on self-report
measures, none of the brief Internet-delivered interventions
discussed by Yeager and Dweck (2012) and Yeager et al.
(2013) or the brief task instruction interventions discussed
in the two preceding paragraphs seem to have measured
implicit theories of intelligence directly. Of note is, however,
that Mueller and Dweck (1998), who gave students only one
sentence of praise for effort (“You must have worked hard at
these problems”) or intelligence (“You must be smart at
these problems”) after task completion, found that students
praised for intelligence endorsed an entity theory of intelligence more than those praised for effort. However, in that
research, implicit theories were assessed on a one-item
self-report measure, which may raise concerns about
reliability, and when an open-ended question was used in
addition (“I think intelligence is . . .”), findings were rather
mixed (Mueller & Dweck, 1998, Studies 4 and 6).
Arguably, it seems unlikely that the, presumably
transient, effects of very brief interventions in the form of
short instructions or messages provided prior to tasks can
be captured on self-report measures such as Dweck’s
(1999) Theories of Intelligence Scale. The reason is that
those measures were not designed to measure whether
brief attempts to induce beliefs in malleable intelligence
Zeitschrift für Psychologie (2017), 225(2), 146–156

I. Bråten et al., Implicit Theories and Rational Thinking

were effective. Accordingly, Yeager et al. (2013) posited
that such self-report measures “are not likely to be sensitive
to short-time changes in student behavior because they
assess global beliefs rather than concrete actions” (p. 26).
Still, given the observed effects of brief interventions on
performance measures, it is reasonable to infer that the
instructions can prime transient shifts in mindsets about
intelligence that have functional value; yet may pass under
the radar of conscious awareness and not leave any traces
on self-report assessment tools.
In this research, we asked whether a brief one-time task
instruction aligned with an incremental theory of intelligence
would improve performance on a rational thinking task relative to a task instruction aligned with an entity theory of intelligence and an instruction not intended to induce any
particular view of intelligence. Based on the meaning system
framework (Dweck, 1999; Dweck & Molden, 2005; Molden
& Dweck, 2006) and prior research using brief task instructions to induce implicit theories of intelligence (Cimpian
et al., 2012; Martocchio, 1994; Wood & Bandura, 1989),
we hypothesized that students given an incremental task
instruction would outperform students given the two other
task instructions. Presumably, even such brief task instructions can be powerful because they may guide students’
causal inferences, such as their self-explanations for why
tasks are challenging and difficult. In turn, such inferences
may determine the type of responses that are perceived to
be possible or effective when faced with challenge and difficulty (Cimpian et al., 2012). Thus, when incremental task
instructions lead students to infer that they can cope with
challenge and difficulty by controllable means, such as
motivation and practice, they may be more likely to invest
the strategic effort required to solve the task than when entity
task instructions lead them to infer that coping is dependent
on uncontrollable factors, such as their innate ability to solve
the task. A rational thinking task may be particularly suitable
for testing the effects of incremental task instructions
because it is considered to require the types of processing
associated with a growth mindset (Dweck & Master, 2008;
Kahneman, 2011; Stanovich, 2016; Yeager & Dweck, 2012).
However, there are still unresolved empirical issues
concerning the sufficient length of a growth mindset intervention and how subtle such an intervention can be and still
have an effect (Yeager et al., 2013). Moreover, it is an
empirical question to what extent the effects of such interventions are dependent on specific contexts or settings or
may be more effective for certain populations (Walton,
2014; Yeager et al., 2013; Yeager & Walton, 2011) and
certain tasks (Cimpian et al., 2012). Finally, cross-cultural
research on the effects of brief interventions to induce
implicit theories of intelligence is essentially lacking
(Walton, 2014; Yeager et al., 2013; Yeager & Walton,
2011). Given such remaining issues, the current research
Ó 2017 Hogrefe Publishing

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

I. Bråten et al., Implicit Theories and Rational Thinking

is pertinent in testing the robustness of the findings
presented in the extant literature. Thus, investigating
whether very brief, one-time task instructions that try to
induce or prime mindsets about intelligence in a rather
subtle way have the expected effects on Norwegian as well
as US undergraduates’ performance on a rational thinking
task substantially extends prior work in this area. With
respect to potential cultural differences, it is conceivable,
for example, that the great emphasis on egalitarian values
within the Norwegian educational system and society at
large (Undheim, Nordvik, Gustafsson, & Undheim, 1995;
Warner-Søderholm, 2012) might make entity instructions
less threatening for Norwegian than for US undergraduates.
Because performance on the rational thinking task
may be associated with achievement level as well as with
more stable implicit theories of intelligence, we also
included those variables to control for any random differences among the conditions. However, given the brevity
and subtlety of our intervention and the presumed lack of
sensitivity of the global self-report measures of implicit
theories of intelligence that we used to more specific
transient changes, we did not expect any experimental
effects on these measures. This is because global self-report
measures targeting relatively stable beliefs about intelligence were constructed for the sake of theory development
and the prediction of diverse outcomes (Yeager et al., 2013),
not for assessing specific effects of brief and subtle interventions. By comparison, behavioral and performance-based
measures, such as the rational thinking task that we used,
seem more likely to capture specific and short-lived effects
of brief one-time task instructions aligned with different
mindsets about intelligence.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, Norwegian undergraduates were tasked to
solve the three numerical problems included in the Cognitive Reflection Test (Frederick, 2005), which is targeting
rational thinking processes and decision-making (Kahneman, 2011; Stanovich, 2016). We varied the instruction
for this test, with one instruction just asking them to solve
the problems and two other instructions highlighting the
importance of learning and motivation or innate ability
for problem solving.

Method
Participants
Participants were 74 undergraduates (Mage = 24.69,
SD = 7.87; 85% female) at a large state university in southeast Norway attending a course in educational science.
Ó 2017 Hogrefe Publishing

149

The majority (81.1%) had Norwegian as their first language.
Participants were randomly assigned to one control condition and two experimental conditions. Chi-square tests
were performed to determine if females and males or
native and nonnative speakers of Norwegian were differently distributed across the three conditions. Neither test
indicated a significant difference, with w2(2) = 1.04,
p = .595, Cramer’s V = .118, for gender, and w2(2) = 0.20,
p = .904, Cramer’s V = .052, for language background.
Design and Conditions
The three conditions to which participants were randomly assigned introduced the Cognitive Reflection Test
(Frederick, 2005) in different ways. After task completion,
participants’ scores were compared across conditions to
examine whether the ways of introducing the test would
differentially affect performance. Additionally, we assessed
participants’ achievement levels and self-reported implicit
theories of intelligence as potential covariates.
Before starting on the numerical problems, participants
in the control condition were presented with a written
instruction just asking them to solve the problems. In addition to the control instruction, the instruction in the learning
and motivation condition highlighted that solving the problems depended on practice and a wish to further develop
and learn. Specifically, the instruction read: “These problems are often used within psychology to assess students’
learning. Performance on these three problems has been
found to depend on practice and a wish to further develop
one’s competence and learn new things.” In contrast, in
addition to the control instruction, participants in the innate
ability condition were presented with an instruction highlighting that solving the problems depended on innate
ability. Specifically, the instruction read: “These problems
are often used within psychology to assess students’
abilities. Performance on these three problems has been
found to depend on innate abilities that change little
throughout life.” In all conditions, the written instructions
were presented at the top of the page containing the
problems, printed in bold but using the same font as the
problems printed below (i.e., Times New Roman 12).
Measures
Achievement Level
We assessed the overall academic achievement level by
obtaining participants’ final high school grade point average
(GPA).
Implicit Theories of Intelligence
A Norwegian version of Dweck’s (1999) Theories of
Intelligence Scale was used (Bråten & Strømsø, 2004).
Four items assessed the degree to which students identified
with an entity theory of intelligence reflecting a belief that
Zeitschrift für Psychologie (2017), 225(2), 146–156

150

I. Bråten et al., Implicit Theories and Rational Thinking

Table 1. Descriptive statistics for all measured variables by condition in Experiment 1
Control (n = 27)

Learning and
motivation (n = 24)

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

Potential range

Actual range

Achievement

4.33

0.59

4.47

0.41

4.40

0.44

1–6

3.00–6.00

Entity theory

2.42

1.10

2.48

1.19

2.24

0.88

1–6

1.00–6.00

Incremental theory

4.16

1.01

4.20

1.01

4.48

0.94

1–6

2.00–6.00

Cognitive reflection

0.81

1.08

0.57

0.90

0.75

1.07

0–3

0–3

Variable

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Innate ability
(n = 23)

intelligence is a fixed trait, a personal attribute or quantity
that cannot be changed. Four additional items assessed
the degree to which students identified with an incremental theory of intelligence reflecting a belief that
intelligence is malleable, that is, that individuals can become
more intelligent through their efforts. Entity and incremental
items were presented in a mixed order and participants rated
agreement with each statement on a 6-point scale (1 = strongly
agree, 6 = strongly disagree). Cronbach’s α reliabilities were
.91 for entity and .85 for incremental items.
Cognitive Reflection Test
The Cognitive Reflection Test (CRT; Frederick, 2005) is
designed to assess problem solving in terms of overriding
a prepotent intuitive response alternative that is incorrect
and engaging in further reflection and rational thinking that
lead to the correct response (Toplak, West, & Stanovich,
2014). The test is composed of three numerical problem
tasks (sample item: “A bat and a ball cost $1.10 in total.
The bat costs a dollar more than the ball. How much does
the ball cost?”). Participants were awarded 1 point for each
correct answer; 58.1% (n = 43) did not solve any of the
problems and 10.8% (n = 8) solved all three items.
Cronbach’s α reliability was .74.
The CRT is considered to require motivation, effort, and
deeper-level self-regulatory processing (Kahneman, 2011;
Kahneman & Frederick, 2007; Toplak, West, & Stanovich,
2011). Scores on the CRT have been shown to correlate
substantially with other measures of skills in rational thinking, and to predict rational thinking performance after
variance accounted for by cognitive ability and diverse
thinking dispositions (e.g., need for cognition) has been
partialled out. Accordingly, the CRT has been classified
as a performance-based rational thought indicator (Toplak
et al., 2014). The CRT figures prominently as a subtest in
Stanovich’s (2016) recent proposal for a comprehensive
assessment of rational thinking.
Procedure
Two authors and three trained research assistants
administered the materials during a regular lecture taking
place right before the final course exam. Presumably
because many had decided to study for the exam instead
Zeitschrift für Psychologie (2017), 225(2), 146–156

of attending the lecture, only 74 students were present.
Participants received three sheets of paper that were
stapled together and were asked to complete the materials
in the same order. On the demographic survey sheet that
appeared first they provided information about gender,
age, language background, and high school GPA. The next
sheet contained the problems of the CRT with the instruction printed at the top of the page. The last sheet contained
the Theories of Intelligence Scale. All participants worked
independently with one sheet at a time and finished within
the allotted 15 min.

Results and Discussion
Descriptive statistics are shown in Table 1. Because oneway analyses of variance (ANOVAs) showed no differences
between the conditions with respect to achievement level,
F(2, 65) = 0.51, p = .604, η2 = .015, entity theory of intelligence, F(2, 70) = 0.34, p = .713, η2 = .009, or incremental
theory of intelligence, F(2, 69) = 0.74, p = .481, η2 = .021,
we did not include these variables as covariates in the
analysis testing for an experimental effect.
We therefore conducted a one-way between-subjects
analysis of variance with condition as the independent
and scores on the CRT as the dependent variable. The
assumption of homogeneity of variances was met. No significant effect of condition was observed, F(2, 71) = 0.39,
p = .679, ηp2 = .011. Rather, the means on the CRT were
rather similar across conditions (see Table 1).
Thus, participants given an instruction highlighting that
problem solving depended on practice and a wish to further
develop and learn did not outperform participants in the
other conditions. This means that our hypothesis was not
confirmed. Given that the CRT seems to require motivation, effort, and deeper-level self-regulatory processing
(Kahneman, 2011; Kahneman & Frederick, 2007; Toplak
et al., 2011), this result is also inconsistent with other work
indicating that even brief task instructions aligned with an
incremental view of intelligence may promote adaptive
motivation and self-regulatory processing, as well as task
performance (Cimpian et al., 2012; Martocchio, 1994;
Wood & Bandura, 1989; Yeager et al., 2013).
Ó 2017 Hogrefe Publishing

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

I. Bråten et al., Implicit Theories and Rational Thinking

The lack of support for our hypothesis could have been
because the instructions were not salient enough, with
several students expressing during debriefing that they
had not paid attention to the instruction. Because data
collection took place at the end of the course, another
possibility is that participants could have learned about
related theory and research that may have influenced their
interpretations of the task instructions. Thus, although the
textbooks that were used did not present Dweck’s work
on implicit theories of intelligence directly, achievement
goal theory highlighting related differences between learning and performance goals was covered in the course.
Yet another issue is that many students seemed to prioritize exam preparation instead of attending the lecture. As a
result, the sample was less representative of Norwegian
education undergraduates than desirable, for example, in
terms of age, and it consisted of so few male students that
we could not test whether any effect of condition might
depend on gender. For example, because female students
have been found to perform poorer than males on the
CRT (Frederick, 2005; Toplak et al., 2014), and because
females may be more likely to experience a stereotype
threat that may create interfering stress and distraction
on such numerical tasks (Yeager & Walton, 2011), it is
conceivable that any benefits of the incremental task
instruction on the CRT would occur primarily for female
students. According to Yeager et al. (2013), it is pertinent
to examine whether the effects of growth mindset
interventions may vary with gender, with an interaction
between condition and gender on the CRT also made
probable by the Good et al. (2003) study, which found that
the positive effects of teaching an incremental theory of
intelligence on mathematics performance were particularly
pronounced for female students. We conducted Experiment
2 to address this issue as well as the potential limitations
noted above.

Experiment 2
The aim of Experiment 2 was to further examine potential
effects of the three task instructions on Norwegian undergraduates’ performance on the CRT. However, we made
the instructions much more salient in Experiment 2, printing them on separate sheets of paper with much larger font
size and an explicit demand that participants read the
instructions carefully before proceeding to the numerical
problems on the next sheet. In addition, Experiment 2
was conducted at the beginning of the educational science
course before participants could have learned about related
theory and research, and it used a much larger sample that
was more representative of Norwegian educational science

Ó 2017 Hogrefe Publishing

151

undergraduates and also allowed us to test whether any
experimental effects might depend on gender.

Method
Participants
Participants were 230 Norwegian undergraduates
(Mage = 21.69, SD = 3.54; 80% female) at the same university attending the same educational science course the
semester after we conducted Experiment 1 (none had
participated in Experiment 1). The majority (72.6%) had
Norwegian as their first language. In terms of gender,
age, and language background, the sample was representative of Norwegian educational science undergraduates.
Chi-square tests were performed to determine if females
and males or native and nonnative speakers of Norwegian
were differently distributed across the three conditions to
which participants were randomly assigned. Neither test
indicated a significant difference, with w2(2) = 0.64,
p = .728, Cramer’s V = .053, for gender, and w2(2) = 0.46,
p = .796, Cramer’s V = .045, for language background.
Design and Conditions
With one exception, the design and conditions were the
same as in Experiment 1. Thus, although the written
instructions were the same as in Experiment 1 for the
control, learning and motivation, and innate ability conditions, these instructions were printed in large quadratic
frames placed in the center of separate sheets of paper
preceding the problems, using much larger font size
(Times New Roman 22) and with “Note! Read this before
you turn the page!” printed in bold capital letters above
the frames.
Measures
The same measures of achievement level, implicit theories
of intelligence, and rational thinking were used in
Experiment 2. For implicit theories of intelligence,
Cronbach’s α reliabilities were .84 for entity and .85 for
incremental items. On the CRT, 55.2% (n = 127) did not
solve any of the problems, and 10.0% (n = 23) solved all
three items. Cronbach’s α reliability was .66.
Procedure
Two authors and four trained research assistants administered the materials during a regular lecture at the beginning
of the course. Participants were told that they must read all
written instructions very carefully. They then received four
sheets of paper that were stapled together and were asked
to complete the materials in the same order. The order of
the materials was: the demographic survey sheet, the task
instruction, the CRT, and the Theories of Intelligence Scale.

Zeitschrift für Psychologie (2017), 225(2), 146–156

152

I. Bråten et al., Implicit Theories and Rational Thinking

Table 2. Descriptive statistics for all measured variables by condition in Experiment 2
Control (n = 77)

Learning and
motivation (n = 76)

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

Potential range

Actual range

Achievement

4.32

0.46

4.29

0.50

4.30

0.47

1–6

2.50–5.60

Entity theory

2.31

0.88

2.65

1.01

2.45

0.99

1–6

1.00–6.00

Incremental theory

4.28

0.90

4.03

1.07

4.25

1.13

1–6

1.75–6.00

Cognitive reflection

0.71

0.98

0.88

1.06

0.63

0.92

0–3

0–3

Variable

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Innate ability
(n = 77)

All participants worked independently with one sheet at a
time and finished within the allotted 15 min.

2.5

2

Results and Discussion
Descriptive statistics are shown in Table 2. Because oneway analyses of variance showed no differences between
the conditions with respect to achievement level,
F(2, 220) = 0.66, p = .936, η2 = .001, entity theory of intelligence, F(2, 222) = 2.39, p = .094, η2 = .021, or incremental
theory of intelligence, F(2, 221) = 1.33, p = .267, η2 = .012,
these variables were not included as covariates in the analysis testing for experimental effects.
We conducted a two-way between-subjects analysis of
variance with condition and gender as the independent
variables and scores on the CRT as the dependent variable.
The assumption of homogeneity of variances was met.
There were two significant main effects, with F(2, 224) =
4.03, p = .019, ηp2 = .035 for condition, and F(1, 224) =
16.18, p = .000, ηp2 = .067 for gender. These main effects
were modified by a significant interaction between condition and gender, with F(2, 224) = 3.83, p = .023,
ηp2 = .033. Tests of the simple effects of condition within
each level of gender showed that there were significant
condition mean differences on the CRT for males,
F(2, 224) = 4.92, p = .008, ηp2 = .042, but not for females,
F(2, 224) = 0.003, p = .997, ηp2 = .000. Follow-up pairwise
comparisons for male participants showed that males
scored significantly higher on the CRT in the innate ability
than in the control (p = .035, Cohen’s d = 0.443) and the
learning and motivation condition (p = .003, Cohen’s
d = 0.633), while there was no difference between males’
performance in the control and the learning and motivation
condition (p = .315, Cohen’s d = 0.211). Figure 1 indicates
that there were also differences between males and females
within conditions. Additional tests of simple effects for gender for each level of condition showed that males scored
significantly higher than females on the CRT in the innate
ability, F(1, 224) = 21.57, p = .000, ηp2 = .088, and the
control condition, F(1, 224) = 3.81, p = .05, ηp2 = .017, but
not in the learning and motivation condition, F(1, 224) =
0.33, p = .565, ηp2 = .001. The ηp2 values indicate that the
Zeitschrift für Psychologie (2017), 225(2), 146–156

1.5
Females
1

Males

0.5

0
Control

Innate ability

Learning and motivation

Type of instruction given

Figure 1. Scores on the cognitive reflection test for each condition by
gender in Experiment 2.

difference between males and females was much greater in
the innate ability than in the control condition.
Despite previous findings that female students typically
have more difficulties than males on the CRT (Frederick,
2005; Toplak et al., 2014), and the possibility that females
may experience stereotype threat on such numerical tasks
(Yeager & Walton, 2011), an instruction designed to induce
a growth mindset did not improve female students’ performance. However, surprising in relation to theory and prior
research, male students profited greatly from a task instruction intended to induce a fixed mindset about intelligence.
Thus, the innate ability instruction apparently made the
males more likely to reflect on their answers and less
inclined to go with their intuitive, irrational responses.
We return to this issue in the General Discussion. Next,
we describe an experiment with US undergraduates
conducted to probe the cross-cultural generalizability of
our findings.

Experiment 3
Experiment 3 intended to investigate whether US undergraduates also would profit from a fixed mindset instruction
Ó 2017 Hogrefe Publishing

I. Bråten et al., Implicit Theories and Rational Thinking

153

Table 3. Descriptive statistics for all measured variables by condition in Experiment 3
Control (n = 74)

Learning and
motivation (n = 75)

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

Potential range

Achievement

3.68

0.25

3.60

0.38

3.74

0.24

0–4

2.30–4.00

Entity theory

2.55

0.92

2.48

0.93

2.85

0.95

1–6

1.00–5.25

Incremental theory

4.13

1.08

4.10

1.08

3.94

0.97

1–6

1.25–6.00

Cognitive reflection

1.58

1.19

1.51

1.11

1.64

1.12

0–3

0–3

Variable

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Innate ability
(n = 76)

when performing the CRT. One possibility is that the
findings of Experiment 2 are peculiar to the Norwegian
cultural and educational context and therefore not likely
to be replicated with US participants. However, it is also
conceivable that there is something peculiar about the
CRT that makes male undergraduates excel in the context
of a fixed mindset instruction, independent of the larger
cultural and instructional context.

Method
Participants
Participants were 225 undergraduates (Mage = 20.09,
SD = 3.52; 56% female) at a large state university in southeast USA attending courses in applied child development
(n = 25), educational psychology (n = 94), and introduction
to computing environments (n = 106). The majority
(88.0%) had English as their first language. Chi-square tests
were performed to determine if females and males or
native and nonnative speakers of English were differently
distributed across the three conditions to which participants
were randomly assigned. Neither test indicated a statistically significant difference, with w2(2) = 1.45, p = .484, Cramer’s V = .081, for gender, and w2(2) = 0.20, p = .907,
Cramer’s V = .029, for language background.
Design and Conditions, Measures, and Procedure
The design and conditions were the same as in Experiment
2 except that all materials were in English. Also, the same
measures of achievement level, implicit theories of intelligence, and rational thinking were used. For implicit
theories of intelligence, Cronbach’s α reliabilities were .88
for entity and .92 for incremental items. On the CRT,
24.9% (n = 56) did not solve any of the problems, and
27.6% (n = 62) solved all three items. Cronbach’s α reliability was .67. One author and two trained research assistants
administered the materials to students attending the
applied child psychology and educational psychology
courses during regular lectures, while students attending
the introduction to computing environments course were
administered the materials in sessions outside regular
lectures. Participants were given the same oral instructions
and received the same materials in the same order as in
Ó 2017 Hogrefe Publishing

Actual range

Experiment 2. All participants worked independently with
one sheet at a time and finished within the allotted 15 min.

Results and Discussion
Descriptive statistics are shown in Table 3. One-way
analyses of variance showed no differences between conditions with respect to achievement level, F(2, 110) = 1.87,
p = .160, η2 = .034, or incremental theory of intelligence,
F(2, 222) = 0.71, p = .491, η2= .001. However, there were
significant differences on entity theory of intelligence,
F(2, 222) = 3.26, p = .040, η2 = .029, with learning and
motivation condition students scoring higher (M = 2.85,
SD = 0.95) than those in the innate ability condition
(M = 2.48, SD = 0.93), p = .049, d = 0.39.
We therefore conducted a two-way between-subjects
analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) with scores on entity
theory of intelligence as the covariate, condition and gender
as the independent variables, and scores on the CRT as the
dependent variable. The assumption of homogeneity of
variances was met. There was only a significant main effect
of gender, F(1, 217) = 11.07, p = .001, ηp2 = .049, with males
(M = 1.85, SD = 1.09) scoring higher on the CRT than
females (M = 1.35, SD = 1.13). Thus, neither the main effect
of condition, F(2, 217) = 0.64, p = .529, ηp2 = .006, nor the
interaction between condition and gender, F(2, 217) = 1.01,
p = .367, ηp2 = .009, was significant.
Experiment 3 did not replicate the finding that a brief
task instruction aligned with an entity theory of intelligence
can positively affect male students’ performance on the
CRT. Rather, it suggests that the findings of Experiment 2
may be due to the particular cultural and educational
context of the Norwegian participants. Of note is also that
neither the female nor the male US undergraduates
benefited from an instruction aligned with an incremental
theory of intelligence.

General Discussion
Based on theoretical assumptions (Dweck, 1999; Dweck &
Molden, 2005; Molden & Dweck, 2006) and prior research
Zeitschrift für Psychologie (2017), 225(2), 146–156

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

154

showing effects of brief task instructions (Cimpian et al.,
2012; Martocchio, 1994; Wood & Bandura, 1989; Yeager
et al., 2013), as well as our use of a rational thinking task
presumably requiring motivation, effort, and deeper-level
self-regulatory processing (Kahneman, 2011; Kahneman &
Frederick, 2007; Toplak et al., 2011, 2014), we expected
that a task instruction aligned with a growth mindset about
intelligence would have a positive effect on performance.
Specifically, we assumed that informing students that
task performance depended on controllable factors (i.e.,
motivation and practice) would raise their expectations
and have them invest more strategic effort than informing
them that task performance depended on an uncontrollable
factor (i.e., innate, fixed ability), with the latter implying
that persistent effort would indicate lack of ability and also
prove futile.
At the same time, however, we were concerned that our
intervention might not have any effect because the growth
mindset would have to be based on very little information
(Cimpian et al., 2012), because the intervention did not
attempt to explicitly persuade participants into believing
that intelligence is malleable but instead used a rather subtle delivery mechanism (Yeager et al., 2013), and because
our measure of rational thinking might not be sensitive
enough (Toplak et al., 2014). Unfortunately, the results of
our first experiment with Norwegian undergraduates (i.e.,
Experiment 1) did not allow us to draw any conclusions
regarding these concerns. However, our second experiment
with Norwegian undergraduates (i.e., Experiment 2)
indicated that even brief one-shot task instructions that
deliver a mindset about intelligence intervention in a rather
subtle way may be powerful enough to affect students’
performance on a rational thinking task. This was true only
for male students, however, with the performance of
females left unaffected by the task instruction intervention. Finally, the results of Experiment 3, including US
undergraduates, while also showing no effect for
females, suggested that the effect observed for males in
Experiment 2 was due to the particular context of the
Norwegian participants.
There are several possible reasons why females did not
respond to the intervention in any of the experiments. For
example, across cultures, the female participants might
have been so disinterested and disengaged in the task that
no brief instruction could turn them on and have them
invest more mental effort and reflective thinking in task
completion. Thus, the brief task instruction may not have
been sufficient to influence performance in the face of
females’ generally very low subjective task values
associated with the numerical problems included in
the CRT (cf. Eccles, 2005). Another, related, possibility is
that they experienced so strong stereotype threat when
they started on the numerical problems that this negative
Zeitschrift für Psychologie (2017), 225(2), 146–156

I. Bråten et al., Implicit Theories and Rational Thinking

experience overshadowed whatever positive, short-lived
effect the incremental task instruction might have had.
Thus, the stereotype that females are less skilled at solving
such problems may have undermined performance to the
extent that no brief task instruction could counteract it
(Yeager & Walton, 2011). Finally, the female participants
might have interpreted the incremental instructions in an
unintended way, for example, by perceiving the task
requirements in terms of practice and motivation as
uncontrollable factors that they did not possess or were able
to mobilize in relation to this type of task. That is, because
females may have felt they lacked both prior practice and
motivation for such tasks, the information that they
required practice and motivation may have made females
consider task solution uncontrollable. Of note is that all
these possible explanations for a lack of effect presuppose
that our female participants had the necessary computational skills to solve the task. This is because the three
numerical problems are easy in the sense that their solution
is easily understood by most students at this level when
explained, yet reaching the correct answer requires mental
effort and deeper processing to suppress an erroneous
answer that springs impulsively to mind (Frederick, 2005).
The most intriguing finding of this research is that the
task instruction aligned with an entity theory of intelligence
positively affected the Norwegian male participants’ performance on the CRT. Whereas this instruction was not
expected to facilitate their performance because it could
make them go for a quick, effortless solution to prove their
ability and avoid looking dumb, with this resulting in
intuitive, yet erroneous answers, this was obviously not
what happened. To the contrary, the innate ability instruction seemed to make the Norwegian male students engage
in more constructive task-oriented processing to demonstrate competence without worrying that a more careful
reflection on the solution could be threatening to the self,
with this resulting in a much higher overall score on the
CRT. Presumably, the Norwegian male undergraduates
given the entity instruction did not perceive that performing
the CRT in this setting, without any real, public consequences for them, posed any risk of revealing that they
were not endowed with sufficient intelligence. And, given
that no such effect of an entity instruction was observed
for US male students in Experiment 3, this lack of perceived
threat in an educational setting may, at least in part, be
culturally determined.
More specifically, in the context of the egalitarian
Norwegian culture, with relatively little emphasis on competition and individual distinction within the educational system (Undheim et al., 1995), the entity instruction may have
been perceived as less threatening than in a less egalitarian,
more competitive context, such as the US educational system (for a similar interpretation, see Braasch et al., 2014).
Ó 2017 Hogrefe Publishing

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

I. Bråten et al., Implicit Theories and Rational Thinking

Rather, in the Norwegian context, this instruction may simply have intrigued the male students and fueled their task
engagement over and above what occurred with the two
other instructions, having them strive harder and staying
more focused to show that they could skillfully handle the
challenge represented by the numerical problems. In terms
of theory, this suggests that broader cultural values may
provide frames of reference that influence how students
perceive constructs embedded within particular theoretical
perspectives (McInerney, 2011). As discussed above, there
are several possible reasons why female participants’ effort
was not similarly ignited by the entity instruction in this
study.
To better understand our findings, it would be interesting
to do cognitive interviewing (Willis, 2005) to assess how
Norwegian and US male and female participants interpret
the different task instructions that we used, as well as to
collect cognitive process data, such as think-alouds
(Ericsson & Simon, 1993), to explore task processing under
different experimental conditions across cultures. Yet
another avenue for further research is to combine quantitative performance data with qualitative interview data from
purposefully selected participants in a mixed methods study
(Creswell & Plano Clark, 2007) to gain a more complete
understanding of students’ meaning systems and how they
play out in the current task context. Finally, more sensitive,
preferably online, measures of students’ mindsets about
intelligence should be used in future research to try to
capture the specific, transient changes in mindsets that
may (or may not) be induced by brief task instructions.
Taken together, our findings speak to the contextspecificity of implicit theories of intelligence interventions
(Walton, 2014; Yeager & Walton, 2011), as well as to the
possibility that mindset messages may yield different
effects for specific populations, such as gender groups
(Yeager et al., 2013). It is, of course, possible that the
beneficial effect of the entity instruction that we observed
may be restricted to the male Norwegian education undergraduates who participated in our research, the particular
setting in which the data were collected, and the outcome
measure that was used. It is therefore pertinent to further
research the effects of the same or similar brief task instructions with other student populations and outcome measures
across cultural contexts. As it cannot be entirely ruled out
that a somewhat different data collection procedure in
Experiment 3 (with some participants being administered
the materials outside regular lectures) may have influenced
our results, future research should also ensure consistency
across contexts in this regard.
Despite the need to further research students’ interpretations of different instructions and their processing of
tasks under different experimental conditions, as well as
potential context- and culture-specificity of mindset
Ó 2017 Hogrefe Publishing

155

interventions, our findings are not trivial. Given that many
tasks that students encounter may be introduced in ways
that prime one implicit theory of intelligence or the other,
understanding which task instruction is better for whom
seems like an important future research agenda. For example, certain task instructions that according to theory and
prior research developed within a particular cultural context
seem to impair students’ ability to handle challenging tasks
may in some specific contexts actually be helpful for some
specific student populations in other cultures.

References
Aronson, J., Fried, C. B., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the effects of
stereotype threat on African-American college students by
shaping their theories of intelligence. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 38, 113–125. doi: 10.1006/jesp.2001.1491
Blackwell, L. S., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Implicit
theories of intelligence predict achievement across an
adolescent transition: A longitudinal study and an intervention.
Child Development, 78, 246–263. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8624.
2007.00995.x
Braasch, J. L. G., Bråten, I., Strømsø, H. I., & Anmarkrud, Ø.
(2014). Incremental theories of intelligence predict multiple
document comprehension. Learning and Individual Differences,
31, 11–20. doi: 10.1016/j.lindif.2013.12.012
Bråten, I., & Strømsø, H. I. (2004). Epistemological beliefs and
implicit theories of intelligence as predictors of achievement
goals. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 29, 371–388.
doi: 10.1016/j.cedpsych.2003.10.001
Cimpian, A., Mu, Y., & Erickson, L. C. (2012). Who is good at this
game? Linking an activity to a social category undermines
children’s achievement. Psychological Science, 23, 533–541.
doi: 10.1177/0956797611429803
Creswell, J. W., & Plano Clark, V. L. (2007). Designing and
conducting mixed methods research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Dweck, C. S. (1999). Self-theories: Their role in motivation,
personality, and development. Philadelphia, PA: Psychology
Press.
Dweck, C. S. (2006). Mindset: The new psychology of success. New
York, NY: Random House.
Dweck, C. S., Chiu, C., & Hong, Y. (1995). Implicit theories and
their role in judgments and reactions: A world from two
perspectives. Psychological Inquiry, 6, 267–285. doi: 10.1207/
s15327965pli0604_1
Dweck, C. S., & Leggett, E. L. (1988). A social-cognitive approach
to motivation and personality. Psychological Review, 95,
256–273. doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.95.2.256
Dweck, C. S., & Master, A. (2008). Self-theories motivate selfregulated learning. In D. H. Schunk & B. J. Zimmerman (Eds.),
Motivation and self-regulated learning: Theory, research, and
applications (pp. 31–51). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Dweck, C. S., & Molden, D. C. (2005). Self-theories: Their impact
on competence motivation and acquisition. In A. J. Elliot & C. S.
Dweck (Eds.), Handbook of competence and motivation (pp.
122–140). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Eccles, J. S. (2005). Subjective task value and the Eccles et al.
model of achievement-related choices. In A. J. Elliot &
C. S. Dweck (Eds.), Handbook of competence and motivation
(pp. 105–121). New York, NY: Guilford press.
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1993). Protocol analysis: Verbal
reports as data. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Zeitschrift für Psychologie (2017), 225(2), 146–156

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

156

Frederick, S. (2005). Cognitive reflection and decision making. The
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19, 25–42. doi: 10.1257/
089533005775196732
Good, C., Aronson, J., & Inzlicht, M. (2003). Improving adolescents’
standardized test performance: An intervention to reduce the
effects of stereotype threat. Journal of Applied Developmental
Psychology, 24, 645–662. doi: 10.1016/j.appdev.2003.09.002
Hong, Y. Y., Chiu, C. Y., Dweck, C. S., Lin, D., & Wan, W. (1999).
Implicit theories, attributions, and coping: A meaning system
approach. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77,
588–599. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.77.3.588
Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, fast and slow. New York, NY:
Farrar, Straus, & Giroux.
Kahneman, D., & Frederick, S. (2007). Frames and brains:
Elicitation and control of response tendencies. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 11, 45–46. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2006.11.007
Lüftenegger, M., & Chen, J. A. (2017). Conceptual issues and
assessment of implicit theories. Zeitschrift für Psychologie,
225, 99–106. doi: 10.1027/2151-2604/a000286
Martocchio, J. J. (1994). Effects of conceptions of ability on
anxiety, self-efficacy, and learning in training. The Journal of
Applied Psychology, 79, 819–825. doi: 10.1037/0021-9010.
79.6.819
McInerney, D. M. (2011). Culture and self-regulation in educational contexts. In B. J. Zimmerman & D. H. Schunk (Eds.),
Handbook of self-regulation of learning and performance (pp.
442–464). New York, NY: Routledge.
Molden, D. C., & Dweck, C. S. (2006). Finding “meaning” in
psychology: A lay theories approach to self-regulation, social
perception, and social development. The American Psychologist, 61, 192–203. doi: 10.1037/0003-066X.61.3.192
Mueller, C. M., & Dweck, C. S. (1998). Praise for intelligence can
undermine children’s motivation and performance. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 33–52. doi: 10.1037/
0022-3514.75.1.33
Nussbaum, A. D., & Dweck, C. S. (2008). Defensiveness versus
remediation: Self-theories and modes of self-esteem maintenance. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 34, 599–612.
doi: 10.1177/0146167207312960
Stanovich, K. E. (2016). The comprehensive assessment of
rational thinking. Educational Psychologist, 51, 23–34.
doi: 10.1080/00461520.2015.1125787
Toplak, M. E., West, R. F., & Stanovich, K. E. (2011). The Cognitive
reflection test as a predictor of performance on heuristics
and biases tasks. Memory & Cognition, 39, 1275–1289.
doi: 10.3758/s13421-011-0104-1
Toplak, M. E., West, R. F., & Stanovich, K. E. (2014). Assessing
miserly information processing: An expansion of the cognitive
reflection test. Thinking & Reasoning, 20, 147–168.
doi: 10.1080/13546783.2013.844729

Zeitschrift für Psychologie (2017), 225(2), 146–156

I. Bråten et al., Implicit Theories and Rational Thinking

Undheim, J. O., Nordvik, H., Gustafsson, K., & Undheim, A. M.
(1995). Academic achievement of high-ability students in
egalitarian education. Scandinavian Journal of Educational
Research, 39, 157–167. doi: 10.1080/0031383950390206
Walton, G. M. (2014). The new science of wise psychological
interventions. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 23,
73–82. doi: 10.1177/0963721413512856
Warner-Søderholm, G. (2012). Culture matters: Norwegian cultural
identity within a Scandinavian context. SAGE Open, 2, 1–12.
doi: 10.1177/2158244012471350
Willis, G. B. (2005). Cognitive interviewing: A tool for improving
questionnaire design. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Wood, R., & Bandura, A. (1989). Impact of conceptions of ability on
self-regulatory mechanisms and complex decision-making.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 56, 407–415.
doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.56.3.407
Yeager, D. S., & Dweck, C. S. (2012). Mindsets that promote
resilience: When students believe that personal characteristics
can be developed. Educational Psychologist, 47, 302–314.
doi: 10.1080/00461520.2012.722805
Yeager, D. S., Paunesku, D., Walton, G. M., & Dweck, C. S. (2013).
How can we instill productive mindsets at scale? A review of the
evidence and an initial R&D agenda. A White Paper prepared for
the White House meeting on Excellence in Education: The
Importance of Academic Mindsets. Retrieved from https://labs.
la.utexas.edu/adrg/files/2013/12/Yeager-et-al-RD-agenda-610-131.pdf
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological interventions in education: They’re not magic. Review of Educational
Research, 81, 267–301. doi: 10.3102/0034654311405999

Received July 5, 2016
Revision received November 10, 2016
Accepted November 20, 2016
Published online July 28, 2017

Ivar Bråten
Department of Education
University of Oslo
P.O. Box 1092
Blindern
0317 Oslo
Norway
ivar.braten@ped.uio.no

Ó 2017 Hogrefe Publishing

Motivating voter turnout by invoking the self
Christopher J. Bryana,1, Gregory M. Waltona, Todd Rogersb, and Carol S. Dwecka
a

Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305; and bJohn F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138

Edited by Brian Skyrms, University of California, Irvine, CA, and approved June 22, 2011 (received for review March 1, 2011)

psychology

| intervention | ﬁeld experiment | language and thought

W

hy do people vote? Mass voting is essential to a wellfunctioning democracy, yet theorists have often pointed
out that, from the standpoint of individual self-interest, voting is
irrational (1–3). Just the probability of being killed in a car accident on the way to the polls far outweighs the likelihood that
the average American’s vote will inﬂuence the outcome of
most elections.
Previous research has shown that people have a strong desire
to see themselves as competent, morally appropriate, and worthy
of social approval (4–11). They also see voting as appropriate
and socially desirable (12, 13). Thus, being the kind of person
who votes may be seen as a way to build and maintain a positive
image of the self—to claim a desired and socially valued identity.
Accordingly, people may be more likely to vote when voting is
represented as an expression of self—as symbolic of a person’s
fundamental character—rather than as simply a behavior.
We tested this hypothesis in three randomized experiments. In
the ﬁrst, we investigated the reported interest in registering to
vote of people who were eligible but had not yet registered to
vote; in the second and third, we examined voter turnout as
assessed by ofﬁcial state records. In each experiment, participants completed one of two versions of a brief survey. In one
version, a short series of questions referred to voting using a selfrelevant noun (e.g., “How important is it to you to be a voter in
the upcoming election?”); in the other, questions that were
otherwise identical referred to voting using a verb (e.g., “How
important is it to you to vote in the upcoming election?”). This
manipulation draws on past research investigating the effects of
linguistic cues on social- and self-perception (14, 15). Noun
wording leads people to see attributes as more representative of
a person’s essential qualities. In one study, children thought
that a child described as “a carrot eater” liked carrots more than
a child who “eats carrots whenever she can” (14). In another
study, adults rated their own preferences as stronger and more
stable when induced to describe them with nouns (e.g., “I am
a Shakespeare-reader”) than with the related verbs (e.g., “I read
Shakespeare a lot”) (15).
In this past research, people were labeled in the here and now,
but in the present research, people were offered the opportunity
to claim an identity in the future. That is, using noun wording to
refer to a prospective behavior offers the possibility of claiming
or reclaiming a personal attribute by engaging in that behavior.
So we hypothesized that using a predicate noun (e.g., “to be
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1103343108

a voter”) as opposed to a verb (e.g., “to vote”) to refer to participation in an upcoming election would create a greater interest
in and likelihood of performing that behavior—registering to
vote and voting. If this hypothesis were conﬁrmed, it would be
evidence for the more general theoretical idea that simply
framing a future behavior as a way to claim a desired identity can
motivate that behavior.
Experiment 1
Participants in experiment 1 were people who were eligible to
vote in the 2008 presidential election in California but were not
registered to vote at the time of participation. After completing
the noun- or the verb-based survey, they were informed that, to
vote in the upcoming election, they would need to register and
were asked to indicate their level of interest in doing so.
As predicted, participants in the noun condition expressed
signiﬁcantly greater interest in registering to vote than participants in the verb condition. Because the distribution of reported
interest in registering to vote was negatively skewed (Z = −2.78,
P = 0.005), the variable was reﬂected and then square-root
transformed, which reduced skew to nonsigniﬁcance (Z = −1.76,
P = 0.078). A t test on the transformed variable yielded a significant condition difference [t(32) = 2.10, P = 0.044]. Analysis
of the untransformed variable also yields a signiﬁcant result
[(Mnoun = 4.44; Mverb = 3.39; 1 = “not at all interested,” 5 =
“extremely interested”), t(32) = 2.23, P = 0.033].
A signiﬁcant Levene’s test indicated that there was less variance in the noun condition than in the verb condition [F(1,32) =
6.02, P = 0.020]. This appeared to be the case because of
a ceiling effect in the noun condition, where 62.5% of participants were at the highest point on the scale (compared with
38.9% in the verb condition). Adjusting for this, the signiﬁcance
level of the condition effect strengthened slightly [t(29.40) =
2.15, P = 0.040]. In addition, a separate χ2 analysis, which does
not rely on the assumption of the equality of variance, found that
more participants indicated that they were “very” or “extremely”
interested in registering to vote (as opposed to “not at all,” “a
little,” or “somewhat” interested in registering to vote) in the
noun condition (87.5%) than in the verb condition (55.6%)
[χ 2(1, n = 34) = 4.16, P = 0.041].
Experiment 2
Experiment 2 tested the effect of the noun-vs.-verb manipulation
on voter turnout. Participants were registered to vote in California and had not already voted (e.g., by mail) in the 2008
presidential election. They were recruited for an “election survey” and completed the noun- or verb-based manipulation survey
the day before or the morning of the election. After completing
the manipulation survey, participants were thanked; this marked
the end of their active participation in the study.

Author contributions: C.J.B. and G.M.W. designed research; C.J.B. and T.R. performed
research; T.R. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; C.J.B. and G.M.W. analyzed data;
and C.J.B., G.M.W., and C.S.D. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
1

To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: cbryan@stanford.edu.

This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1103343108/-/DCSupplemental.

PNAS | August 2, 2011 | vol. 108 | no. 31 | 12653–12656

PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES

Three randomized experiments found that subtle linguistic cues
have the power to increase voting and related behavior. The
phrasing of survey items was varied to frame voting either as the
enactment of a personal identity (e.g., “being a voter”) or as simply a behavior (e.g., “voting”). As predicted, the personal-identity
phrasing signiﬁcantly increased interest in registering to vote (experiment 1) and, in two statewide elections in the United States,
voter turnout as assessed by ofﬁcial state records (experiments
2 and 3). These results provide evidence that people are continually managing their self-concepts, seeking to assume or afﬁrm
valued personal identities. The results further demonstrate how
this process can be channeled to motivate important socially
relevant behavior.

After the election, we used ofﬁcial records from the State of
California (13, 16, 17, 18) to determine whether each participant
had or had not voted in the election. We also used US Census
data (19) to estimate the premanipulation probability that each
participant would vote on the basis of their age, gender, and level
of education. This variable, which was a signiﬁcant predictor of
turnout [Δχ2(1, n = 88) = 8.23, P = 0.004] and did not differ
between conditions [t(86) = 0.59, not signiﬁcant (ns)], served as
a covariate. Logistic regression tested the effect of the noun-vs.verb manipulation on voting. As predicted, participants in the
noun condition voted at a signiﬁcantly higher rate (95.5%) than
participants in the verb condition (81.8%) [Δχ2(1, n = 88) =
5.55, P = 0.018] (Fig. 1A).*
In addition to the condition difference, the overall turnout rate
in our sample merits consideration. The turnout rate in the verb
condition of 81.8%, although not meaningfully higher than the
statewide turnout rate of 79.4% among registered voters in this
election, was higher than would be expected given the demographic makeup of the sample. Using US Census data on
turnout rates in this election by age, gender, and level of education
(19), the expected premanipulation turnout rate of participants in
our sample was 63.9% (95% conﬁdence interval: 61.9–66.0%).
We suggest two possible reasons why the turnout rate, even in
the verb condition, was higher than this expected baseline rate.
First, people who choose to participate in a survey related to an
upcoming election—or even those who have the time and inclination to participate in any survey shortly before an election—
may be more likely to vote than the general population. Second,
some research suggests that merely responding to a pre-election
survey can increase voter turnout (16, 17, 20, 21; but see ref. 18).
These ﬁndings highlight the rigorous nature of the control condition in the present research, which used questions that were
nearly identical to those in the treatment condition. In any case,
the critical ﬁnding from experiment 2 is that a subtle change in
the phrasing of survey items, which cast voting as a reﬂection
of the kind of person one is rather than as merely a behavior,
signiﬁcantly increased voter turnout.
Experiment 3
Is the inﬂuence of noun-vs.-verb wording speciﬁc to the type of
people who took part in experiments 1 and 2, or would it occur
more broadly? The participants in experiments 1 and 2 were
relatively young (Mage = 22.8 y, range = 18–70). A manipulation
like the present one, which relies on the malleability of the selfconcept, might be more effective at inﬂuencing young adults,
whose self-concepts may be less well deﬁned than those of older
people (22). Experiment 3 tested the effect of the noun-vs.-verb
manipulation in a larger and more diverse sample (Mage = 54.4 y,
range = 21–83). Participants were registered to vote in New
Jersey and had not already voted (e.g., by mail) in the 2009 New
Jersey gubernatorial election. They were recruited from a randomly sampled and nationally representative panel administered
by a professional survey research ﬁrm. The participant sample
did not differ from the representative statewide sample with
respect to most demographic characteristics, and those differences that did exist were small (see Methods for details). Unlike
experiment 2, participants were not aware, at the time they
agreed to participate, that the experiment was related to the
election. They completed the noun- or verb-based manipulation
survey the day before or the morning of the election.

*The design and sample size of experiment 2 do not allow reliable tests of moderation by
demographic variables. The dependent variable was dichotomous, and one of the possible outcomes (not voting) was relatively rare. As a result, breaking the sample down by
more than one dimension to test for moderation creates the possibility of empty cells.
Moderation tests were therefore conducted with the larger sample in experiment 3.

12654 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1103343108

Fig. 1. Percentage voter turnout in the noun and verb conditions in
experiments 2 and 3. (A) Experiment 2: California registered voters, 2008 US
presidential election. (B) Experiment 3: New Jersey registered voters, 2009
New Jersey gubernatorial election.

As in experiment 2, after the election we used ofﬁcial state
records to determine whether or not each participant had voted.
Census data needed to estimate participants’ premanipulation
probability of voting were not available for this off-year election.
However, even without this covariate, the noun-vs.-verb manipulation again had a signiﬁcant effect on voter turnout [Δχ2(1,
n = 214) = 4.91, P = 0.027]. Participants in the noun condition
voted at a higher rate (89.9%) than participants in the verb
condition (79.0%; Fig. 1B). This effect was not signiﬁcantly
moderated by age, gender, ethnicity (white vs. non-white), level
of education, household income, political orientation, or interest
in politics and public affairs (all Ps > 0.22).†
As was the case in experiment 2, the turnout rate in both conditions in experiment 3 was higher than the expected baseline—in
the New Jersey election, the statewide turnout rate among registered voters was 47%. As we noted above, this may be because
people who have the time and inclination to complete any survey
shortly before an election might be more likely to vote than the
general population and/or because merely completing a preelection survey can increase turnout (16, 17, 20, 21). Indeed,
future research could explore the relative importance of these
explanations by including a baseline condition in which participants do not complete any survey. Again, however, the critical
ﬁnding is that a small change in wording that framed voting as
an expression of self rather than as simply a behavior increased
voter turnout—in this experiment by 10.9 percentage points.
Discussion
This research shows that people’s desire to shape their own
identities can be harnessed to motivate behavior. That is, using
noun-based wording to frame socially valued future behavior
allows individuals, by performing the behavior, to assume the
identity of a worthy person.
Although the wording manipulation in these studies was subtle
and rigorously controlled, the effects observed in experiments 2
and 3 are among the largest experimental effects ever observed
on objectively measured voter turnout. In discussing the magnitude of this effect, we focus on experiment 3, which used a larger
and more demographically diverse sample, and not on experiment 2 where the effect was, if anything, larger but the sample
†

To maximize statistical power for these analyses, we pooled data from experiments 2
and 3 when the same demographic variables were assessed in both studies (i.e., age,
gender, and ethnicity). Results of these tests did not differ when we used only the
sample in experiment 3.

Bryan et al.

Methods
Experiment 1. Participants and design. Participants were recruited via advertisements on a social networking website and invited to complete a brief
survey about the 2008 presidential election in exchange for an entry in
a drawing to win $100. A screening questionnaire identiﬁed participants
who met a priori speciﬁed eligibility criteria: participants who (i) were eligible to vote in this election, (ii) had not already registered to vote, and (iii)
were native English speakers. Thirty-four participants met these criteria (21
women and 13 men; Mage = 19.9 y; SD = 1.79). Eligible participants were
randomly assigned to either the noun condition or the verb condition.
Manipulation. The manipulation was embedded in a 10-item survey. The
content of each question was identical in the two conditions; the only difference was the speciﬁc wording used to refer to the act of voting—verbbased wording in one condition and noun-based wording in the other [e.g.,
“How important is it to you to (vote/be a voter) in the upcoming election?”,
“How clear are your thoughts and feelings about (voting/being a voter) in
the upcoming election?”; see SI Methods for the full list of items]. Participants responded to each question on a ﬁve-point scale with verbal labels
appropriate to the content of the question.
Participants’ responses to a composite of all 10 manipulation items did
not differ between conditions [t(32) = 0.92, ns] nor did their responses to 9
of the 10 individual items (all Ps > 0.20; see SI Methods for details).
Finally, participants were informed that, to vote in the upcoming election,
they would need to register to vote. The key outcome was participants’ selfreported interest in registering to vote. They were asked: “Right now, how
interested are you in registering to vote in the upcoming election?” (1 =
“not at all interested,” 5 = “extremely interested”). There were no outliers
on the dependent variable; all scores fell within 1.96 SDs of the mean.

Bryan et al.

Experiment 2. Participants and design. Participants were recruited on the afternoon of November 3 or early on the morning of November 4, 2008 (i.e.,
Election Day) through advertisements on the same social networking website
used in experiment 1 and through an advertisement distributed to members
of a university-administered online participant pool. Advertisements described the experiment as an “election survey.” A screening questionnaire
identiﬁed participants who met eligibility criteria similar to those used in
experiment 1: participants who (i) were registered to vote in California, (ii)
had not already voted (e.g., by mail) in the election, and (iii) were native
English speakers. A total of 133 participants met these criteria and were
randomly assigned to either the noun or the verb condition. Demographic
data provided by participants (name, county of residence, and date of birth)
were compared with California voter turnout records to determine whether
each participant had voted or not (see Procedure for additional details).
State records had matches for 92 of these participants. Additional analyses
tested for outliers (23) on the basis of participants’ condition assignment and
their premanipulation likelihood of voting (Premanipulation likelihood of
voting). Four participants were excluded because their residual scores based
on these data were outliers (i.e., standardized residuals >2.58, the level associated with a two-tailed α of 0.01). The remaining 88 participants (56
women and 32 men; Mage = 23.7 y; SD = 5.9) make up the ﬁnal sample.
Procedure. The procedure was identical to that of experiment 1 except that (i)
the manipulation questions referred to “tomorrow’s election” instead of
“the upcoming election” and (ii) instead of being asked about their interest
in registering to vote, participants were asked to provide the demographic
data needed to ﬁnd their listings in state voting records. After the election,
a copy of California’s voter history ﬁle was obtained from the ofﬁce of the
California Secretary of State. The data included the ﬁrst name, last name,
county of residence, and voting history of all of California’s registered voters. A research assistant, who was blind to condition, searched for each of
the 133 eligible participants in the state data. A listing in the state ﬁle was
considered to match a study participant if it had the same ﬁrst name, last
name, date of birth, and county of residence provided by the participant.
Cases in which a participant’s last name, date of birth, and county of residence matched but the ﬁrst name a participant provided was similar but not
identical to the ﬁrst name listed in the state ﬁle (e.g., “Eddie” or “E.” instead
of “Edward”) were considered to be matches. The match rate did not differ
between conditions [χ2 (1, n = 92) = 0.59, ns]. Participants’ responses to
a composite of all 10 manipulation items did not differ between conditions
[t(86) = 0.64, ns] nor did responses to any individual item (all Ps > 0.10).
Premanipulation likelihood of voting. After the election, we obtained data from
the US Census on self-reported voter turnout among registered voters in the
2008 presidential election by age, gender, and level of education. We used
these data to determine the baseline (or premanipulation) expected likelihood that each participant would vote. As noted, expected turnout rates did
not differ between conditions [t(86) = 0.59, ns], and this variable was used as
a covariate in the main analysis. It was a signiﬁcant predictor of turnout
[Δχ2(1, n = 88) = 8.23, P = 0.004].
Experiment 3. Participants and design. Participants were members of a randomly sampled and nationally representative panel administered by the
professional survey research ﬁrm Knowledge Networks. Only panel members
who lived in New Jersey and were registered to vote in that state at the time
of the study were invited to participate. All participants took part in the study
on the afternoon of November 2 or early the morning of November 3, 2009
(i.e., Election Day). In contrast to experiments 1 and 2, the invitation to panel
members to participate in experiment 3 included no mention of the upcoming election. This ruled out any bias that might arise from limiting the
sample to people who were unusually interested in the election. A total of
350 panel members completed the study. A screening questionnaire identiﬁed participants who met the same criteria used in experiment 2. A total of
293 participants met those criteria. Of these, 214 (129 women, 85 men) were
matched in ofﬁcial New Jersey voter turnout records (see Procedure for
additional details). Whereas the people sampled in experiments 1 and 2
were on average relatively young (Mage = 22.6 y, SD = 5.4, range = 18–70),
the people sampled in experiment 3 were on average middle-aged (Mage =
54.4 y, SD = 13.9, range = 21–83). The demographic makeup of the sample
was similar to that of the rest of Knowledge Networks’ randomly sampled
and representative statewide panel. That is, the sample did not differ from
the panel with respect to most demographic variables (i.e., gender, marital
status, employment status, household size, housing type, home ownership
status, or internet access; all Ps > 0.17). The sample did, however, differ
somewhat in terms of its racial/ethnic breakdown (sample: 86.4% white,
7.9% black, 1.4% non-Hispanic other, 3.3% Hispanic, and 0.9% multiracial;
rest of the statewide panel: 77.1% white, 7.4% black, 6.4% non-Hispanic

PNAS | August 2, 2011 | vol. 108 | no. 31 | 12655

PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES

was smaller and less diverse. Experiment 3 found an increase in
turnout in the noun condition of 10.9 percentage points, a 13.7%
boost in turnout over the verb condition. It is fascinating to
consider whether this effect would remain as strong if delivered
at the population level. Although there might be important factors that could decrease or increase the strength of the effect in
different populations, a large-scale intervention that produced
an increase in voter turnout even close to the size observed here
would have major effects on democratic participation, and possibly on election outcomes. For example, if the losing side in every
congressional and gubernatorial race in 2010 had increased turnout among its supporters by just 5%, 23 House races, 3 Senate
races, and 8 governor’s races would have turned out differently.
Because voting is a private action, people who vote may receive little or no recognition from others for doing so. This may
help to explain why many people do not vote. The present research suggests a way to ameliorate this problem. By highlighting
the implications of voting for one’s self-concept, the use of noun
wording may offer an alternative incentive to vote: positive selfregard. Indeed, many behaviors that policy-makers seek to encourage are similarly private, including environmental behaviors
such as energy conservation and recycling. Such behaviors may
be ideal candidates for research extending the present results.
Although participants responded strongly to this subtle language manipulation, they did not do so in a rote or mindless
fashion. The effect we observed depends on the fact that voting is
something most people feel that they should do. The noun
wording, we contend, simply ascribed symbolic signiﬁcance to
this behavior, suggesting it had implications for the kind of
person one is. Therefore, we do not believe that a manipulation
of this sort would induce people to engage in behavior in which
they feel they should not engage. In fact, we would expect the
opposite effect for behavior people see as undesirable (e.g.,
“cheating” vs. “being a cheater”; “quitting” vs. “being a quitter”).
More broadly, these experiments provide evidence that the selfconcept is a continual work-in-progress. In part because of this,
the self can play a key role in shaping socially relevant behavior.
This desire to see oneself as good, competent, and worthy of
approval can be channeled, even through subtle means, to motivate behavior with important social and political consequences.

other, 7.1% Hispanic, and 2.0% multiracial) [χ2(4, n = 809) = 14.29, P = 0.006].
The panel was also marginally more educated [Msample = 11.37, Mpanel =
11.14, where 11 = an associate degree and 12 = a bachelor’s degree; t(807) =
1.84, P = 0.066], had a marginally higher average income [Msample = 14.36,
Mpanel = 13.85, where 13 = $60,000–$74,999, 14 = $75,000–$84,999, and
15 = $85,000–$99,999; t(807) = 1.74, P = 0.082], and was marginally older
[Msample = 54.42 y, Mpanel = 52.27 y; t(807) = 1.86, P = 0.063] than the rest of
the panel. The effect of condition, however, did not interact with any of
these demographic variables.
Because US Census Bureau data needed to estimate the premanipulation
probability that each participant would vote were not available in this offyear election, residual scores for individual participants were based solely on
their condition assignments. As a consequence, an outlier analysis similar to
the one conducted in experiment 2 identiﬁed every nonvoting participant in
the noun condition as an outlier. Excluding these participants would inappropriately inﬂate the size of the observed effect; thus all participants were
retained in the analysis.
Demographic measures. To test for moderation by demographic variables, we
obtained measures of participants’ age, ethnicity, gender, level of education, household income, political orientation, and interest in politics and
public affairs. Political orientation was measured with a composite of participants’ self-reported party preference and liberal–conservative ideological orientation, both on seven-point scales (1 = strong Republican/
extremely conservative; 7 = strong Democrat/extremely liberal). The two
items were correlated (r = 0.54, P < 0.0005). Interest in politics and public
affairs was measured on a four-point scale (1 = “not at all interested”; 4 =
“very interested”).
Procedure. The procedure was the same as the one in experiment 2 with three
exceptions. First, the manipulation items referred to “tomorrow’s election”
only until 11:59 PM on November 2; from midnight on November 3 until the
close of recruitment, the items referred to “today’s election.” Second, minor

changes were made to the wording of several manipulation items (SI
Methods). Third, participants were not asked to provide demographic data
at the time they completed the manipulation survey because Knowledge
Networks already had the information needed to match panel members to
state voting records. After the election, a copy of New Jersey’s voter history
ﬁle was obtained from the ofﬁce of the New Jersey Secretary of State. As in
California, the data included the ﬁrst name, last name, county of residence,
and voting history of all of New Jersey’s registered voters. Because Knowledge Networks is obligated to protect the identities of its panel members,
we provided the state ﬁle to them and a member of their staff, who was
blind to both the study’s hypotheses and to the participants’ condition assignment, searched for each of the 293 eligible participants in the state ﬁle.
As in experiment 2, a listing in the state ﬁle was considered to match a study
participant if it had the same ﬁrst name, last name, date of birth, and county
of residence provided by the participant. Also as in experiment 2, cases in
which a participant’s last name, date of birth, and county of residence
matched but the ﬁrst name that the participant provided was similar but not
identical to the ﬁrst name listed in the state ﬁle were considered to be
matches. The match rate again did not differ between conditions [χ 2(1, n =
293) = 0.19, ns].
Responses to a composite of all 10 manipulation items did not differ
between conditions [t(212) = 0.76, ns] nor did responses to 8 of the 10 individual items (all Ps > 0.10; see SI Methods for details).

1. Downs A (1957) An Economic Theory of Democracy (Harper & Row, New York).
2. Rogers T, Fox CR, Gerber AS The Behavioral Foundations of Policy, ed Shaﬁr E (Russell
Sage, New York).
3. Tullock G (1968) Towards a Mathematics of Politics (University of Michigan Press, Ann
Arbor).
4. Dunning D (2002) Motivated Social Perception: The Ontario Symposium, eds Fein S,
Spencer S (Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ).
5. Cohen GL, Garcia J, Apfel N, Master A (2006) Reducing the racial achievement gap: A
social-psychological intervention. Science 313:1307–1310.
6. Higgins ET (1987) Self-discrepancy: A theory relating self and affect. Psychol Rev 94:
319–340.
7. Markus H, Nurius P (1986) Possible selves. Am Psychol 41:954–969.
8. Monin B, Miller DT (2001) Moral credentials and the expression of prejudice. J Pers Soc
Psychol 81:33–43.
9. Oyserman D (2009) Identity-based motivation: Implications for action-readiness,
procedural-readiness and consumer behavior. J Consum Psychol 19:250–260.
10. Sherman DK, Cohen GL (2006) The psychology of self-defense: Self-afﬁrmation theory. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, ed Zanna MP (Academic Press, San
Diego), pp 183–242.
11. Steele CM (1988) The psychology of self-afﬁrmation: Sustaining the integrity of the
self. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, ed Zanna MP (Academic Press, New
York), pp 261–302.
12. Blais A (2000) To Vote or Not to Vote: The Merits and Limits of Rational Choice Theory
(University of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh).

13. Gerber AS, Green DP, Larimer CW (2008) Social pressure and voter turnout: Evidence
from a large-scale ﬁeld experiment. Am Polit Sci Rev 102:33–48.
14. Gelman SA, Heyman GD (1999) Carrot-eaters and creature-believers: The effects
of lexicalization on children’s inferences about social categories. Psychol Sci 10:
489–493.
15. Walton GM, Banaji MR (2004) Being what you say: The effect of essentialist linguistic
labels on preferences. Soc Cogn 22:193–213.
16. Greenwald AG, Carnot CG, Beach R, Young B (1987) Increasing voting behavior by
asking people if they expect to vote. J Appl Psychol 2:315–318.
17. Nickerson DW, Rogers T (2010) Do you have a voting plan?: Implementation intentions, voter turnout, and organic plan making. Psychol Sci 21:194–199.
18. Smith JK, Gerber AS, Orlich A (2003) Self-prophecy effects and voter turnout: An
experimental replication. Polit Psychol 24:593–604.
19. US Census Bureau (2008) Voting and registration in the election of November 2008,
Current Population Survey, (available at http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/socdemo/
voting/publications/p20/2008/tables.html).
20. Granberg D, Holmberg S (1992) The Hawthorne effect in election studies: The impact
of survey participation on voting. Br J Polit Sci 22:240–247.
21. Yalch RF (1976) Pre-election interview effects on voter turnout. Public Opin Q 40:
331–336.
22. Sears DO (1986) College sophomores in the laboratory: Inﬂuences of a narrow
data base on social psychology’s view of human nature. J Pers Soc Psychol 51:
515–530.
23. Tabachnick BG, Fidell LS (2007) Using Multivariate Statistics (Pearson, Boston).

12656 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1103343108

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank L. Boroditsky, H. Clark, A. Gerber, D. Green,
J. Krosnick, H. Markus, B. Monin, L. Ross, D. Yeager, and two anonymous
reviewers for input and L. Handal-Kalifa, D. Kermer, D. Miller, J. Ternovski,
and K. Wang for assistance. Funding for experiment 3 was provided by Grant
0818839 (to C.J.B., G.M.W., and T.R.) awarded by Time-Sharing Experiments
in the Social Sciences, National Science Foundation.

Bryan et al.

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

ANNUAL
REVIEWS

31 October 2013

13:5

Further

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

Click here for quick links to
Annual Reviews content online,
including:
• Other articles in this volume
• Top cited articles
• Top downloaded articles
• Our comprehensive search

The Psychology of Change:
Self-Afﬁrmation and Social
Psychological Intervention
Geoffrey L. Cohen1 and David K. Sherman2
1

Graduate School of Education, Department of Psychology, and (by courtesy) Graduate School
of Business, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305; email: glc@stanford.edu

2

Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, University of California, Santa Barbara,
California 93106; email: david.sherman@psych.ucsb.edu

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014. 65:333–71

Keywords

The Annual Review of Psychology is online at
http://psych.annualreviews.org

health, intervention, relationships, self-afﬁrmation, stereotype threat

This article’s doi:
10.1146/annurev-psych-010213-115137

Abstract

c 2014 by Annual Reviews.
Copyright 
All rights reserved

Watch a video lecture online

People have a basic need to maintain the integrity of the self, a global sense
of personal adequacy. Events that threaten self-integrity arouse stress and
self-protective defenses that can hamper performance and growth. However,
an intervention known as self-afﬁrmation can curb these negative outcomes.
Self-afﬁrmation interventions typically have people write about core personal values. The interventions bring about a more expansive view of the
self and its resources, weakening the implications of a threat for personal integrity. Timely afﬁrmations have been shown to improve education, health,
and relationship outcomes, with beneﬁts that sometimes persist for months
and years. Like other interventions and experiences, self-afﬁrmations can
have lasting beneﬁts when they touch off a cycle of adaptive potential, a
positive feedback loop between the self-system and the social system that
propagates adaptive outcomes over time. The present review highlights both
connections with other disciplines and lessons for a social psychological understanding of intervention and change.

333

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Contents

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Pervasive Psychology of Self-Defense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Self-Afﬁrmation Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
What Are Self-Afﬁrmations? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Understanding the Effects of Self-Afﬁrmation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cycles of Adaptive Potential: How Social Psychological Processes Such
as Self-Afﬁrmation Propagate Through Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
AFFIRMATION INTERVENTIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Health . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Intergroup Conﬂict and Interpersonal Relationships . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IMPLICATIONS, QUALIFICATIONS, AND QUESTIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lessons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Moderators and Boundary Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Connections With Other Research Areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
CONCLUSION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

334
335
336
337
339
340
342
342
347
352
354
354
358
360
362

INTRODUCTION

Self-integrity: the
perception of oneself
as morally and
adaptively adequate

334

In the 1940s, despite war shortages in ﬁner meats and produce, many American homemakers
refused to purchase inferior but more abundant foods even when pressured with patriotic appeals.
But when Kurt Lewin (1997/1948) brought homemakers together in small groups to talk about
obstacles to serving the recommended foods—thus creating a new group norm around the desired
behavior—their purchase patterns changed. In the U.S. Civil Rights era, prejudice was widespread,
and opposition to equal rights proved tenacious in many quarters. But when Milton Rokeach (1973)
threatened Americans’ conception of themselves as compassionate—with a brief insinuation that
they valued their own freedom more than the freedom of others—their support for civil rights
strengthened in a lasting way.
Today many social problems afﬂict society—inequalities in education, health, and economic
outcomes; political polarization; and intergroup conﬂict. But these social problems share a psychological commonality with the historical cases described above. The commonality is the notion
that barriers and catalysts to change can be identiﬁed and that social psychological interventions
can bring about long-term improvement.
This review has two purposes. First it looks at threats to, and afﬁrmations of, the self as barriers
and catalysts to change. Threats and afﬁrmations arise from the self ’s fundamental motive: to be
morally and adaptively adequate, good and efﬁcacious. How people maintain the integrity of the
self, especially when it comes under threat, forms the focus of self-afﬁrmation theory (Steele 1988;
see also Aronson et al. 1999, Sherman & Cohen 2006). We provide an overview of self-afﬁrmation
theory and review research in three areas where the theory has yielded impactful self-afﬁrmation
interventions: education, health, and interpersonal and intergroup relationships.
A second purpose of this review is to address questions related to the psychology of change
raised by self-afﬁrmation research. Increasingly, social psychological research demonstrates the
potential for brief interventions to have lasting benefits (Cohen & Garcia 2008, Garcia & Cohen,
2012, Walton & Cohen 2011, Wilson 2011, Yeager & Walton 2011). These interventions help
people to adapt to long-term challenges. For example, a series of 10-minute self-affirming
Cohen

·

Sherman

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

exercises, which prompt people to write about core personal values, raised minority student
achievement in public schools, with effects that persisted for years (Cohen et al. 2006, 2009;
Sherman et al. 2013). How is this possible? How and when do social psychological interventions
such as self-afﬁrmation spark lasting positive change? An impactful intervention acts like almost
any formative experience. It works not in isolation but rather like a turning point in a story, an
event that sets in motion accumulating consequences (Elder 1998). Timely interventions can
channel people into what we refer to as a cycle of adaptive potential. This is a series of
reciprocally reinforcing interactions between the self-system and a social system, such as a school,
that propagates adaptive outcomes over time (cf. Elder 1974, Wilson 2011). The self acts; the
social system reacts; and the cycle repeats in a feedback loop (Caspi & Moffitt 1995). We discuss
lessons for intervention and for a social psychological understanding of change.

The Pervasive Psychology of Self-Defense

Cycle of adaptive
potential: a positive
feedback loop between
the self-system and the
social system that
propagates adaptive
outcomes over time
Psychological threat:
the perception of
environmental
challenge to one’s
self-integrity

Key to understanding the effects of afﬁrmation is psychological threat, the perception of an environmental challenge to the adequacy of the self. Whether people see their environment as
threatening or safe marks a dichotomy that runs through research not only on self-afﬁrmation but
also on attachment, stress, and coping (see Worthman et al. 2010). Psychological threat represents
an inner alarm that arouses vigilance and the motive to reafﬁrm the self (Steele 1988). Although
psychological threat can sometimes trigger positive change (Rokeach 1973, Stone et al. 1994), it
can also impede adaptive coping. People may focus on the short-term goal of self-defense, often
at the cost of long-term learning. Like a distracting alarm, psychological threat can also consume
mental resources that could otherwise be marshaled for better performance and problem solving.
Thus, psychological threat can raise a barrier to adaptive change.
Major life events, such as losing one’s job or receiving a medical diagnosis, can obviously give
rise to psychological threat. But the self-integrity motive is so strong that mundane events can
threaten the self as well and instigate defensive responses to protect it (Sherman & Cohen 2006).
When people make trivial choices, such as between two similarly appealing music albums, they tend
to defensively rationalize their selection (Steele et al. 1993). When partisans encounter evidence
that challenges their political views, they tend to reﬂexively refute it (Cohen et al. 2007). When
sports fans see their favorite team suffer a defeat, they experience it partly as their own and increase
their consumption of unhealthy comfort foods (Cornil & Chandon 2013; see also Sherman & Kim
2005). When people confront petty insults, they sometimes turn to violence and even homicide to
reassert an image of personal strength and honor in the minds of others (Cohen et al. 1996; see also
Baumeister et al. 1996). Although the objective stakes of many of these situations seem low, the
subjective stakes for the self can be high. That everyday events can bring about feelings of threat
and trigger extreme responses attests to the power and pervasiveness of the self-integrity motive.
Greenwald (1980) likened the self to a totalitarian regime that suppresses and distorts information to project an image of itself as good, powerful, and stable. However, unlike a totalitarian
regime, people can be self-critical. They sometimes denigrate themselves more than outside observers do and believe that others judge them more harshly than they actually do (e.g., Savitsky
et al. 2001). People can feel guilty for events they have little control over (Doosje et al. 2006). Although they can spin idealized fantasies of their abilities, they can also give accurate self-appraisals
at moments of truth (Armor & Sackett 2006). Storyteller rather than totalitarian regime seems
an apt metaphor for the self. The self has a powerful need to see itself as having integrity, but
it must do so within the constraints of reality (Adler 2012, Kunda 1990, Pennebaker & Chung
2011, Wilson 2011). The goal is not to appraise every threat in a self-ﬂattering way but rather to
maintain an overarching narrative of the self ’s adequacy. A healthy narrative gives people enough
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

335

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

optimism to “stay in the game” in the face of the daily onslaught of threats, slights, challenges,
aggravations, and setbacks.
Successful social psychological interventions help individuals access this narrative process
through two avenues (see also Wilson 2011). One avenue is to encourage people to appraise
a difﬁcult circumstance in a hopeful and nondefensive way that, in turn, sustains the perceived
adequacy of the self. Helping trauma victims make sense of their experiences promotes health
(Pennebaker & Chung 2011); helping students to interpret mistakes as an opportunity for
growth rather than evidence of incompetence improves their academic performance (Dweck 2008,
Walton & Cohen 2011, Wilson & Linville 1982, Yeager et al. 2014); and helping parents to see
their infants’ cries in a more sympathetic and less defensive light reduces abuse (Bugental et al.
2002). A second avenue for intervention focuses on changing not people’s appraisal of a speciﬁc
challenge but their appraisal of themselves. The present review addresses this second avenue and
the theory that it proceeds from, self-afﬁrmation theory.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

Self-Affirmation Theory
The postulate that people are motivated to maintain self-integrity rests at the center of selfafﬁrmation theory (Steele 1988; see also Sherman & Cohen 2006). Self-integrity is a sense of
global efﬁcacy, an image of oneself as able to control important adaptive and moral outcomes in
one’s life. Threats to this image evoke psychological threat (see Steele 1988, Sherman & Cohen
2006). Three points about this motive merit emphasis.
First, the motive is to maintain a global narrative of oneself as a moral and adaptive actor (“I am
a good person”), not a speciﬁc self-concept (e.g., “I am a good student”) (cf. Aronson 1969). With
time, people may commit themselves to a particular self-deﬁnition (e.g., parent, teacher). However,
the self can draw on a variety of roles and identities to maintain its perceived integrity. Such
ﬂexibility can be adaptive. People can ﬂexibly deﬁne success in a way that puts their idiosyncratic
strengths in a positive light, establishing a reliable but realistic basis for self-integrity (Dunning
2005). The ﬂexibility of the self-system can also promote adaptation, especially in dynamic social
systems. Lower animals have relatively simple goals that they try to meet. A mouse unable to
forage for food would be a failure. But humans have a unique ability to adapt to a vast range of
circumstances. For children and adults, the ﬂexibility of the self-system may foster adaptation to
the wide array of challenges they face across cultures and over the lifespan (Worthman et al. 2010).
Second, the motive for self-integrity is not to be superior or excellent, but to be “good enough,”
as the term “adequate” implies—to be competent enough in a constellation of domains to feel that
one is a good person, moral and adaptive. An implication for intervention is that, to afﬁrm the
self, an event need foster only a sense of adequacy in a personally valued domain, not a perception
of overall excellence.
Third, the motive for self-integrity is not to esteem or praise oneself but rather to act in
ways worthy of esteem or praise. Having people praise themselves (e.g., “I am lovable”) tends
to backﬁre among those who seem to need the praise most, low-self-esteem individuals, in part
because these “afﬁrmations” lack credibility (Wood et al. 2009). People want not simply praise but
to be praiseworthy, not simply admiration but to be admirable, according to the values of their
group or culture (Smith 1759/2011; see also Leary 2005). An implication for intervention is that
rewards and praise are secondary to opportunities for people to manifest their integrity through
meaningful acts, thoughts, and feelings.
Although the ﬂexibility of the self-system can be adaptive, it can also prove costly when people
cannot ﬁnd constructive avenues to achieve self-integrity. The self may then seek out alternative
domains in which to invest itself. A disadvantaged student may want to succeed in school but,
336

Cohen

·

Sherman

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

distrustful that society will reward his or her efforts, ﬁnd other niches to exert control and gain
respect; this is one explanation for the draw of gang membership and violent behavior (Matsuda
et al. 2013). However, the ﬂexibility of the self-system can also be harnessed for positive ends.
People can import into a threatened domain the sense of personal integrity that they feel in another.
Thus they can sustain a global sense of adequacy while adaptively confronting a speciﬁc threat.
For a wide range of challenges, this is what self-afﬁrmation interventions enable people to do.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

What Are Self-Affirmations?
A self-afﬁrmation is an act that demonstrates one’s adequacy (Steele 1988; see also G.L. Cohen &
J. Garcia, manuscript in preparation). Although big accomplishments such as winning a sports contest can obviously afﬁrm one’s sense of adequacy, small acts can do so as well. Examples of events
that although small from the perspective of an outsider can be subjectively “big” (Yeager & Walton
2011) include a stressed employee who cares for his children or merely reﬂects on the personal importance of his family; an ill resident of a nursing home who enacts a small measure of control over
daily visitations (Schulz 1976); and a lonely patient who, receiving a personal note from her doctor,
realizes that others care for her (Carter et al. 2013). Even small inputs into the self-system can have
large effects, because a healthy self-system is motivated to maintain integrity and generate afﬁrming meanings (Steele 1988; see also Sherman & Cohen 2006). Many events in a given day are seen
as relevant to the self in some way and this enables people to continually refresh their sense of adequacy. But there are times when sources of self-afﬁrmation may be few, or threats to the self may run
especially high. Times of high need can be identiﬁed, making possible well-timed self-afﬁrmation
interventions. Stressful transitions and choice points, for example, mark such timely moments.
Self-afﬁrmations given at these times can help people navigate difficulties and set them on a better
path. Their conﬁdence in their ability to overcome future difficulties may grow and thus buttress
coping and resilience for the next adversity, in a self-reinforcing narrative (Cohen et al. 2009).

Self-affirmation: an
act that manifests one’s
adequacy and thus
afﬁrms one’s sense of
global self-integrity
Values affirmation
intervention: an
activity that provides
the opportunity to
assert the importance
of core values, often
through writing
exercises

Self-afﬁrmations bring about a more expansive view of the self and its resources. They can
encompass many everyday activities. Spending time with friends, participating in a volunteer
group, or attending religious services anchor a sense of adequacy in a higher purpose. Activities
that can seem like distractions can also function as self-afﬁrmations. Shopping for status goods
(Sivanathan & Pettit 2010) or updating one’s Facebook page (Toma & Hancock 2013) afford
culturally prescribed ways to enact competence and adequacy. For people who value science,
simply donning a white lab coat can be self-afﬁrming (see Steele 1988).
Although many inductions of self-afﬁrmation exist, the most studied experimental manipulation
has people write about core personal values (McQueen & Klein 2006; cf. Napper et al. 2009).
Personal values are the internalized standards used to evaluate the self (Rokeach 1973). People
ﬁrst review a list of values and then choose one or a few values most important to them. The list
typically excludes values relevant to a domain of threat in order to broaden people’s focus beyond it.
To buffer people against threatening health information, health and rationality might be excluded
from the list. Among patients with chronic illness, values related to family might be avoided
insofar as they remind patients of the burden they worry they place on relatives (see Ogedegbe
et al. 2012). People then write a brief essay about why the selected value or values are important
to them and a time when they were important. Thus, a key aspect of the afﬁrmation intervention
is that its content is self-generated and tailored to tap into each person’s particular valued identity
(Sherman 2013). Often people write about their relationships with friends and family, but they
also frequently write about religion, humor, and kindness (Reed & Aspinwall 1998).
Table 1 provides excerpts from afﬁrmation essays written by adolescents and adults in research studies. As the examples illustrate, completing a values afﬁrmation is not typically an act
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

337

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Table 1 Excerpts from affirmation essays
Middle school participants
Dance is important to me, because it is my passion, my life. My second home is the dance studio, my second family is my dance
team. My family and friends are so important to me, even more than dance. My family, I can’t live without them. My friends, I am
my real self around them (and my sister). I can be silly, goofy, and weird and they don’t care, they accept me for who I am. . . . And
for being creative, I LOVE being creative in dance. When I’m dancing or making a dance it takes me to another place.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

Being creative is important to me all the time, because I can use things different kinds of ways and look at things differently. For
example, if I can combine the color of the clothes I’ll wear or make different kinds of use for the things I have. . . . Being with my
family is what makes me happy because only your family understands you better than anyone and you can be yourself no matter
what and they would never criticize you. With my friends it’s not always the same we can ﬁght sometimes or cry but it’s what
friendships are for so you should enjoy the moment and be happy with them.
If I didn’t have my family, I [wouldn’t] be raised right and if I didn’t have my friends I would be a boring person. If I didn’t have my
religion, I wouldn’t know what to do, I would be lost.
Music is important to me because it gives me a way to express myself when I’m mad, happy, or sad. I also think family and friends
are important because everything, like money, fame, happiness mean nothing if you don’t have loved ones to share it with. My
friends and family are important because I love them to death and they make me who I am. I also think religious values are very
important because if you don’t know what you believe in anybody can tell you anything and you’ll believe it.
Politics is another really important thing to me because I love politics and I some day want to become a corporate lawyer and to
later become the ﬁrst black president.
College participants
How can one get by without friendship or family? I know I couldn’t, I need that support, at times it can feel like the only thing I
have that’s real. At other times I don’t need it, but love and comfort from relationships is something that is always nice. . . . I was
stuck in Keystone this winter and had no [way] of getting back home, I felt helpless . . . I didn’t know what to do, so I called a
friend and they drove 2 hours out of their way to come help me out, without even thinking twice, without that friend I would of
had one bad night. Not the end of the world no, but when in need I fall back on my support, friends and family, without that
support I would never stop falling.
My relationship with my family is very important to me because it is my parents and brother who helped push me to be who I am
today. Without them, I probably wouldn’t have the patience and motivation to have applied for this university and be successful
here. Whenever I have a problem, it is my family I can go to to help me through it. My friends are also very important. If I didn’t
have the strong loving relationship with my friends from home, I wouldn’t be who I am today. My new friends that I have made
[here] are also a big part in my life because they make me smile every day.
My religious values are the foundation of my life; they guided me, helped me, and strengthened me in every aspect of my life. I have
always had a strong faith which has taught me to love others and led me to be a better person. I’ve found that I enjoy life to a
greater extent, worry less, and smile more than my friends who don’t have religious values. I believe this is because my faith has
taught me to be grateful for everything I have, to trust that everything will be ﬁne, and to enjoy every day as if it were the last.
For me the sense of humor of someone is the most important thing. Every time someone makes me laugh it gives me comfort and
happiness. I think having a good sense of humor is the best quality that a person can have. It does not matter if a person is good
looking or not if they can make others laugh. Every time I meet someone I care if they have a good sense of humor or if they are
funny. That is why most of my friends are always laughing, because we all like to make jokes and laugh together. I even think that
laughing, making jokes and having a good sense of humor is what keeps us together as friends. Furthermore, our sense of humor is
what makes us unique as a group of friends.

of self-aggrandizement (consistent with Crocker et al. 2008, Shnabel et al. 2013). Rather, it is a
psychological time-out (Lyubomirsky & Della Porta 2010): a moment to pull back and regain
perspective on what really matters. As one college student wrote, “How can one get by without
friendship or family? I know I couldn’t, I need that support, at times it can feel like the only thing
I have that’s real.” Although the physical act of writing this essay is momentary, it can bring to
mind a lifelong source of strength. As Table 1 also illustrates, people often afﬁrm themselves by
writing about their connections to other people and to purposes and projects outside themselves
338

Cohen

·

Sherman

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

(Shnabel et al. 2013; see also Crocker et al. 2008). Against this broadened conception of the self
in the world, a particular threat that confronts a person feels less dire.

Understanding the Effects of Self-Affirmation

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

Before focusing on self-afﬁrmation interventions in education, health, and interpersonal and intergroup relations, we summarize how afﬁrmations affect psychology to create a moment of potential
change. Then we discuss how and when that change persists.
The psychology of self-affirmation. First, afﬁrmations remind people of psychosocial resources
beyond a particular threat and thus broaden their perspective beyond it (Sherman & Hartson
2011). Under normal circumstances, people tend to narrow their attention on an immediate
threat (e.g., the possibility of failure), a response that promotes swift self-protection and, in the
face of acute dangers, survival (e.g., the ﬁght-or-ﬂight response) (see Pratto & John 1991, Tugade
& Fredrickson 2004). But when self-afﬁrmed, people can see the many ordinary stressors of daily
life in the context of the big picture (Schmeichel & Vohs 2009, Wakslak & Trope 2009). A speciﬁc
threat and its implications for the self thus command less vigilance. Nonafﬁrmed participants saw
a psychologically threatening stimulus—a live but securely caged tarantula—as physically closer
to them than it actually was, but self-afﬁrmed participants estimated its distance accurately, as
though the afﬁrmation psychologically distanced the threat from the self (Harber et al. 2011).
Second, because a threat is seen in the context of an expansive view of the self, it has less impact
on psychological well-being (Cohen et al. 2009, Cook et al. 2012, Sherman et al. 2013). Among
self-afﬁrmed minority students in a ﬁeld experiment, a low classroom grade exerted less inﬂuence
on their long-term sense of belonging in school than it did for their nonafﬁrmed peers (Cook
et al. 2012). Likewise, when college students were self-afﬁrmed, their attention was less absorbed
by ruminative thoughts about past failure (Koole et al. 1999).
Third, afﬁrmations foster an approach orientation to threat rather than avoidance. If a threat
is seen as important and addressable (Vohs et al. 2013), afﬁrmations make it less likely that people
will shrink away from the threat or deny its importance to themselves. Self-afﬁrmed participants in
one study asserted that the threatening domain was more important to them than did nonafﬁrmed
participants (Cohen et al. 2007, study 1; see also Koole et al. 1999). People can thus better deal with
the threat in a constructive way, rather than spend mental energy on avoidance, suppression, and
rationalization (see Koole et al. 1999, Taylor & Walton 2011). For example, self-afﬁrmed participants were less likely to shun threatening health information that could beneﬁt them (e.g., Klein
& Harris 2009, van Koningsbruggen et al. 2009; see also Taylor & Walton 2011). Self-afﬁrmed
participants also showed greater attention to their errors on a cognitive task, as indexed by errorrelated negativity, a neural signal of the brain’s error-detection system (Legault et al. 2012). This
pattern suggests greater engagement among afﬁrmed individuals in learning from their mistakes.
Afﬁrmations lift psychological barriers to change through two routes: the buffering or lessening
of psychological threat and the curtailing of defensive adaptations to it.
Buffering against threat. Self-afﬁrmations can reassure people that they have integrity and that
life, on balance, is okay in spite of an adversity before them. Social relationships appear to have this
kind of power. When people were put in a stressful situation, such as receiving mild electric shocks,
those who felt they had social support in their lives, or those who simply had the chance to see a
picture of a loved one, experienced less fear, threat, and pain (e.g., Master et al. 2009; see also
Cacioppo & Patrick 2008). Likewise, when people were put under intense social evaluation—giving
an impromptu speech in front of a judgmental audience—those who had reﬂected on an important
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

339

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

personal value no longer displayed an elevation in the stress hormone cortisol (Creswell et al.
2005). Neither social support nor values afﬁrmation eliminated the stressor. Rather they placed it
in a larger context of “things that truly matter for my adequacy.” Less encumbered by
psychological threat, self-afﬁrmed people can better marshal their cognitive resources to meet the
demands of the task at hand, for example, solving more creative problems under pressure (Creswell
et al. 2013) or exerting self-control in a depleting situation (Schmeichel & Vohs 2009).

Reducing defensiveness. Self-afﬁrmations also reduce defensive responses, adaptations to
protect the self from threat (for a review, see Sherman & Cohen 2006). These include the self’s
strategies of spin control, such as denying responsibility for failure and taking selective credit for
success. Defensive responses also include various other adaptations, such as denigrating others to
afﬁrm the self, and engaging in denial, rumination, and even heavy drinking and other chemically
induced escapes (Steele et al. 1981) that help people to cope with threats to self. Such defensive
adaptations serve as a psychological immune system (Gilbert et al. 1998). Although these defenses
protect self-integrity in the short term, they can undermine growth and prove self-defeating in
the long term. One way that self-afﬁrmations promote change is by curbing defensive reactions.
Studies show that defensive denial, bias, and distortion in one domain are lessened by afﬁrmations
of self-integrity in another. For example, self-afﬁrmed individuals were more open to a scientiﬁc
report linking their behavior to cancer risk (Sherman et al. 2000).
In summary, afﬁrmations help people to maintain a narrative of personal adequacy in threatening circumstances. They thus buffer individuals against threat and reduce defensive responses to it.
The effect is catalytic. Forces that would otherwise be suppressed by psychological threat—such
as cognitive aptitude or persuasive evidence—are unleashed.

Cycles of Adaptive Potential: How Social Psychological Processes Such
as Self-Affirmation Propagate Through Time

Defensive
adaptations:
adaptations aimed at
protecting
self-integrity by
reducing psychological
threat or its effects,
including cognitive
adaptations (e.g., selfserving biases) and
behavioral adaptations
(e.g.,
self-handicapping,
alcohol consumption)

340

The review so far has described the psychology of the afﬁrming moment. But several of the
intervention studies to be discussed ﬁnd that the effects of self-afﬁrming writing activities can
persist, for instance improving the grades of at-risk minority students years later (Cohen et al.
2009, Sherman et al. 2013). In fact, social psychology has established that brief interventions can
have large and long-term effects when they address key psychological processes, as pioneered in the
studies of Lewin and Rokeach described in the introductory section of this review (for reviews, see
Ross & Nisbett 2011, Wilson 2011). In some cases, the effects of the intervention even grow. Time
does not necessarily weaken the inﬂuence of the past, but can, it seems, preserve and strengthen it.
A key feature of these interventions is that their effectiveness depends on the point in the process
in which they are introduced. For example, if teachers are led to expect certain incoming students
in their classroom to bloom intellectually, they elicit stronger performance from those students
(Rosenthal 1994). But the effects of this “high expectations” intervention disappear if it is delivered
only a short time after teachers have met their students and begun to form their own impressions
of them (for a meta-analysis, see Raudenbush 1984).
Like any formative experience, a successful intervention is not an isolated event but rather a
turning point in a process (see Elder 1998). When well-timed and well-situated, it touches off
a series of reciprocally reinforcing interactions between the self-system and the social system
(see Figure 1). A positive feedback loop between these two powerful systems can drive adaptive
outcomes over time. We refer to this as a cycle of adaptive potential, because it increases the actor’s
potential to achieve adaptive outcomes. The cycle can take over and propagate adaptive outcomes
Cohen

·

Sherman

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Self
system

a

b
Adaptive
outcomes

f

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

c

e

d
Social
system

Figure 1
Cycle of adaptive potential, a positive feedback loop between the self-system and the social system that
promotes adaptive outcomes over time. Examples of paths include Path a: as a result of being self-afﬁrmed,
the person (e.g., athlete, student) achieves more adaptive outcomes (e.g., better performance); Path b: as a
result of performing better, the person feels more self-afﬁrmed; Path c: because the person performs better,
others (e.g., coaches, teachers) expect more of him/her; Path d: expecting more, others in the social system
draw out better performance from the person; Path e: others in the social system afﬁrm the person’s self
through positive feedback, rewards, etc.; Path f: the person alters the social system through paths other than
adaptive outcomes (e.g., by seeking opportunities for practice or by selecting challenging courses).

long after the intervention has receded in time and memory (Caspi & Mofﬁtt 1995, Walton &
Cohen 2011, Wilson 2011).
Three principles explain how and when processes propel themselves through time in cycles
of adaptive potential (Cohen et al. 2012, Garcia & Cohen 2012, Yeager & Walton 2011). First,
because of recursion, the output of a process such as self-afﬁrmation can cycle back as its input, thus
perpetuating itself (Cohen et al. 2009, Wilson & Linville 1982). Better performance may afﬁrm
the self, leading to still better performance, further afﬁrming the self, and so on, as improvement
maintains or even builds on itself. Second, because of interaction, the output of a process can
interact with other processes in the environment. For example, if self-afﬁrmed students perform
better, they may ﬁnd themselves held to higher expectations by their teachers or placed in a
higher track, which could raise their performance further and open new opportunities. An early
advantage can thus channel people into subsequent experiences that perpetuate and broaden the
advantage. For long-term effects to occur, a process need not recur, as in recursion, but can instead
feed into altogether different processes. Indeed, many social environments abound with change
processes (G.L. Cohen & J. Garcia, manuscript in preparation). For instance, schools and cultures
produce massive change, as when they transform a kindergartner into an educated, civilized adult.
An intervention need not create new processes but may simply interface with these existing ones.
Effects then reverberate through the interconnected forces in a social system (Caspi et al. 1987;
Caspi & Mofﬁtt 1995; Elder 1974, 1998; Lewin 1997/1948; Wilson 2011). Because of recursion
and interaction, the beneﬁts of an intervention can maintain themselves through the progressive
accumulation of their own consequences (see Caspi et al. 1987).
Third, because of subjective construal, an intervention can trigger an enduring shift in
perception (Sherman et al. 2013; see also Ross & Nisbett 2011, Wilson 2011). Even if the
objective environment remains constant, the subjective experience of it may change. For example,
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

Recursive process:
a process in which the
output feeds back as an
input
Interactive process:
a process in which the
output serves as an
input to an altogether
different process in a
system
Subjective construal:
the actor’s subjective
perception; even if the
objective environment
remains constant, the
subjective experience
of it can be changed
through intervention

341

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Latino American middle school children who afﬁrmed core values saw instances of racial threat
as unrelated to their likelihood of success in school (Sherman et al. 2013). When afﬁrmed, people
tend to narrate adversity as an isolated event rather than an indictment of their adequacy (Cohen
et al. 2009). Approach, rather than avoidance, becomes more likely, as does problem solving over
giving up. As these personal styles take hold, individuals may construe themselves as the kind of
person who can overcome difﬁculties, an identity that can then guide their behavior (cf. Freedman
& Fraser 1966). Their narrative of personal adequacy may strengthen, which may bolster coping
with the next adversity, further strengthening the narrative, in a repeating cycle. An intervention
may thus have lasting effects by changing the way people ﬁlter information about themselves and
their environment.
To illustrate these principles, consider the parable of the professional hockey player. Given
the many inﬂuences on a child’s likelihood of becoming a professional hockey player, it seems
surprising that birth date has a sizable impact (Gladwell 2008; for a recent comprehensive test,
see Addona & Yates 2010). Children with a birthday that falls soon after the cut-off date for
entry into this age-based sport have an advantage. As the oldest in their cohort, they tend to be
bigger and more adept than other children, and they may stand out as more talented as a result.
Their environment may be more afﬁrming; they may score more, be given more opportunities
to practice, and be recruited to higher-caliber teams. These experiences afﬁrm the children and
strengthen their self-conﬁdence, love for the sport, and identity as a hockey player, which can fuel
their desire to practice and improve, evoking further afﬁrmation and opportunity, in a repeating
interactive cycle (Figure 1). Analogous to afﬁrmation interventions, a birthdate is not the sole
cause of children’s athletic fate. It is a trigger for a series of iterative interactions between the child
and a powerful system of athletic socialization that allocates more resources to higher performers.
The parable of the professional hockey player illustrates how recursion, interaction, and subjective
construal can turn a variable with no intrinsic causal power into a life-altering inﬂuence by putting
a person on a cycle of adaptive potential.
Like a fortuitous event, even a brief intervention can have a lasting impact if it is appropriately
situated and timed. It can then trigger a positive cycle or interrupt a negative one (Wilson &
Linville 1982). Indeed, the three domains where afﬁrmation has had lasting beneﬁt—education,
health, and relationships—are ones where problems emerge from a slow-moving accumulation of
costs. Each domain abounds with recursive, interactive processes that carry forward the inﬂuence
of timely experiences, both for ill and for good.
The inﬂuence of recursion, interaction, and subjective construal, and the afﬁrmation interventions that tap into these processes, were tested using randomized experiments, many in ﬁeld
settings such as schools and health care centers. The interventions did not eliminate the problems under study and, of course, were not expected to do so. But they did lead to positive and in
some cases lasting changes in academic performance, health, and the quality of interpersonal and
intergroup relations.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

AFFIRMATION INTERVENTIONS
Education
Students want to think positively of themselves. But the daily stressors of school—tests, grades,
peer relations—can threaten their sense of personal adequacy. School can be especially threatening
for members of historically marginalized groups such as African Americans and Latino Americans
(Steele 2010). They may worry that they could be seen through the lens of a negative stereotype
rather than accorded respect and judged on their merits. Such vigilance is understandable and
342

Cohen

·

Sherman

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

even adaptive given the current and historical signiﬁcance of race in America (Steele 2010,
Walton & Cohen 2011). Race, gender, immigration status, and other group memberships can
thus give rise to a repeated threat for entire groups in academic and work settings. As hundreds
of studies have shown, social identity threat—awareness that one could be devalued on the basis
of one’s group—can be stressful and undermine learning and performance (Inzlicht & Schmader
2011, Steele 2010, Steele et al. 2002). Even if an African American and a white student work in
the same classroom and receive similar instruction, their subjective experience may differ. For the
African American student, the prospect of being stereotyped as intellectually limited can render
the classroom more threatening.
Policy changes and education reform that eliminate this “threat in the air” are of paramount
importance (Steele 2010). Even partial closure of the achievement gap would make a large difference in the lives of many children and their families. Promisingly, lab studies demonstrate that
afﬁrmations can improve the performance of students working under the specter of a negative
stereotype (Martens et al. 2006, Shapiro et al. 2012, Taylor & Walton 2011).
But in contrast to the lab, in real-world academic and work settings, social identity threat is not
acute but chronic (Cohen & Garcia 2008, Garcia & Cohen 2012, Yeager & Walton 2011). It recurs
in a multitude of daily experiences, such as learning new material, taking a test, getting help, and
making friends. Imagine an African American student who enters middle school with trepidation,
uncertain of whether he belongs and will be accepted by peers and teachers. He wants to achieve
academically. But, in the ﬁrst week of school, he is called on by his teacher for his perspective
as a “black student.” Aware of being stereotyped, the student may feel that his fears have been
conﬁrmed, and he may learn less and perform worse on the next exam. The student’s sense of
threat may then increase, harming performance further, in a recursive process that strengthens
with time. Increasingly subtle events may trigger perceived threat, with more mental energy spent
on vigilance rather than learning. If teachers fail to grasp the invisible forces at work, they may
see the student as limited, give him less support, and hold him to a lower standard. These could
exacerbate threat and undermine performance further.
However, a moment of validation at a threatening transition could improve a trajectory (Cohen
et al. 2009, Yeager & Walton 2011). If an afﬁrmed student performed better early in an academic
transition, this could trigger a cascade of positive effects—greater self-conﬁdence in the student,
higher expectations from the teacher—all of which could further afﬁrm the student, relax vigilance,
and beneﬁt performance, in a cycle of adaptive potential. Or, more modestly, a downward cycle
might be slowed or averted.
Educational interventions. The ﬁrst set of randomized ﬁeld experiments tested the effectiveness
of values afﬁrmation in lifting the achievement of African Americans (Cohen et al. 2006, 2009)
and Latino Americans (Sherman et al. 2013; for additional published replications, see Bowen et al.
2012, Harackiewicz et al. 2014, Miyake et al. 2010, Woolf et al. 2009). The research took place
at three middle schools with students in early adolescence, a key transition marked by feelings of
inadequacy and a quest for identity. Too many adolescents take a wrong turn and ﬁnd themselves
ensnared in negative trajectories with lifelong consequences (Eccles et al. 1991, Mofﬁtt et al.
2011). The schools were racially mixed such that roughly half the students were minority, that
is, African American or Latino American depending on the school, and roughly half were white.
Although the schools were located in middle-class neighborhoods, most minority students at
one site came from socioeconomically disadvantaged families (Sherman et al. 2013, study 1), an
important population given the widening socioeconomic gap in achievement (Reardon 2011).
Critically, in the experiments featured here, the academic environments provided material and
human resources to help students succeed, and indeed some had undertaken initiatives to advance
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

343

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

4.0

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

Grade point average

3.5

3.0
White (affirmation)
White (control)
Latino American (affirmation)
Latino American (control)

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

Preintervention

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Time point

Figure 2
Performance across the school year as a function of ethnicity and afﬁrmation condition, with means and
error terms adjusted for baseline covariates and grade level. Middle school students completed a series of
writing exercises related to either their most important value in the afﬁrmation condition or an unimportant
value/neutral topic in the control condition. Abbreviation: Q, quarter. Adapted from Sherman et al. (2013),
study 1.

the learning of underrepresented students. Thus, the social system was “ready” to respond and
reinforce better student performance once it occurred.
Each student was randomly assigned to complete either values afﬁrmation exercises or control
exercises [for methodological details, see Cohen et al. 2006, 2009 (supplementary materials);
Sherman et al. 2013]. These were distributed by teachers as regular in-class assignments two to
ﬁve times over the year. Each took roughly 10 minutes to complete (see Table 1 for sample essays).
Although students likely expected teachers to read their essays, teachers knew neither students’
condition assignments nor the content of their essays. Because early outcomes matter more in a
recursive process, the interventions were given early in the year, typically the fourth week of school.
In most cases the exercises occurred right before an in-class exam so that their psychological effects
could be immediately channeled into better performance rather than decay before they could affect
a key outcome. Because novel rather than repetitive experiences have more emotional impact
(Lyubomirsky & Della Porta 2010), the nature of the exercises was varied throughout the year.
Students’ ofﬁcial grades were tracked for the next one to three years. The values afﬁrmation
intervention signiﬁcantly improved the grade point average (GPA) of the identity-threatened
groups, African American students in one school (Cohen et al. 2006, 2009) and Latino American
students in two others (Sherman et al. 2013), in their core courses (English, math, social studies,
and science). For instance, the afﬁrmation halved the percentage of African American students who
received a D or F in the ﬁrst term of the course in which the intervention was given (Cohen et al.
2006). Because the intervention beneﬁted ethnic minority students but not white students, it closed
the achievement gap. The closure corresponded to roughly 30% for Latino and African American
students at two school sites (Cohen et al. 2009; Sherman et al. 2013, study 2) and 22% for economically disadvantaged Latino American students at another (see Figure 2) (Sherman et al. 2013,
study 1).
344

Cohen

·

Sherman

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

The intervention’s effects persisted and improved students’ trajectory through the rest of middle
school. Two years later, afﬁrmed African Americans and Latino Americans continued to earn
higher GPAs than their nonafﬁrmed peers (Cohen et al. 2009, Sherman et al. 2013). At one site
where high school records were available, the intervention effect persisted into a third year, when
most students progressed into high school (Sherman et al. 2013, study 1). Students appeared to
carry the beneﬁts with them into a new environment.
The afﬁrmation did not boost GPA but rather slowed its decline. The downward trend common
among middle school students (Eccles et al. 1991) proved less steep among afﬁrmed minorities. As
a result, the performance trajectories of afﬁrmed and nonafﬁrmed students tended to diverge with
time (see Figure 2). This pattern is consistent with the notion that the intervention interrupted a
recursive cycle in which threat and poor performance fed on one another and worsened outcomes
over time. Also suggestive of a recursive process, the most threatened subgroup, those who would
be most undermined by threat and its accumulating consequences, derived the greatest lasting beneﬁt from afﬁrmation. For example, among African American students, those who at baseline had a
history of poor performance and felt most unsure of their belonging at school showed almost a full
grade point beneﬁt in GPA (Cook et al. 2012, study 1). These were the students whose academic potential was most inhibited by psychological threat. Put differently, the intervention beneﬁt was not
diffuse but concentrated among the most threatened, and sometimes hardest to reach, subgroup.
Would values afﬁrmation help close the social-class achievement gap (Reardon 2011)? A randomized ﬁeld experiment that disentangled the effect of student social class from the effect of
student race found that it could (Harackiewicz et al. 2014). It focused on ﬁrst-generation college
students, over 90% of whom were white. These students came from families where neither parent
had received a four-year college degree, a proxy for low socioeconomic status. Students with poor
socioeconomic backgrounds can face extra stress in college because of ﬁnancial worries and a sense
of not fully belonging on campus (Stephens et al. 2012). For these students, two in-class values
afﬁrmations improved their grades in an introductory biology course. The intervention cut the
achievement gap between them and their more ﬁnancially advantaged peers in the course by
50%. Remarkably, ﬁrst-generation students also proved more likely to enroll in the second course
in the biology sequence if they had been in the afﬁrmation condition (86% did so) rather than in
the control condition (66% did so). In another study with low-income middle school students,
the standard afﬁrmation did not affect students’ initial grades, but it did prevent a drop in grades
over the course of the year (Bowen et al. 2012).
Values afﬁrmation has also helped another group of students who contend with social identity
threat: female college students enrolled in introductory physics, a gateway science course (Miyake
et al. 2010). Women who had been randomly assigned to complete values afﬁrmation exercises in
their class performed better on their course exams and earned higher grades than did those who
completed control exercises. Once again, the greatest beneﬁt accrued to the most threatened subgroup: in this context, women who wondered relatively more if gender stereotypes about science
ability might be true1 . Together, the results of these ﬁeld experiments suggest that afﬁrmation removed a barrier that prevented the full expression of students’ potential (Walton & Spencer 2009).

1

Another afﬁrmation intervention with an ethnically heterogeneous sample of medical students in England found mixed effects,
improving the performance of all students on their clinical evaluations and undermining the performance of white students
on a written examination (Woolf et al. 2009). However, at least two issues limit interpretability. First, it was unclear whether
identity threat contributed to the performance of the ethnic minority sample, a heterogeneous group consisting primarily
of Asian Indian, Pakistani, and Bangladeshi participants. Second, procedural changes made the afﬁrmation evaluative in
nature. Students’ instructors evaluated their essays as “suitable” or “not suitable” for submission to each student’s portfolio
of learning. A few essays were singled out to be discussed in students’ tutorials. Beyond unblinding instructors to students’
condition assignment, the evaluative and public nature of the activity may have compromised its ability to be afﬁrming.
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

345

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Self-afﬁrmation processes bear not only on underperformance but also on bullying and aggression. Young adolescents completed either afﬁrmation or control tasks in school, with outcomes
measured several weeks or months after the intervention (Thomaes et al. 2009). Afﬁrmation
lessened the extent to which students with grandiose self-views, a risk factor for aggression,
reacted to threat (i.e., a drop in their self-esteem) by hitting, name calling, rumor spreading,
or committing other antisocial acts as assessed by their classmates. In another ﬁeld experiment,
self-afﬁrmation increased prosocial behavior among students with a history of antisocial behavior,
as assessed by their teachers (Thomaes et al. 2012). In summary, psychological threat contributes
not only to underperformance but also to bullying and aggression, important problems that have
proved difﬁcult to change. And timely self-afﬁrmations can help remedy them.
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

Understanding the longevity of affirmation effects. How do afﬁrmation intervention effects
persist over long periods of time, as they did in these studies? Recursion, interaction, and subjective
construal can channel people into a cycle of adaptive potential.
Feeling afﬁrmed, a student may perform better on the next classroom test, and performing
better, the student may feel more afﬁrmed, in a recursive process that lifts the student’s trajectory
and eventually becomes a continual source of self-afﬁrmation. In one series of studies, much of
the effect of afﬁrmation on second-year grades was mediated by its effect on ﬁrst-year grades,
suggesting that early strong performance begot later strong performance (Cohen et al. 2009,
Harackiewicz et al. 2014). Also consistent with a recursive process was the ﬁnding that randomized
“afﬁrmation boosters” in the second year did not increase the afﬁrmation’s beneﬁt. The processes
that the intervention set in motion in the ﬁrst year sufﬁced to explain its continuing effect in the
second year (Cohen et al. 2009).
A cycle of adaptive potential is, by deﬁnition, interactive. Academic institutions teem with
processes that recognize, reinforce, and provide resources for student success. By interacting with
these processes, an intervention can trigger consequences that have causal power unto themselves.
For example, a student who excels early in the year may be seen by teachers as having greater potential. The positive effects of high teacher expectancies on student performance (Rosenthal 1994)
may then take hold and propel the intervention effect through time (see Yeager & Walton 2011).
Indeed, fewer minority students were placed in their school’s remedial track or retained in grade
in the afﬁrmation condition (3%) than in the control condition (9%); afﬁrmed minorities also took
more advanced math courses (Cohen et al. 2009). When self-afﬁrmed minority students performed
better, the system reacted by categorically reshaping their academic experience. Deﬂection from
failure channels such as remediation and entry into success channels such as advanced placement
courses can shape students’ academic trajectory (Grubb 2009, Steele 2010). The consequences of
the intervention can thus break free of their origin and propagate change through time.
Beyond recursion and interaction, subjective construal can fuel a cycle of adaptive potential.
Feeling afﬁrmed and achieving more, students may become more hopeful. They may narrate adversity in a more optimistic light. Consistent with this, several ﬁndings suggest that self-afﬁrmed
minorities were more likely to see adversity as an isolated event rather than a threat to self (see
Cook et al. 2012; Sherman et al. 2013, study 2). Among nonafﬁrmed minority students, a poor
grade or a stressful day predicted a lower sense of belonging in school and a higher sense of racial
threat (see Cook et al. 2012, Sherman et al. 2013). Each adversity seemed to raise anew the question of whether they belonged (Walton & Cohen 2011). Indeed, over two years, minority students
saw their sense of belonging in school fall, as if successive adversities reinforced the narrative that
they did not fit in (Cook et al. 2012). Likewise, among nonafﬁrmed ﬁrst-generation college students, uncertainty about whether they “had the right background” for their course grew over the
semester (Harackiewicz et al. 2014). But for self-afﬁrmed students, these effects vanished. They did
346

Cohen

·

Sherman

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

not question their belonging. Self-afﬁrmed minority students also displayed lower cognitive accessibility of the racial stereotype, suggesting that they were less likely to ﬁlter classroom experience
through the lens of race (Cohen et al. 2006). To the extent that they were less vigilant to racial cues,
they may have had more mental resources for performance and learning (Taylor & Walton 2011).
Although the intervention was brief, its effects were repeatedly relived in subjective experience.
In summary, afﬁrmation interventions can trigger a series of reciprocally reinforcing interactions between the self-system and the social system that foster students’ adaptive potential over
time.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

Health
Most people want to think of themselves as healthy, so it can be threatening to confront evidence
that challenges that assessment. Illness, frailty, and the prospect of death represent some of the
most powerful challenges to adaptive adequacy (see Greenberg et al. 1997). Health-related
threats can take many forms: evidence that one’s diet puts one at risk for heart disease, a screening
that reveals a vulnerability to cancer. Even a visit to the doctor’s ofﬁce can be stressful (Havranek
et al. 2012). The effect can run in the reverse direction too. Prolonged stress can have serious
health costs that bring a person to the doctor’s ofﬁce (Sapolsky 2004, Sterling 2004, Taylor 2010).
Self-afﬁrmation interventions will not cure serious illness, but they can catalyze the impact of
other positive health-related forces, such as health information, postoperative care regimens, and
a person’s goal to live a healthful life.
Like education outcomes, health outcomes are also driven by recursive, interactive processes.
For example, stress and illness can exacerbate one another in a vicious cycle (Sapolsky 2004).
Failure to achieve a health goal may lead people to give up prematurely, worsening health (see
Logel & Cohen 2012, Vohs et al. 2013). Because these processes depend on continual feedback
loops, timely interventions could break a negative cycle and perhaps spark a positive one.
Research in this area uses the two routes of afﬁrmation inﬂuence. One route uses afﬁrmation
to reduce defensive rejection of threatening health information, the other to buffer people against
the effects of stress.

Reducing defensiveness. For many diseases, simple preventive steps, such as smoking cessation
or diet change, would save a profound number of lives if practiced on a large scale.
But imagine a middle-aged man whose doctor tells him that his diet puts him at risk for heart
disease and diabetes. Rather than admit to his dietary misdeeds, he may deploy defensive biases that
shield the self from blame but also block change (Sherman & Cohen 2006). He might denigrate
the evidence of a link between fat intake and heart disease or assure himself that drugs will undo
the damage. Rationalizing the threat away, he persists in his behavior. Persisting in his behavior,
he embraces his rationalization more, increasing resistance to change.
However, timely self-afﬁrmation can open people up to threatening health information. With
their self-integrity less on trial, self-afﬁrmed individuals can better confront threatening information and evaluate it in a manner less tethered to their needs for self-integrity (Klein et al. 2011).
This effect has been conﬁrmed in many studies (for reviews, see Harris & Epton 2009, 2010;
Sherman & Hartson 2011).
Afﬁrmation has increased openness to information about the life-threatening habit of smoking.
Tobacco-related illness in the United States causes more deaths than HIV, car accidents, alcohol
and illegal drug use, suicides, and murders combined (CDC 2012). One study presented smokers
with graphic antismoking cigarette advertisements (Harris et al. 2007). Relative to participants
in a control condition, participants who ﬁrst completed a self-afﬁrmation—listing their desirable
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

347

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

qualities—saw the advertisements as more distressing, expressed greater conﬁdence in their ability
to stop smoking, and had a stronger motivation to quit. This effect on motivation persisted one
week later.
When afﬁrmed, people are also more likely to take the ﬁrst steps toward positive behavioral
change. Another study focused on smokers low in socioeconomic status, the demographic group
with the highest rate of smoking (Armitage et al. 2008). Among afﬁrmed participants, 59% took
leaﬂets about how to quit smoking, compared with only 37% of nonafﬁrmed participants. In yet
another study, people at risk for diabetes defensively rejected information about their health risk.
They declined the opportunity for a diabetes screening test, even though taking the test presumably would have helped them to acquire medical advice that could improve their health and
perhaps even prolong their lives (van Koningsbruggen & Das 2009). However, providing them
with the opportunity to reﬂect on important values before reviewing the information decreased
their denigration of the health message and increased their likelihood of agreeing to take a screening test (see also Howell & Shepperd 2012). Other small behavioral wins from self-afﬁrmation
have been documented, such as increases in the number of college students purchasing condoms
after watching an AIDS education video (Sherman et al. 2000).
Two insights emerge from this research. First, afﬁrmation enables more balanced information
processing. Without the self on trial, people are better able to evaluate evidence on its merits
(Correll et al. 2004, Klein et al. 2011). Thus, afﬁrmation does not produce change by itself but
enables change to occur if evidence warrants it. Second, echoing the ﬁndings in education, afﬁrmation promotes change among people under consistent psychological threat—people whose
behavior puts them at risk for a health condition and who thus have cause to feel that their selfintegrity is under threat (e.g., Grifﬁn & Harris 2011, Harris & Napper 2005, van Koningsbruggen
& Das 2009; cf. Klein & Harris 2009).
Although three null ﬁndings have been published (Dillard et al. 2005, Fry & Prentice-Dunn
2005, Zhao et al. 2012)2 , on the whole the research paints a picture of the afﬁrmed mind as an open
mind (Correll et al. 2004). Whether the moment of openness then prompts enduring changes in
behavior, however, hinges on other factors.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

Overcoming barriers to long-term behavior change. The effects of afﬁrmation on attitude
and motivation tend to persist, even one month later (Harris et al. 2007, Harris & Napper 2005).
But long-term effects on behavior have been mixed (Harris & Epton 2010). In one positive study,
drinkers at a bar completed a brief afﬁrmation—selecting and copying an afﬁrming statement
that incorporated an implementation intention for how to deal with threat (e.g., by prompting
participants to write “If I feel threatened or anxious, then I will think about the things I value about
myself ”)—while others completed a standard afﬁrmation, reﬂecting on acts of kindness (Armitage
et al. 2011). All participants then read a message that summarized the medical risks of alcohol
consumption. Relative to a control condition, both afﬁrmations reduced consumption of alcohol,
as assessed by self-reports on a validated measure one month later. Between the two time points,
the percentage of participants drinking within healthful government-recommended levels jumped

2
In two of these null reports, the authors raise questions about whether their manipulations successfully instantiated afﬁrmation
because of either a novel afﬁrmation method (Dillard et al. 2005) or failed manipulation checks for the majority of participants
(Fry & Prentice-Dunn 2005). In two of the reports (Dillard et al. 2005, Zhao et al. 2012), the null result may be due to
low statistical power, as the key comparisons, though not statistically signiﬁcant, were in the predicted direction such that
afﬁrmation led to more openness to threatening health messages among those for whom the message was most relevant.
By chance alone, periodic null effects would occur in a large set of studies. It is also possible that the effects of afﬁrmation
depend on hidden moderators not assessed in these studies. For example, in Grifﬁn & Harris (2011), afﬁrmation effects were
moderated by trait defensiveness.

348

Cohen

·

Sherman

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

by an average of 32 percentage points in the afﬁrmation conditions, more than double the change
observed in the control condition.
However, in some studies, afﬁrmed participants fail to make the behavioral changes that they
predict they will (Harris et al. 2007, Harris & Napper 2005, Reed & Aspinwall 1998; for a review,
see Harris & Epton 2010). Indeed, changes in attitude and motivation seldom sufﬁce for long-term
behavioral change (Lewin 1997/1948, Ross & Nisbett 2011). For many health-risk behaviors such
as smoking, many people want to stop but are unable to do so (CDC 2012).
Behavior change not only has value in its own right but also helps to trigger changes in selfconstrual that carry forward intervention effects. Once people act in a healthful way, they may
see themselves as a person who cares about health and then behave in ways congruent with that
identity (Freedman & Fraser 1966). To achieve long-term beneﬁts with an afﬁrmation, it may be
essential to ensure early behavioral wins. These wins also help to convince people that behavior
change is possible, a key condition for afﬁrmation-induced change to occur (see Vohs et al. 2013).
Two strategies to promote long-term behavior change, and spur a cycle of adaptive potential,
have received suggestive support. One encourages people to form realistic, concrete plans for how
to implement their new health-related goals in speciﬁc situations (Gollwitzer & Sheeran 2006).
One study had college students review a report about the need to eat fruits and vegetables (Epton
& Harris 2008). The report provided easy-to-implement steps to incorporate these foods into
their diets (e.g., “Add extra vegetables to your pizza”). Although speculative, this may have been
a critical aspect of the intervention. When self-afﬁrmed, participants ate more portions of fruits
and vegetables over the following week, as assessed by a validated daily diary instrument.
A second strategy to promote long-term behavior change reinstates afﬁrmation at the
choice point, when the risk behavior occurs. Because afﬁrmations help people postpone shortterm gratiﬁcations for the sake of long-term goals (Schmeichel & Vohs 2009), and reduce
stress that people might otherwise manage by drinking and smoking (Steele et al. 1981),
it may be important to time afﬁrmations to moments of greatest vulnerability (O. Fotuhi,
S. Spencer, G.T. Fong, & M.P. Zanna, manuscript in preparation). For example, incorporating a speciﬁc implementation intention into the afﬁrmation may be effective (“If I feel tempted to
drink alcohol, then I will think about the things I value about myself ”) (cf. Armitage et al. 2011).
Two recent unpublished studies used a recurring physical cue to keep the self-afﬁrming value
salient after participants left the laboratory: a bracelet given to participants, inscribed with the
words, “Remember the values” (O. Fotuhi, S. Spencer, G.T. Fong, & M.P. Zanna, manuscript in
preparation), and a key chain with a secret compartment that contained a slip of paper on which
participants had written a phrase related to their most important value (G.M. Walton, C. Logel,
J.M. Peach, S.J. Spencer, M.P. Zanna, manuscript under review). Another technique has people
write about a value they share with a close other who supports their health goal (O. Fotuhi, S.
Spencer, G.T. Fong, & M.P. Zanna, manuscript in preparation). By mentally pairing a value with
their health goal in this way, smokers may be more likely to call to mind their value when they are
tempted to smoke. Interventions that used these tactics to increase the adhesiveness of a single
afﬁrmation yielded long-term improvements in smoking cessation (O. Fotuhi, S. Spencer, G.T.
Fong, & M.P. Zanna, manuscript in preparation) and GPA (G.M. Walton, C. Logel, J.M. Peach,
S.J. Spencer, M.P. Zanna, manuscript under review).
Buffering against stress. Stress, especially when chronic, can threaten the integrity of the self
(Keough & Markus 1998). Indeed, stress often arises from events that call into question people’s
sense of adaptive adequacy, their perceived ability to meet the demands on them (see Sherman
& Cohen 2006). Given this, values afﬁrmations may help buffer people against stress by allowing
them to anchor their sense of adequacy in another domain where it is less subject to question.
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

349

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Physiological evidence of the stress-buffering effect of afﬁrmation was found among college
undergraduates facing a real-world stressor—the midterm exam that they had singled out as most
stressful (Sherman et al. 2009; see also Creswell et al. 2005). Students in the treatment condition
completed two values afﬁrmations before this midterm exam, whereas students in the control
condition completed neutral writing exercises. By the morning of their midterm, nonafﬁrmed
students showed a marked increase in epinephrine, as measured by urinary catecholamines, hormones involved in the ﬁght-or-ﬂight response. Afﬁrmed students did not show an increase in
epinephrine. Once again, the stress-reduction effect of the intervention was concentrated among
the most threatened: students worried about being disliked and seen as unintelligent.
Stress can harm health, especially when it is prolonged (Sapolsky 2004, Sterling 2004, Taylor
2010). Chronic stressors at sensitive periods can keep the stress system on alert for threat even
years later, a risk factor for cardiovascular disease (see Miller et al. 2009). This vigilance can create
a self-fulﬁlling prophecy wherein the expectation of threat readies people to perceive it, thereby
reinforcing the expectation of threat in a recursive loop that imposes an increasingly heavy toll on
health (Miller et al. 2009). Vigilance may help explain why various afﬂictions—poor sleep, obesity,
hypertension, heart disease—cluster among distressed populations (Sterling 2004; see also Walton
& Cohen 2011).
Interventions can promote health if they target the psychological “ringleader,” perceived
threat (see Cacioppo & Patrick 2008). The most effective way to do so is to change the social
environment—classrooms, work, home, society—so that it better provides everyday opportunities to manifest adequacy, such as through meaningful work and civic engagement (Sterling 2004).
But short of this, timely interventions that assuage threat at sensitive periods can help.
One study focused on women with early-stage (stage I and II) breast cancer (Creswell et al.
2007, a reanalysis of Stanton et al. 2002). The original study found that expressive writing, in
which patients reﬂected on their thoughts and feelings about their experience with breast cancer,
reduced self-reported illness symptoms at a three-month follow-up, relative to writing about facts
about cancer and treatment (for a review of expressive writing interventions, see Pennebaker &
Chung 2011). Content analyses suggested that the active ingredient in women’s essays was the act of
afﬁrming the self. Patients who afﬁrmed important values, such as relationships or religion, or who
reﬂected on valued personal qualities beneﬁted most. Consistent with the stress-buffering effects
of self-afﬁrmation, self-afﬁrming writing was associated with less subjective distress immediately
after the writing exercises. By helping patients to see themselves as people with adaptive adequacy
in spite of their illness, or even because of their ability to cope with it, the writing exercise seemed
to lessen the stress of chronic illness and thus improved long-term health. People beneﬁted from
the expressive writing not so much because it led them to reappraise their cancer but because it
helped them to reappraise themselves. As a cancer survivor said when reﬂecting on this research,
“This process of self-afﬁrmation allowed me to ﬁnd the strength and sense of self to keep getting
back up” (Norris 2008).
The role of self-afﬁrmation as a buffer against stress and illness is highlighted in a study
that used a novel “meaning-making afﬁrmation” (see Keough & Markus 1998). It encouraged
participants to extract a value-relevant meaning from their daily experience. College students
completed self-afﬁrming writing exercises every other day on ten occasions during their winter
break. Participants wrote about their day’s experiences and put them into perspective with respect
to their most important value. They thus assigned a self-afﬁrming meaning to what they might
otherwise construe as a hassle or stressor. For instance, they might see driving a sibling to work as
an expression of the value they place on family. Relative to a writing control group, self-afﬁrmed
students reported less stress and better health, as assessed by a composite measure of illness, physical symptoms, and health center visits. As evidence that the exercises helped students to integrate

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

350

Cohen

·

Sherman

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

stressors into a self-afﬁrming narrative, those who beneﬁted most were students who reported
the greatest number of daily hassles that implicated their self-worth (Keough & Markus 1998).
The stress-buffering effects of self-afﬁrmation can improve objective health outcomes by interrupting negative cycles (Logel & Cohen 2012). Stress can undermine self-control, which can
increase the likelihood that one will fail to meet health-related goals, which can increase stress
further, in a repeating cycle. One study recruited women concerned with their weight. Consistent with the effects of stress on self-control, preoccupation with one’s weight predicts distress,
poor eating, lack of exercise, and—ironically—weight gain (Haines et al. 2007, Logel & Cohen
2012). More generally, psychological threat can increase appetite for sugary and high-fat comfort
foods (see Cornil & Chandon 2013, Sterling 2004). Before being weighed and having their height
and waistline measured, participants completed a standard values afﬁrmation or control exercise
(Logel & Cohen 2012). Approximately 2.5 months later, afﬁrmed participants had lost more weight
than nonafﬁrmed participants. They also had lower body mass index (BMI) and a smaller waist
circumference, a health factor independent of BMI. Afﬁrmation produced these effects, the authors speculated, because it buffered women against weight-related stress and thus helped them to
tap into psychological resources to meet their weight-related goals (see also Schmeichel & Vohs
2009). Consistent with this speculation, afﬁrmation both improved women’s working memory
performance—needed to maintain focus on long-term goals—and strengthened the association
between better memory and weight loss. Once people begin to achieve important health goals,
they may feel more afﬁrmed and receive more afﬁrming feedback from others, each of which could
reinforce the change and carry it forward through time.
Field experiments on patients with chronic health conditions. The February 2012 issue of
Archives of Internal Medicine featured a series of large randomized trials that found beneﬁts of an
afﬁrmation-informed intervention for at-risk individuals on a medical regimen. Medical treatment
poses many stressors, such as pain, aversive medical procedures, and separation from loved ones.
Severe or prolonged stress can interfere with treatment and recovery (Kiecolt-Glaser et al. 1998).
In the studies, all patients received a standard behavioral intervention to promote recovery
from their health problem. Patients in the treatment condition were also encouraged to reﬂect
on core values and proud moments whenever they encountered situations that made it difﬁcult to
follow their medical regimen, and to remind themselves of small and often value-relevant events
that made them feel good, such as a beautiful sunset. In one study, afﬁrmation increased prescribed
medication use among hypertensive African Americans, from 36% to 42% at a 12-month followup (Ogedegbe et al. 2012). Another study focused on patients who had undergone an intervention
for a heart condition, for whom physical exercise marks a key step in recovery (Peterson et al.
2012). The percentage of patients who achieved the recommended level of physical activity rose
from 37% in the control condition to 55% in the afﬁrmation condition. In a third study on
young asthma patients, afﬁrmation had a null effect on physical activity, although a positive effect
emerged among young patients who had had a serious medical episode that required hospitalization
or intensive care and who thus presumably faced the greatest psychological threat (Mancuso et al.
2012).
In these studies, the intervention also contained a positive mood component (e.g., patients
received happiness-inducing gifts in the mail), so it is unclear whether afﬁrmation or positive
mood drove the effects. However, a randomized double-blind ﬁeld experiment tested whether a
pure afﬁrmation intervention could reduce patients’ stress in their interactions with their health
care provider and thus promote better patient-physician communication (Havranek et al. 2012).
Poor communication between patients and their physicians contributes to patient nonadherence
to prescribed care, a major health problem (Zolnierek & DiMatteo 2009). Approximately half of
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

351

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

patients fail to adhere to their doctor’s regimens for treatment or for prevention of illness (Sabaté
2003). Moreover, because accurate diagnosis hinges on patients’ ability to talk candidly about their
condition, it is essential to ﬁnd ways to promote better communication between patients and their
physicians.
Communication tends to be less open and more strained when the patient and physician have
different racial backgrounds, for instance, when a minority patient meets with a white doctor. Such
race discordances predict poorer patient-physician communication, a cause of racial disparities
in compliance and health care (see Havranek et al. 2012). Although many factors contribute
to this problem, Havranek and colleagues (2012) speculated that social identity threat played
a role. Minority patients may worry that their doctor could stereotype them as uninformed or
unintelligent, a concern that may be fueled by the cold, awkward, or rushed demeanor of their
doctor. The patient’s unease and the doctor’s demeanor may reciprocally reinforce one another,
increasing tension and distrust. But perhaps a values afﬁrmation at the beginning of this interaction
might put the patient at ease. The patient might then feel more empowered to take control of the
interaction, and the quality of the exchange might improve.
African American patients with a clinical diagnosis of hypertension participated in the study.
Most were socioeconomically disadvantaged. Patients were randomly assigned to complete either
a standard values afﬁrmation task or a control task at their health care clinic immediately prior
to their appointment with a white health care provider. Patients remained unaware of the rationale for the activity, and health care providers remained unaware of the condition assignments
of their patients. Each meeting between patient and provider was audiotaped. As assessed by an
established coding protocol, the communications between the patient and the provider proved
superior among afﬁrmed patients than among nonafﬁrmed patients. Afﬁrmed patients gave and
requested more information about their medical condition. Their interactions evinced greater
attentiveness, warmth, and respect, and less depression and distress. Indeed, the aspects of the exchange that afﬁrmation improved are predictive of patients’ adherence to their doctors’ prescribed
care (see Havranek et al. 2012).
As in other domains, afﬁrmation acts as a catalyst in the health domain. It allows people to
take advantage of the opportunities for improvement available in a medical regimen or persuasive
information, and to deal more adaptively with stress. Many of the health-based afﬁrmations also
seem to encourage a habit of self-afﬁrming in challenging circumstances, which may help explain
the longevity of their effects. If success occurs at a timely moment, it can set in motion a cycle of
adaptive potential that beneﬁts long-term health.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

Intergroup Conflict and Interpersonal Relationships
People want to have rewarding relationships, and most want to resolve disagreements equitably. But these motives are sometimes compromised by the competing motive to maintain
self-integrity. Because our social worth affects our sense of self-worth (Leary 2005), people may
be especially sensitive to perceived threats in their relationships. This vulnerability can cause
a harmful defensive style. Afﬁrmation interventions can ease this defensiveness and put the
relationship on a better course. Indeed, afﬁrmations have been shown to lessen defensive behavior
in interpersonal and intergroup encounters and to promote trust, compromise, and closeness (see
also Crocker et al. 2008).
Conflict. When people are afﬁrmed in valued domains unrelated to a dispute, they are more open
to otherwise identity-threatening political information and less intransigent in negotiations (for
a review, see Cohen 2012). Among people in Israel and Bosnia, historically conﬂict-ridden areas,
352

Cohen

·

Sherman

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

self-afﬁrmed participants were more likely to acknowledge wrongdoings inﬂicted by their group
on the other side and to support reparations to those harmed (Čehajić-Clancy et al. 2011). After
viewing presidential debates on the eve of the 2008 election, afﬁrmed Democrats and Republicans
were less partisan in their evaluations of Barack Obama’s debate performance, and 10 days after
the election, previously afﬁrmed Republicans thought that President Obama would govern in a
more balanced and objective fashion (Binning et al. 2010). Arab American men were able to induce
prejudiced people to consider their perspective of being unfairly treated in the wake of 9/11 when
they ﬁrst asked them self-afﬁrming questions, such as, “When were you really creative?” (Stone
et al. 2011). Afﬁrmation—induced in this case by the target of prejudice and not a third-party
experimenter or interventionist—increased openness to a stigmatized other.
In negotiation, afﬁrmation can lessen the escalation of commitment often observed as partisans’
identity becomes bound to the positions they advocate (Sivanathan et al. 2008). When afﬁrmed,
people are less likely to derogate concessions offered by adversaries in a negotiation (Ward et al.
2011). In a negotiation over abortion rights, participants whose commitment to their political
views had been made salient proved responsive to afﬁrmation. When afﬁrmed, they made more
compromises in a negotiation over abortion legislation, and they left the negotiation with stronger
trust of the advocate on the other side of the issue (Cohen et al. 2007). Afﬁrmation seems to provide
reassurance that a social or political identity, one that would otherwise ﬁx people’s evaluations and
negotiation positions, is but one of many valued identities. In conﬂicts where downward spirals of
accusation and counteraccusation can descend into aggression (Kennedy & Pronin 2008), the
improved trust and open-mindedness brought about by afﬁrmation holds promise for improved
relations.
Relationships. Relationships are so recursive and dynamic, and so intertwined with our sense of
self and well-being, that self-afﬁrmation interventions could make a difference in relational matters.
One of the strongest predictors of marital distress is defensiveness (Gottman 2011). In arguments,
unhappy couples often sink into a mire of reciprocal retaliation. Each person’s defensiveness evokes
a response in kind from the other, a downward spiral of tit-for-tat that is not only mathematically
predictable, consistent with a recursive cycle, but also predictive of early divorce. By contrast,
happy couples seem to escape these recursive cycles by parrying with a surprising moment of
afﬁrmation—a disarming compliment, an assurance of regard, a bit of shared humor. Indeed,
this pattern of disarming afﬁrmation proved among the strongest predictors of marital stability
and happiness (Gottman 2011). Such afﬁrming gestures seem especially beneﬁcial for people who
feel insecure in their relationships (Overall et al. 2013). Observational studies thus suggest that
reducing threat can lessen defensiveness and help couples resolve disagreements constructively
(see also Murray et al. 2006).
But can one experimentally introduce such a turning point in a relationship? Although the
body of research is not yet as voluminous as in education and health, studies suggest that the
answer is yes. In one study, a standard afﬁrmation reduced the defensive distancing strategies that
low-self-esteem people in long-term relationships use to regulate the risk of losing the affection
of their partner ( Jaremka et al. 2011). After a standard relationship threat induction—thinking
about personal traits they wanted to keep secret from their partner—afﬁrmed low-self-esteem participants proved less prone to derogate their partner and to contemplate relationship-sabotaging
behaviors such as starting arguments. Relational insecurity can also lead people to adopt a distant
but self-protective social demeanor, which can evoke rejection from others, deepening insecurity,
in a “self-fulﬁlling prophecy of social rejection” (Stinson et al. 2011, p. 1145). This negative spiral
can be interrupted, and a positive trajectory fostered, through values afﬁrmation. When afﬁrmed,
relationally insecure participants not only felt more conﬁdent in the regard of their family and
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

353

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

romantic partners, but also behaved with greater ease and positivity in an interaction with a stranger
several weeks later (Stinson et al. 2011).
Small positive shifts in how people construe their relationships can accumulate into enduring
changes in the narratives people craft about themselves and their relationships. These in turn can
promote warmer relationships, provide further afﬁrmation, and trigger a cycle of adaptive potential
that could have far-reaching effects on trust, well-being, and health (Cacioppo & Patrick 2008).
More modestly, such shifts may enable couples to break free of downward cycles. Such recursive
possibilities received support in a series of studies that tested a novel intervention (Marigold et al.
2007, 2010; see also Finkel et al. 2013). It aimed to encourage low-self-esteem participants to
draw self-afﬁrming meanings that, ordinarily, seem to elude them. College students in romantic
relationships were instructed to think of a time when their partner complimented them and, in a
subtly presumptive prompt, “explain why your partner admired you . . . what it meant to you and its
signiﬁcance for your relationship.” Relative to various control conditions, including one that asked
participants only to recall the compliment, the intervention led low-self-esteem participants to feel
more secure both in their relationship and about themselves. They were more conﬁdent in their
partner’s affection for them, more optimistic about the future of their relationship, and expressed
a more positive sense of personal worth. The intervention’s effect on relationship security and
quality persisted two weeks later. It also seemed to trigger a shift in the actual quality of participants’
relationships. At the end of two weeks, afﬁrmed participants reported that their partners had acted
more supportively and less critically toward them (Marigold et al. 2007). There was also some
evidence that their partners, in turn, saw them as less harsh and critical (Marigold et al. 2010).
The role of self-afﬁrmation processes in negotiations between real-world stakeholders and
among people in long-term, committed relationships will, we hope, prove an exciting area of
future research.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

IMPLICATIONS, QUALIFICATIONS, AND QUESTIONS
Values afﬁrmations can improve grades for students in a lasting way, open people up to threatening health information, reduce sympathetic nervous system activation during stressors, lead
overweight people to lose weight, increase patients’ compliance with treatment regimens, and
improve intergroup and interpersonal relations. Its versatility reﬂects the pervasiveness of psychological threat in social life. That brief writing exercises could have wide-ranging and long-term
beneﬁts may seem nonintuitive. But it is plausible when seen in context. For a person who feels
threatened, such as a minority student worried about the transition to middle school, an early
moment to manifest personal adequacy in the classroom can provide a psychological foothold. In
the context of a powerful social system such as school, designed to reinforce positive change, an
afﬁrmation can nudge a motivated but underperforming student away from failure in a lasting way.
Below we highlight the main ideas and implications of afﬁrmation and its utility as a centerpiece
in intervention.

Lessons
The self is both a barrier and a catalyst to social change. People want to learn, grow, be
healthy, and have rewarding relationships, but psychological threat can impede their ability to do
so. By helping people to situate threats into a narrative of global adequacy, affirmations turn down
the inner alarm of psychological threat. They thus lessen stress and self-protective defenses. Less
encumbered, people can make better use of the resources for performance and growth in their
social environment, in their relationships, and in themselves. Self-affirmation processes also
354

Cohen

·

Sherman

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

suggest when environmental stressors harm long-term health—when they threaten self-integrity
—and how interventions can lessen their cumulative costs (Keough & Markus 1998, Logel &
Cohen 2012, Miller et al. 2009).

Social psychological processes such as self-affirmation can propagate over time. The effects
of self-afﬁrmation interventions can persist for a long time. For example, effects on academic grades
and health outcomes have endured months and years after the commencement of the intervention
(e.g., Cohen et al. 2009, Harackiewicz et al. 2014, Logel & Cohen 2012, Miyake et al. 2010,
Ogedegbe et al. 2012, Sherman et al. 2013). Social psychological interventions such as afﬁrmation
can channel people onto a cycle of adaptive potential (Figure 1). A positive feedback loop between
the self-system and the social system carries the intervention’s effects through time to improve the
actor’s adaptive outcomes. More modestly, such interventions can interrupt a failure trajectory
(Wilson & Linville 1982).
Any experience can have persistent effects if it hitches a person to processes that propel
outcomes through time. Three principles explain how and when this occurs. Because of subjective
construal, an experience or intervention can bring about a lasting shift in perception. Self-afﬁrmed
individuals narrate adversity in a manner that better maintains the adequacy of the self and helps
them to adaptively engage with threats; this narrative can build on itself over time (Cohen et al.
2009, Cook et al. 2012, Sherman et al. 2013, Wilson 2011). For intervention effects to last, they
may need to bring about a long-term shift in subjective construal, the beliefs and schemas that
ﬁlter experience: an optimistic outlook, openness to challenge, and a self-construal as a person
who belongs and can succeed in new settings (for a discussion, see Ross & Nisbett 2011). Without
cultivating a lasting shift in the way people construe themselves or their social world, an intervention’s impact may fade after it ends, as people slide back to their old habits, seek the familiar, and
avoid challenges that would promote their continued growth (Caspi & Mofﬁtt 1995). For example,
Schulz & Hanusa (1978) found strong initial health beneﬁts of an intervention that increased
elderly nursing home residents’ sense of control over their lives. But after the intervention ended,
its beneﬁts vanished and treated residents’ health worsened. Residents may have come to construe
their greater control as temporary and dependent on an external agent rather than based in their
own agency. Other examples of disappointing interventions include the Cambridge-Somerville
youth program (McCord 1978; see Ross & Nisbett 2011), which provided substantial material and
social resources to at-risk juveniles. Such resources may be necessary for change to occur, but not
sufﬁcient.
Because of recursion, a process such as self-afﬁrmation can feed off its own consequences
(Cohen et al. 2009, Wilson 2011). Self-afﬁrmed individuals may achieve better outcomes, which
in turn can reafﬁrm them and promote better outcomes, in a cycle that sustains itself. Because
of the interaction between the person and the social environment, different processes can feed
off one another’s effects. Achieving better outcomes, self-afﬁrmed individuals may evoke positive
responses from teachers or friends, which in turn may evoke even better outcomes from them.
Their social world may change, and a new current of processes may then propel their advantage.
Afﬁrmed students may be placed in more demanding courses (see Cohen et al. 2009) and come to
befriend peers who set a norm for higher achievement (cf. Alwin et al. 1991). Not only may they be
shaped by their environment, but they may shape it; with fewer underperformers in a classroom,
the teacher might be better able to teach and reach more children. To paraphrase Caspi & Mofﬁtt
(1995), the person acts; other variables react; and the person reacts back in iterative interactions—a
cycle illustrated in the parable of the professional hockey player described previously.
An understanding of the interdependencies in a system can improve intervention. For instance, in one study variation, teachers were permitted to read their students’ afﬁrmation essays
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

355

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

(Bowen et al. 2012). Relative to a standard afﬁrmation and a control condition, teacher awareness
increased student grades. Teachers who read the essays may have felt more connected to their
students and treated them more attentively, thus fueling the recursive processes initiated by the
afﬁrmation in the student. An intervention need not introduce new processes but can instead act
as a triggering mechanism for existing ones.
Because of subjective construal, recursion, and interaction, the beneﬁts of an intervention can
carry forward through time and can accumulate. They can also widen in scope if they foster assets
that promote wide-ranging advantages (Masten & Cicchetti 2010). For example, an intervention
that bolstered students’ sense of belonging beneﬁted not only their grades but also their selfreported well-being and health three years later (Walton & Cohen 2011). But not all intervention
effects persist. And the system can respond in ways that undo intervention effects, if, for example, a
teacher raises the curve in response to improved grades (see Garcia & Cohen 2012, Heckman et al.
1998). To make an intervention effect stick, it is necessary to understand the key processes at work
in the system. When an intervention occurs at the right time and place and to the persons who
need it, what would otherwise be a transient happenstance, such as writing about an important
value, becomes a turning point.
Three methodological lessons follow from the importance of time, recursion, and interaction
(see Bronfenbrenner 1977, Lewin 1943). First, experimentally manipulated interventions can
reveal much about the recursive and interactive processes at work in a system (Lewin 1997/1948).
The long-term effects of an afﬁrmation on middle school minority students underscored the
recursive, interactive processes that turn early performance outcomes in school into enduring
advantages and disadvantages (Cohen et al. 2009, Sherman et al. 2013). Second, because recursive
processes take time to develop, a full understanding of them requires longitudinal research, not
just the freeze-frame of a short-term measure (Lewin 1943; e.g., Obradović et al. 2010). A single
assessment would have failed to capture the downward trend in performance and belonging
of middle school minority students and how these constructs ﬂuctuate together for them. A
wide-angle temporal lens also pinpoints the time and place a problem emerges and thus when and
with whom to intervene (e.g., Cook et al. 2011). Longitudinal research is also important because the
effect of an intervention may take time to occur (Pennebaker & Chung 2011, Schulz & Hanusa
1978) or persist longer than expected (Green & Shachar 2000). Third, because a process interacts
with the system in which it occurs, ﬁeld studies provide a necessary supplement to lab studies.
This is not simply because ﬁeld studies can test the robustness of a process, its signal in the noise
of the real world. It is because social systems contain variables that interact with the process and
affect its manifestation (Paluck 2009). For example, a school may transform a psychological effect
into a structural reality—as when self-afﬁrmed children earn higher grades and are then admitted
into more advanced courses (Cohen et al. 2009). “Rigor is not reductionism” sums up these
methodological implications.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

New trajectories can transform the psychology of the actor. Over time the cumulative advantages of an intervention or formative experience can transform the actor. For instance, months
after the intervention had commenced, afﬁrmed minority students had a more robust identity as a
person who belongs in school and were resilient to ongoing threats (Cohen et al. 2009, Cook et al.
2012, Sherman et al. 2013; see also Walton & Cohen 2011). Afﬁrmed students experienced many
of the same stressors and slights as others but without the detrimental impact that nonafﬁrmed
students experienced. Their experiences throughout the school year made the afﬁrmed and
nonafﬁrmed increasingly dissimilar, as their felt belonging in school diverged with time (Cook
et al. 2012). Because afﬁrmed students lived in a subjectively less threatening world, they may have
been more emboldened to seize opportunities to transform their circumstances. Self-afﬁrmed
children took more advanced courses in math, which suggests that they put themselves on a
356

Cohen

·

Sherman

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

positive trajectory (Cohen et al. 2009; see also Yeager & Walton 2011). That agents can initiate
their own trajectories, and transform themselves in the process, seems key to understanding how
and when early inﬂuences lead to divergent outcomes. For example, people place themselves
in social environments—friendships, marriages, jobs—that can reinforce their beliefs, values,
and identity for a lifetime (Alwin et al. 1991, Caspi & Mofﬁtt 1995). A continuity between
humans and lower animals is suggested by a study with genetically identical mice in which small
early differences in roaming activity became self-reinforcing, compounding over time into large
differences in behavior and brain structure (Freund et al. 2013). Cumulative consequences of small
initial differences, whether due to chance, personality, or an intervention, can transform the actor.
Timing matters. A major determinant of the effectiveness of an intervention is timeliness. Any
resource can provide a bridge to better outcomes if timed to key transitions and choice points (Elder
1998; see also Bronfenbrenner 1977). The importance of timeliness is evident even at the small
temporal scale of the laboratory study. Afﬁrmations reduced defensiveness when they occurred
either before the presentation of threatening information or soon after. But once participants had
engaged in defensive rationalization, the afﬁrmation could not undo it (Critcher et al. 2010; see
also Briñol et al. 2007). In some respects, a social psychological intervention is like an engineered
coincidence. It places in close proximity three events that otherwise might seldom co-occur: a
positive inﬂuence, a challenge, and an immediate chance to change. A smoker is afﬁrmed, receives
threatening health information, then has the opportunity to assert a commitment to quit.
Over large time scales, early outcomes matter more because their consequences can compound
(Cohen et al. 2009, Sherman et al. 2013, Wilson 2011). Not only can early effects magnify in
recursive loops, but a small effect can add up into a large one if it repeatedly recurs. Just as small
but consistent advantages in baseball batting averages compound into large differences in success
over a season or career, a small but consistent advantage in student test performance will compound
into a sizable increase in cumulative GPA (Abelson 1985, Cohen et al. 2006). In a ﬁeld experiment,
afﬁrmation beneﬁted minority students’ classroom grades more if it took place in the ﬁrst week
of school, before any drop in performance and its ensuing psychological toll, than if it took place
at the standard time a few weeks later (Cook et al. 2012). Strikingly, the effect of early timing
on ﬁrst-term class grades equaled the effect of the presence versus absence of the intervention in
previous research (Cohen et al. 2006). The beginning of a process, like the beginning of a story,
sets the stage for what follows and marks an ideal time to intervene.
Interventions such as afﬁrmation may also have larger beneﬁts if timed to the onset of key
developmental transitions. Adolescence, the ascension to college, and entry into gateway courses
represent sensitive periods that are often threatening, unpredictable, and stressful—an opportune
circumstance for an afﬁrmation. People are often impressionable at such transitions, and their
experiences in them can ﬁx the starting point of a recursive process (see Alwin et al. 1991, Elder
1998). As life-course theorists have noted, the outcome of an early life transition can give rise to
a chain of advantages or disadvantages that shapes the outcomes of later transitions (Elder 1998).
Finally, early experiences anchor people’s expectations for threat or safety in an environment
(Miller et al. 2009, Worthman et al. 2010). Once formed, such foundational beliefs can ﬁlter
subsequent experience and prove difﬁcult to undo (cf. Ross & Nisbett 2011). When African
Americans performed poorly early in the school year, they suffered a drop in their sense of academic
belonging and did not recoup it even if their grades later improved (Cook et al. 2012). Afﬁrmed
African Americans, however, were buffered against the effects of early adversity. Transitions thus
represent both points of vulnerability and windows of opportunity (Anderson 2003). It is easier to
control a process in its germinal stages. But once a process has accumulated its full consequences,
it may have a momentum that is hard to halt.
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

357

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Interventions are more impactful if they take into account the psychological landscape of
social problems. Social problems have a psychological side that, if not addressed, will limit the
effectiveness of reforms. Improvements in school curriculum may produce little gain if students
ﬁnd the classroom threatening rather than safe. Health campaigns may yield disappointing results
if they arouse defensiveness. A sound peace proposal could meet with rejection if adversaries stake
their identity on prevailing over the other side. To the extent that ﬁnancial distress can imprint
on children a view of the world as threatening and requiring vigilance, interventions later in life
may need to assure them that their school or work environment is a safe place where they belong
and good things eventually happen (Chen & Miller 2012, Harackiewicz et al. 2014).
Not only can psychological threat suppress the beneﬁts of structural reforms and institutions.
It can also hide the successful impacts that they have already achieved. When social psychological
interventions raise the performance of minority undergraduates, this suggests that the collegiate
programs that promoted their recruitment and retention were successful, as the performance of
students begins to reﬂect their acquired aptitude (Steele 2010, Walton & Spencer 2009). Together,
structural reforms and psychological interventions can synergize each other’s effects and reduce
the gap between where people are and what they can achieve in a variety of domains (Garcia &
Cohen 2012, Yeager & Walton 2011).

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

Moderators and Boundary Conditions
Social psychological interventions like afﬁrmation are not panaceas but catalysts (Yeager & Walton
2011). Afﬁrmation lifts a barrier, psychological threat, that would otherwise block the impact
of positive forces in the person or the situation. Indeed, in all the problem domains discussed,
psychological threat stands in tension with hidden positive forces, such as the desire and ability
to learn, to be healthy, and to have rewarding relationships. By tipping the balance of forces,
afﬁrmation unleashes “previously unrealized behavioral potentials,” especially for those on the
cusp of change (Bronfenbrenner 1977, p. 528). The forces in tension are key. As with almost any
intervention, the effectiveness of afﬁrmation thus depends on prior conditions or moderators.
Resources for growth. For afﬁrmation to afford beneﬁts, there must be forces to impel improvement once psychological threat is lifted. Afﬁrmation will afford little beneﬁt if the motivation and
ability to improve are absent. Without resources for growth, afﬁrmation may even trigger disengagement (see Vohs & Schmeichel 2013). These resources may either reside latent in the person
(e.g., cognitive ability inhibited by stress) or be scaffolded by the environment (e.g., information
about health risk behavior). Intervention “cocktails” that combine afﬁrmation with programs to
boost motivation and skills may thus yield the greatest beneﬁt. In a sense, the effect of afﬁrmation
reveals less about its intrinsic power and more about the potentials untapped in a person or an
environment. Likewise, beneﬁts will tend to persist more in contexts that reinforce the change.
Without an attentive teacher, a partner in peace, or an interested romantic partner, an initial improvement will be like a spark without kindling. Conversely, even a small improvement can sum
into large consequences if the environment repeatedly reinforces the desired behavior, as many
institutions are designed to do. To use an evolutionary analogy, a small increase in the length of
a ﬁnch’s beak may seem trivial, but it is not if it enables the ﬁnch to eat more seeds.
Situational- and individual-based differences in psychological threat. For afﬁrmations to
yield beneﬁt, psychological threat must be a signiﬁcant impediment to improvement. In the
absence of threat, afﬁrmation has different effects. It may increase self-conﬁdence and resistance to change (Briñol et al. 2007). In contexts where psychological threat contributes little to
358

Cohen

·

Sherman

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

outcomes relative to other factors such as a dysfunctional school or neighborhood violence, little
beneﬁt of the standard afﬁrmation would be expected. Moreover, most studies focus on domains
where self-protective responses are harmful (e.g., resisting health information) and afﬁrmation
thus prompts a more adaptive response. But sometimes threat and defensiveness foster adaptive
outcomes (e.g., Rokeach 1973, Stone et al. 1994). In such cases afﬁrmation should lead to negative
effects. When the salient identity was being an open-minded negotiator, afﬁrmation led people to
be more closed-minded (Cohen et al. 2007). Afﬁrmation is a tool to unleash potentials suppressed
by threat, positive or negative.
At the dispositional level, people who are under threat beneﬁt most from afﬁrmation. One of
the best ways to make predictions about the effect of afﬁrmation is to identify whether a threat
response occurs at baseline. People with low self-esteem and those who feel insecure in their relationships seem at particular risk. So do people who experience social identity threat in a setting
(Steele 2010). But dispositional moderators may vary by context. Low-self-esteem participants
act more defensive in some contexts ( Jaremka et al. 2011), whereas high-self-esteem people act
more defensive in others (Landau & Greenberg 2006; see also Aronson 1969). Another key source
of individual differences in responsiveness to afﬁrmation is the ability to generate self-afﬁrming
meanings spontaneously (see Pietersma & Dijkstra 2012). High-self-esteem people seem to do this
more readily in romantic relationships and thus beneﬁt less from afﬁrmation (Marigold et al. 2007).
More generally, the ability to create afﬁrming events, reminders, or meanings seems to contribute
to well-being and health. For instance, among adolescents burdened with household responsibilities, those who saw themselves as fulﬁlling valued social roles such as “good son or daughter” had
lower levels of C-reactive protein and other markers of cardiovascular risk (Fuligni et al. 2009).
Types of values and affirmations. Because afﬁrmations work, in part, by putting a threat in
the context of the big picture, afﬁrmations that focus people on narrow self-centered values (e.g.,
power, status) or on sources of integrity conditional on meeting external standards (e.g., approval)
tend to be less effective than afﬁrmations that focus people on values that transcend themselves
(e.g., compassion, service to others) or on less conditional sources of integrity (e.g., being loved)
(Burson et al. 2012, Schimel et al. 2004). Indeed, many afﬁrmation essays focus on unconditional
sources of integrity, often from social relationships (Crocker et al. 2008, Shnabel et al. 2013). As
one middle school student wrote, “I can’t live without [my family]. My friends, I am my real self
around them . . . I can be silly . . . and they don’t care, they accept me for who I am” (Table 1).
Although speculative, one reason for the effectiveness of afﬁrmation interventions is that people
may seldom spontaneously afﬁrm themselves in this way at moments of threat. Instead they may
adopt a tunnel-vision focus on the threat and lose sight of what really matters. They may try to
afﬁrm themselves in the same domain as the threat, which can increase defensiveness (Blanton
et al. 1997, Sivanathan et al. 2008), or seek afﬁrmation in extrinsic areas such as ﬁnancial success
and status rather than in the intrinsic sources of integrity cultivated by values afﬁrmations (Schimel
et al. 2004; see also Nickerson et al. 2003).
Awareness of self-affirmation processes. As with many interventions, subtlety may be important to the effectiveness of afﬁrmation (Sherman et al. 2009; see also Robinson 2010, Yeager &
Walton 2011). For example, students are unaware that the “writing exercises” that teachers provide
them are intended to reduce stress and social identity threat. If they were aware of the purpose,
they might see the afﬁrmation as a means to an end, robbing it of its intrinsic appeal. Unlike many
interventions, afﬁrmation is also “wise” in the sense that it does not suggest to the beneﬁciaries
that they are being singled out as in need of help, a message that can be threatening (Cohen et al.
1999, Steele 2010, Yeager et al. 2014). Indeed, when participants are told that the afﬁrmation is
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

359

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

expected to beneﬁt them, or simply led to see a connection between it and the outcome measure,
its impact decreases (Sherman et al. 2009, Silverman et al. 2012). However, the beneﬁts of selfafﬁrmation can be restored even when people are aware of its expected impact if they are given a
choice about whether to afﬁrm or not (Silverman et al. 2012). When given a choice, people may
construe the writing exercise not as a threatening act of control or stigmatization but rather as a
tool to achieve agency over their well-being.
Afﬁrmation interventions are not only subtle but also indirect. People often afﬁrm themselves
on values remote from the threatening domain rather than directly relevant to it. As self-afﬁrmation
theory suggests, a threat derives its power from the challenge it poses to global self-integrity (Steele
1988). For this reason, interventions need not resolve a speciﬁc threat to remedy its effects. People
can ﬁnd anchorage for self-integrity in domains beyond the threat. In a variety of areas, in fact,
indirect approaches to a behavioral or psychological problem seem to work as well as, and sometimes even better than, frontal assaults on it. From increasing happiness to reducing loneliness and
depression, from preventing teen pregnancy and academic failure to reducing childhood obesity,
many successful interventions do not directly confront the problem. Instead, they bring people together around positive, value-relevant activities such as meditation, extracurricular activities, and
volunteer work (Creswell et al. 2012, Lyubomirsky & Della Porta 2010, Robinson 2010, Schreier
et al. 2013, Wilson 2011). Although these activities do not directly address the difﬁculty, they help
to remedy it nonetheless.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

Connections With Other Research Areas
Resilience. One connection concerns the adaptive systems that foster human resilience. The outcomes in self-afﬁrmation research overlap with the outcomes in resiliency research—stress reactivity, information processing, and self-regulation. The core areas typically afﬁrmed—relationships,
family, and spiritual and religious values—dovetail with the hot spots for intervention in resilience
research (Masten & Obradović 2006). Afﬁrmation also promotes adaptive processes that resemble
the strategies of the resilient. These include constructively orienting to errors (Legault et al. 2012),
regulating negative emotions while maintaining a focus on big-picture goals (Creswell et al. 2005,
Schmeichel & Vohs 2009), which is similar to a “shift-and-persist” strategy that characterizes
people resilient to early adversity (Chen & Miller 2012), and marshaling cognitive reappraisal
processes, in which higher cortical regions of the brain are recruited to downregulate threat and
fear (see Ochsner et al. 2002). With time, these adaptive tendencies may give rise to interpersonal
assets, as suggested by research on the resilient. With negative emotions kept at bay, the resilient
tend to be good-natured rather than ill-tempered and defensive. This can help them retain the
support of family, friends, and coworkers through the lifespan (Caspi & Mofﬁtt 1995,
Lyubomirsky & Della Porta 2010) and attract the interest of a role model (Chen & Miller 2012).
Psychological assets beget social assets.
In a study of men and women resilient to the stresses of the Great Depression, Elder (1974) saw
in them an “adaptive, competent self” (p. 249). Rather than being preoccupied with “matters of
self-defense,” “inclined to withdraw in adverse situations, and defensive,” the resilient had
acquired assets that echo the effects of self-afﬁrmation (Elder 1974, pp. 247, 249): a sense of
“personal worth . . . inner security” (p. 11), “an active coping orientation to the environment,” an
ability to control stress, a “capacity for sustaining effort and relationships, even in the face of
obstacles,” “ﬂexibility in the ability to learn and grow from mistakes,” “the resilience to rise above
setbacks,” and a faith in their ability to adapt adequately to changing circumstances (p. 247). By
meeting adversity, these individuals became better prepared for new challenges, in a cycle of
adaptive potential (Elder 1974).
360

Cohen

·

Sherman

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Social ties. Research on self-afﬁrmation and research on social ties can inform each other. Some
of the effects of self-afﬁrmation may arise from the protective effects of subjective connectedness
(Cacioppo & Patrick 2008, Taylor 2007). Much “self ” afﬁrmation seems to be “social” afﬁrmation.
Most people choose to afﬁrm themselves in the domain of relationships (e.g., Creswell et al. 2007).
They seem better buffered when they write about why their values make them closer to others (e.g.,
“I feel part of a team when I play music with my band”) (Shnabel et al. 2013) and focus on their
positive feelings for others (Crocker et al. 2008). At ﬁrst glance, the social aspect of afﬁrmation
seems contrary to a motive for self-integrity. However, the self draws its integrity from the social
world (Leary 2005). As Solomon Asch (1954) wrote, “The ego is not dedicated solely to its own
enhancement . . . [but] needs and wants to be concerned with its surroundings, to bind itself to
others, and to work with them” (p. 320).
Social ties may derive some of their beneﬁt from self-afﬁrmation processes. For example, social
support beneﬁts mental health not only because it helps people to manage stressors (Taylor 2007)
but also because it provides opportunities to participate in pleasurable, value-laden activities and
conversations, as when two music students talk about their favorite band (Lakey & Orehek 2011).
Though they do not remedy a speciﬁc stressor, these acts may bolster people’s sense of global
adequacy and thus their well-being and resiliency. In one intriguing study, writers lived longer if
their autobiographies referred to a greater number of positive social roles (e.g., mother, neighbor,
colleague) (Pressman & Cohen 2007). From a self-afﬁrmation perspective, reference to a broader
range of social roles in one’s life story reﬂects a broader pool of afﬁrmational resources to draw
on in difﬁcult times.
Links to other interventions. Afﬁrmation may be an invisible component of successful interventions and practices in a variety of disciplines. Some forms of behavioral activation therapy,
effective in treating depression, have patients articulate their values and set concrete behavioral
goals for living them out (e.g., for the value of good parenting, a goal might be “taking a walk
with my daughter once a week”), breaking ruminative cycles (Lejuez et al. 2001). In motivational
interviewing, a clinical intervention to change health behavior, counselors encourage clients to
afﬁrm their self-identiﬁed goals and values (Ehret et al. 2014). Effective well-being interventions
have people participate in value-relevant activities such as practicing random acts of kindness
(Lyubomirsky & Della Porta 2010). The positive impact of volunteer work on adolescents’ health
and school achievement may arise from the chance it gives teenagers to craft an identity based
on constructive social values (Schreier et al. 2013; see also Allen & Philliber 2001, Wilson 2011).
Likewise, expressive writing interventions (Pennebaker & Chung 2011) and narratives of personal
agency (Adler 2012) can help people salvage from hardship a sense of purpose and global adequacy.
Imaginary acts of self-transformation can bolster a sense of adequacy and thus help people to cope
with challenging circumstances. For example, among preschool children, wearing a Superman
cape tripled the number who sacriﬁced a short-term pleasure for the sake of obtaining a more
prized reward later (Karniol et al. 2011, study 1). By cognitively transforming into Superman, children could envision themselves as a competent agent, able to manage a difﬁcult situation, and they
could thus perform in a way that better achieved their goal. Finally, the motive for self-integrity
can be channeled into socially constructive behavior. In one intervention, ofﬁcial voter turnout
increased with a short pre-election survey that presented the act of voting as an afﬁrmation of identity (e.g., “How important is it to you to be a voter in tomorrow’s election?”) rather than an isolated
behavior (e.g., “How important is it to you to vote in tomorrow’s election?”) (Bryan et al. 2011).
More generally, afﬁrmation is not simply a paper-and-pencil manipulation but rather an act
that manifests one’s adequacy. The theoretical principles behind afﬁrmation, not any speciﬁc
practice, is what we hope people take from this review and use to guide efforts at purposeful
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

361

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

change. These principles seem harnessed in a variety of success stories. Anecdotally, teachers
report that having underprivileged children write about their troubles and relate them to larger
social values improves their engagement with school (Freedom Writ. & Gruwell 1999). Similarly,
expert tutors, among the most effective of educational “interventions,” often begin the tutoring
session by asking students about their hobbies, friends, and families. The tutors tune in to students’
emotional state, and they provide subtle but well-timed gestures of encouragement that interrupt
downward spirals of demoralization and establish a psychological safety zone that helps children
confront challenges (Lepper & Woolverton 2001). Likewise, many effective doctors see their
patients as whole people with goals and lives, not bodies with disease (Verghese et al. 2011). Indeed,
one psychiatric intervention reduced the number of suicide reattempts simply by sending former
patients timely postcards inquiring into their well-being (see Carter et al. 2013). To an outsider,
such practices can seem insigniﬁcant at best and inefﬁcient at worst. But from the perspective of
people under threat, a self-afﬁrming act can be a timely sign of their adequacy in the wider world.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

CONCLUSION
Self-afﬁrmation theory began with the question of how people cope with threats to the self (Steele
1988). It has spurred a more general account of the change process: how and when people adapt
adequately to threatening circumstances, how interventions can foster this adaptation, and when
these new adaptations stick. A developmentally informed social psychology addresses these topics
and speaks to the problem of stability and change. Although social psychology has long demonstrated the malleability of human behavior (Ross & Nisbett 2011), other traditions have shown
the striking continuity of personality over time (e.g., Caspi et al. 1987, Caspi & Mofﬁtt 1995). For
example, the ﬁnding that children’s performance on laboratory self-control tasks can be boosted
by situational intervention (e.g., Karniol et al. 2011) seems to clash with the ﬁnding that childhood
variation on such self-control measures predicts health, wealth, employment, and crime decades
later (Mofﬁtt et al. 2011). The contradiction resolves itself when we realize that “persistent doesn’t
equal permanent” (Sapolsky 2010, p. xxvi). Persistent can be fragile. Outcomes that seem set in
stone may in fact be the repeating output of dynamic processes. At timely moments the processes
can be redirected to prompt lasting adaptive change (Wilson 2011).
In Raymond Carver’s story, A Small, Good Thing, a baker gives delicious cinnamon rolls to a
couple whose child has just died (Carver 1989). The baker says to the stricken couple, “Eating is
a small, good thing in a time like this.” Of course, his gift to them is not so small after all, in part
because it is given at precisely the right moment. A little help with a ﬁnancial aid form for college,
some health advice from a friend, a word of encouragement from a mentor, a conversation with
a stranger, and other seemingly random events can change a life and even the course of history.
But such events need not be left to chance alone. Social psychology can help locate the right place
and the right time for a small, good thing to happen.

FUTURE ISSUES
1. Some people may afﬁrm themselves spontaneously. Indeed, some people try to turn
almost any writing exercise into a self-afﬁrming one. What are the effects of these selfgenerated afﬁrmations? How do they differ from the experimentally induced afﬁrmations?
And how can researchers capture the spontaneous afﬁrmation process and its effects in
everyday life?

362

Cohen

·

Sherman

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

2. Afﬁrmations tend to yield concentrated rather than diffuse effects, because they typically
beneﬁt the people for whom a threat in a given context is most salient and acute. Understanding this heterogeneity is important, as it can help to “reverse engineer” which
individuals and groups are most under threat in a given setting.
3. Insofar as the beneﬁts of values afﬁrmation and other social psychological interventions
result from carefully conducted research by trained experimental social psychologists,
how best should practitioners, policy makers, and researchers work together to scale
up such interventions? This seems a particularly challenging issue given that attention to local conditions, personalization of the intervention materials, considerations
of timing and other theoretical principles can be difﬁcult to maintain in the scaling-up
process.
4. Jamie Pennebaker and Cindy Chung (2011) wrote, “If you are expecting a clean and
simple explanation for the effectiveness of writing, we have some very bad news: There is
no single reason that explains it” (p. 426). The same notion applies to the effects of selfafﬁrmations. Yet some lessons have emerged related to how and when self-afﬁrmation
interventions prompt lasting change. Future research should examine a range of mechanisms and mediators at different levels of analysis, including the neural activity of the
afﬁrmed mind, the content of the writing exercises, and the recursive processes and feedback mechanisms that afﬁrmation catalyzes. Longitudinal experiments will be particularly
useful to capture the multiple processes that propagate effects over time.

DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The authors are not aware of any afﬁliations, memberships, funding, or ﬁnancial holdings that
might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Sarah Wert, Heejung Kim, Kevin Binning, Stephanie Reeves, and Amy Petermann for
assistance and thoughtful comments on earlier drafts, and Julio Garcia, Claude Steele, Gregory
Walton, David Yeager, Lee Ross, Emily Pronin, David Creswell, Kody Manke, and Shannon
Brady for helpful discussions. Preparation of this manuscript was supported by grants NSF DRL1109548 and NIH 5R01HD055342-04 to G.L.C.

LITERATURE CITED
Abelson RP. 1985. A variance explanation paradox: when a little is a lot. Psychol. Bull. 97:129–33
Addona V, Yates PA. 2010. A closer look at the relative age effect in the National Hockey League. J. Quant.
Anal. Sports 6(Artic. 9):1–17
Adler JM. 2012. Living into the story: agency and coherence in a longitudinal study of narrative identity
development and mental health over the course of psychotherapy. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 102:367–89
Allen JP, Philliber S. 2001. Who beneﬁts most from a broadly targeted prevention program? Differential
efﬁcacy across populations in the Teen Outreach Program. J. Community Psychol. 29:637–55
Alwin DF, Cohen RL, Necomb TM. 1991. Political Attitudes Over the Life Span: The Bennington Women After
Fifty Years. Madison: Univ. Wis. Press
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

363

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Anderson SL. 2003. Trajectories of brain development: point of vulnerability or window of opportunity.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 27:3–18
Armitage CJ, Harris PR, Arden MA. 2011. Evidence that self-afﬁrmation reduces alcohol consumption: randomized exploratory trial with a new, brief means of self-afﬁrming. Health Psychol. 30:633–41
Armitage CJ, Harris PR, Hepton G, Napper L. 2008. Self-afﬁrmation increases acceptance of health-risk
information among UK adult smokers with low socioeconomic status. Psychol. Addict. Behav. 22:88–95
Armor DA, Sackett AM. 2006. Accuracy, error, and bias in predictions for real versus hypothetical events.
J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 91:583–600
Aronson E. 1969. The theory of cognitive dissonance: a current perspective. In Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology, ed. L Berkowitz, 4:1–34. New York: Academic
Aronson J, Cohen GL, Nail PR. 1999. Self-afﬁrmation theory: an update and appraisal. In Cognitive Dissonance:
Progress on a Pivotal Theory in Social Psychology, ed. E Harmon-Jones, J Mills, pp. 127–48. Washington,
DC: Am. Psychol. Assoc.
Asch S. 1954. Social Psychology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall
Baumeister RF, Smart I, Boden JM. 1996. Relation of threatened egotism to violence and aggression: the dark
side of high self-esteem. Psychol. Rev. 103:5–33
Binning KR, Sherman DK, Cohen GL, Heitland K. 2010. Seeing the other side: reducing political partisanship
via self-afﬁrmation in the 2008 presidential election. Anal. Soc. Issues Public Policy 10:276–92
Blanton H, Cooper J, Skurnik I, Aronson J. 1997. When bad things happen to good feedback: exacerbating
the need for self-justiﬁcation through self-afﬁrmation. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 23:684–92
Bowen NK, Wegmann KM, Webber KC. 2013. Enhancing a brief writing intervention to combat stereotype
threat among middle-school students. J. Educ. Psychol. 105:427–35
Briñol P, Petty RE, Gallardo I, DeMarree KG. 2007. The effect of self-afﬁrmation in non-threatening persuasion domains: timing affects the process. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 33:1533–46
Bronfenbrenner U. 1977. Toward an experimental ecology of human development. Am. Psychol. 32:513–31
Bryan CJ, Walton GM, Rogers T, Dweck CS. 2011. Motivating voter turnout by invoking the self. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 108:12653–56
Bugental DB, Ellerson PC, Lin EK, Rainey B, Kokotovic A, O’Hara N. 2002. A cognitive approach to child
abuse prevention. J. Fam. Psychol. 16:243–58
Burson A, Crocker J, Mischkowski D. 2012. Two types of value-afﬁrmation: implications for self-control
following social exclusion. Soc. Psychol. Personal. Sci. 3:510–16
Cacioppo JT, Patrick W. 2008. Loneliness: Human Nature and the Need for Social Connection. New York: Norton
Carter GL, Clover K, Whyte IM, Dawson AH, D’Este C. 2013. Postcards from the EDge: 5-year outcomes
of a randomised controlled trial for hospital-treated self-poisoning. Br. J. Psychiatry 202:372–80
Carver R. 1989. A small, good thing. In Where I’m Calling From. New York: Random House
Caspi A, Elder GH, Bem DJ. 1987. Moving against the world: life-course patterns of explosive children. Dev.
Psychol. 23:308–13
Caspi A, Mofﬁtt TE. 1995. The continuity of maladaptive behavior: from description to understanding in the
study of antisocial behavior. In Developmental Psychopathology Vol. 2: Risk, Disorder, and Adaptation. Wiley
Series on Personality Processes, ed. D Cicchetti, DJ Cohen, pp. 472–511. Oxford, UK: Wiley
Čehajić-Clancy S, Effron DA, Halperin E, Liberman V, Ross LD. 2011. Afﬁrmation, acknowledgment of
in-group responsibility, group-based guilt, and support for reparative measures. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol.
101:256–70
Cent. Disease Control Prev. (CDC). Smoking and Tobacco Use. Atlanta, GA: CDC. http://www.cdc.
gov/tobacco/data_statistics/fact_sheets/fast_facts/index.htm
Chen E, Miller GE. 2012. “Shift-and-persist” strategies: why low socioeconomic status isn’t always bad for
health. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 7:135–58
Cohen D, Nisbett RE, Bowdle BF, Schwarz N. 1996. Insult, aggression, and the southern culture of honor:
an “experimental ethnography.” J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 70:945–60
Cohen GL. 2012. Identity, ideology, and bias. In Ideology, Psychology, and Law, ed. J Hanson, pp. 385–403.
New York: Oxford Univ. Press
Cohen GL, Garcia J. 2008. Identity, belonging, and achievement: a model, interventions, implications. Curr.
Dir. Psychol. Sci. 17:365–69

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

364

Cohen

·

Sherman

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Cohen GL, Garcia J, Apfel N, Master A. 2006. Reducing the racial achievement gap: a social-psychological
intervention. Science 313:1307–10
Cohen GL, Garcia J, Purdie-Vaughns V, Apfel N, Brzustoski P. 2009. Recursive processes in self-afﬁrmation:
intervening to close the minority achievement gap. Science 324:400–3
Cohen GL, Purdie-Vaughns V, Garcia J. 2012. An identity threat perspective on intervention. In Stereotype
Threat: Theory, Process, and Application, ed. M Inzlichtt, T Schmader, pp. 280–96. New York: Oxford Univ.
Press
Cohen GL, Sherman DK, Bastardi A, Hsu L, McGoey M, Ross L. 2007. Bridging the partisan divide: selfafﬁrmation reduces ideological closed-mindedness and inﬂexibility in negotiation. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol.
93:415–30
Cohen GL, Steele CM, Ross LD. 1999. The mentor’s dilemma: providing critical feedback across the racial
divide. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 25:1302–18
Cook JE, Purdie-Vaughns V, Garcia J, Cohen GL. 2012. Chronic threat and contingent belonging: protective
beneﬁts of values afﬁrmation on identity development. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 102:479–96
Cornil Y, Chandon P. 2013. From fan to fat? Vicarious losing increases unhealthy eating, but selfafﬁrmation is an effective remedy. Psychol. Sci. In press. http://pss.sagepub.com/content/early/
2013/08/07/0956797613481232.long. doi:10.1177/0956797613481232
Correll J, Spencer SJ, Zanna MP. 2004. An afﬁrmed self and an open mind: self-afﬁrmation and sensitivity to
argument strength. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 40:350–56
Creswell JD, Dutcher JM, Klein WM, Harris PR, Levine JM. 2013. Self-afﬁrmation improves problem-solving
under stress. PLoS ONE 8:e62593
Creswell JD, Irwin MR, Burklund LJ, Lieberman MD, Arevalo JM, et al. 2012. Mindfulness-based stress
reduction training reduces loneliness and pro-inﬂammatory gene expression in older adults: a small
randomized controlled trial. Brain Behav. Immunol. 26:1095–101
Creswell JD, Lam S, Stanton AL, Taylor SE, Bower JE, Sherman DK. 2007. Does self-afﬁrmation, cognitive
processing, or discovery of meaning explain cancer-related health beneﬁts of expressive writing? Personal.
Soc. Psychol. Bull. 33:238–50
Creswell JD, Welch W, Taylor SE, Sherman D, Gruenewald T, Mann T. 2005. Afﬁrmation of personal values
buffers neuroendocrine and psychological stress responses. Psychol. Sci. 16:846–51
Critcher CR, Dunning D, Armor DA. 2010. When self-afﬁrmations reduce defensiveness: timing is key.
Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 36:947–59
Crocker J, Niiya Y, Mischkowski D. 2008. Why does writing about important values reduce defensiveness?
Self-afﬁrmation and the role of positive, other-directed feelings. Psychol. Sci. 19:740–47
Dillard AJ, McCaul KD, Magnan RE. 2005. Why is such a smart person like you smoking? Using selfafﬁrmation to reduce defensiveness to cigarette warning labels. J. Appl. Biobehav. Res. 10:165–82
Doosje BE, Branscombe NR, Spears R, Manstead AS. 2006. Antecedents and consequences of group-based
guilt: the effects of ingroup identiﬁcation. Group Process. Intergr. Relat. 9:325–38
Dunning D. 2005. Self-Insight: Roadblocks and Detours on the Path to Knowing Thyself. New York: Psychol. Press
Dweck CS. 2008. Can personality be changed? The role of beliefs in personality and change. Curr. Dir. Psychol.
Sci. 17:391–94
Eccles J, Lord S, Midgley C. 1991. What are we doing to early adolescents? The impact of educational contexts
on early adolescents. Am. Educ. J. 99:521–42
Ehret PJ, LaBrie JW, Santerre C, Sherman DK. 2014. Self-afﬁrmation and motivational interviewing: integrating perspectives to reduce resistance and increase efﬁcacy of alcohol interventions. Health Psychol.
Rev. In press
Elder GH Jr. 1974. Children of the Great Depression: Social Change in Life Experience. Chicago: Univ. Chicago
Press
Elder GH. 1977. Family history and the life course. J. Fam. Hist. 2:279–304
Elder GH. 1998. The life course as developmental theory. Child Dev. 69:1–12
Epton T, Harris PR. 2008. Self-afﬁrmation promotes health behavior change. Health Psychol. 27:746–52
Finkel EJ, Slotter EB, Luchies LB, Walton GM, Gross JJ. 2013. A brief intervention to promote conﬂict
reappraisal preserves marital quality over time. Psychol. Sci. 24:1595–601
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

365

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Freedman JL, Fraser SC. 1966. Compliance without pressure: the foot-in-the-door technique. J. Personal. Soc.
Psychol. 4:195–202
Freedom Writers, Gruwell E. 1999. The Freedom Writers Diary: How a Teacher and 150 Teens Used Writing to
Change Themselves and the World Around Them. New York: Broadway Books
Freund J, Brandmaier AM, Lewejohann L, Kirste I, Kritzler M, et al. 2013. Emergence of individuality in
genetically identical mice. Science 340:756–59
Fry RB, Prentice-Dunn S. 2005. Effects of coping information and value afﬁrmation on responses to perceived
health threat. Health Comm. 17:133–47
Fuligni AJ, Telzer EH, Bower J, Cole SW, Kiang L, Irwin MR. 2009. A preliminary study of daily interpersonal
stress and C-reactive protein levels among adolescents from Latin American and European backgrounds.
Psychosom. Med. 71:329–33
Garcia J, Cohen GL. 2012. A social psychological approach to educational intervention. In Behavioral Foundations of Policy, ed. E Shaﬁr, pp. 329–50. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press
Gilbert DT, Pinel EC, Wilson TD, Blumberg SJ, Wheatley TP. 1998. Immune neglect: a source of durability
bias in affective forecasting. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 75:617–38
Gladwell M. 2008. Outliers: The Story of Success. New York: Little, Brown
Gollwitzer PM, Sheeran P. 2006. Implementation intentions and goal achievement: a meta-analysis of effects
and processes. Adv. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 38:69–119
Gottman JM. 2011. The Science of Trust: Emotional Attunement for Couples. New York: Norton
Green D, Shachar R. 2000. Habit formation and political behavior: evidence of consuetude in voter turnout.
Br. J. Polit. Sci. 30:561–73
Greenberg J, Solomon S, Pyszczynski T. 1997. Terror management theory of self-esteem and cultural worldviews: empirical assessments and conceptual reﬁnements. In Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, ed.
MP Zanna, 29:61–139. Orlando, FL: Academic
Greenwald AG. 1980. The totalitarian ego: fabrication and revision of personal history. Am. Psychol. 35:603–18
Grifﬁn DW, Harris PR. 2011. Calibrating the response to health warnings limiting both overreaction and
underreaction with self-afﬁrmation. Psychol. Sci. 22:572–78
Grubb WN. 2009. The Money Myth: School Resources, Outcomes, and Equity. New York: Sage Found.
Haines J, Neumark-Sztainer D, Wall M, Story M. 2007. Personal, behavioral, and environmental risk and
protective factors for adolescent overweight. Obesity 15:2748–60
Harackiewicz JM, Canning EA, Tibbetts Y, Giffen CJ, Hyde JS. 2014. Closing the social class achievement
gap for ﬁrst-generation students in undergraduate biology. J. Educ. Psychol. In press
Harber KD, Yeung D, Iacovelli A. 2011. Psychosocial resources, threat, and the perception of distance and
height: support for the resources and perception model. Emotion 11:1080–90
Harris PR, Epton T. 2009. The impact of self-afﬁrmation on health cognition, health behaviour and other
health-related responses: a narrative review. Soc. Personal. Psychol. Compass 3:962–78
Harris PR, Epton T. 2010. The impact of self-afﬁrmation on health-related cognition and health behaviour:
issues and prospects. Soc. Personal. Psychol. Compass 4:439–54
Harris PR, Mayle K, Mabbott L, Napper L. 2007. Self-afﬁrmation reduces smokers’ defensiveness to graphic
on-pack cigarette warning labels. Health Psychol. 26:437–46
Harris PR, Napper L. 2005. Self-afﬁrmation and the biased processing of threatening health-risk information.
Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 31:1250–63
Havranek EP, Hanratty R, Tate C, Dickinson LM, Steiner JF, Cohen GL, Blair IA. 2012. The effect of values
afﬁrmation on race-discordant patient-provider communication. Arch. Intern. Med. 172:1662–67
Heckman JJ, Lochner L, Taber C. 1998. General equilibrium treatment effects: a study of tuition policy. Am.
Econ. Rev. 88:381–86
Howell JL, Shepperd JA. 2012. Reducing information avoidance through afﬁrmation. Psychol. Sci. 23:141–45
Inzlicht M, Schmader T, eds. 2011. Stereotype Threat: Theory, Process, and Application. New York: Oxford Univ.
Press
Jaremka LM, Bunyan DP, Collins NL, Sherman DK. 2011. Reducing defensive distancing: self-afﬁrmation
and risk regulation in response to relationship threats. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 47:264–68
Karniol R, Galili L, Shtilerman D, Naim R, Stern K, et al. 2011. Why Superman can wait: cognitive selftransformation in the delay of gratiﬁcation paradigm. J. Clin. Child Adolesc. Psychol. 40:307–17

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

366

Cohen

·

Sherman

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Kennedy KA, Pronin E. 2008. When disagreement gets ugly: perceptions of bias and the escalation of conﬂict.
Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 34:833–48
Keough KA, Markus HR. 1998. The role of the self in building the bridge from philosophy to biology. Psychol.
Inq. 9:49–53
Kiecolt-Glaser JK, Page GG, Marucha PT, MacCallum RC, Glaser R. 1998. Psychological inﬂuences on
surgical recovery: perspectives from psychoneuroimmunology. Am. Psychol. 53:1209–18
Klein WM, Harris PR. 2009. Self-afﬁrmation enhances attentional bias toward threatening components of a
persuasive message. Psychol. Sci. 20:1463–67
Klein WM, Harris PR, Ferrer RA, Zajac LE. 2011. Feelings of vulnerability in response to threatening
messages: effects of self-afﬁrmation. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 47:1237–42
Koole SL, Smeets K, van Knippenberg A, Dijksterhuis A. 1999. The cessation of rumination through selfafﬁrmation. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 77:111–25
Kunda Z. 1990. The case for motivated reasoning. Psychol. Bull. 108:480–98
Lakey B, Orehek E. 2011. Relational regulation theory: a new approach to explain the link between perceived
social support and mental health. Psychol. Rev. 118:482–95
Landau MJ, Greenberg J. 2006. Play it safe or go for the gold? A terror management perspective on selfenhancement and protection motives in risky decision making. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 32:1633–45
Leary MR. 2005. Sociometer theory and the pursuit of relational value: getting to the root of self-esteem. Eur.
Rev. Soc. Psychol. 16:75–111
Legault L, Al-Khindi T, Inzlicht M. 2012. Preserving integrity in the face of performance threat: selfafﬁrmation enhances neurophysiological responsiveness to errors. Psychol. Sci. 23:1455–60
Lejuez CW, Hopko DR, LePage JP, Hopko SD, McNeil DW. 2001. A brief behavioral activation treatment
for depression. Cogn. Behav. Pract. 8:164–75
Lepper MR, Woolverton M. 2001. The wisdom of practice: lessons learned from the study of highly effective
tutors. In Improving Academic Achievement: Contributions of Social Psychology, ed. J Aronson, pp. 133–56.
Orlando, FL: Academic
Lewin K. 1943. Deﬁning the “ﬁeld at a given time.” Psychol. Rev. 50:292–310
Lewin K. 1997/1948. Resolving Social Conﬂicts and Field Theory in Social Science. Washington, DC: Am. Psychol.
Assoc.
Logel C, Cohen GL. 2012. The role of the self in physical health. Psychol. Sci. 23:53–55
Lyubomirsky S, Della Porta M. 2010. Boosting happiness, buttressing resilience: results from cognitive and
behavioral interventions. In Handbook of Adult Resilience: Concepts, Methods, and Applications, ed. JW Reich,
AJ Zautra, J Hall, pp. 450–64. New York: Guilford
Mancuso CA, Choi TN, Wenn H, Wenderoth S, Hollenberg JP, et al. 2012. Increasing physical activity in
patients with asthma through positive affect and self-afﬁrmation. Arch. Intern. Med. 172:337–43
Marigold DC, Holmes JG, Ross M. 2007. More than words: reframing compliments from romantic partners
fosters security in low self-esteem individuals. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 92:232–48
Marigold DC, Holmes JG, Ross M. 2010. Fostering relationship resilience: an intervention for low self-esteem
individuals. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 46:624–30
Martens A, Johns M, Greenberg J, Schimel J. 2006. Combating stereotype threat: the effect of self-afﬁrmation
on women’s intellectual performance. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 42:236–43
Masten AS, Cicchetti D. 2010. Developmental cascades. Dev. Psychopathol. 22:491–95
Masten AS, Obradović J. 2006. Competence and resilience in development. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1094:13–27
Master SL, Eisenberger NI, Taylor SE, Naliboff BD, Shirinyan D, Lieberman MD. 2009. A picture’s worth:
Partner photographs reduce experimentally induced pain. Psychol. Sci. 20:1316–18
Matsuda KN, Melde C, Taylor TJ, Freng A, Esbensen FA. 2013. Gang membership and adherence to the
“code of the street.” Justice Q. 30:440–48
McCord J. 1978. A thirty-year follow-up of treatment effects. Am. Psychol. 33:284–89
McQueen A, Klein WM. 2006. Experimental manipulations of self-afﬁrmation: a systematic review. Self
Identity 5:289–354
Miller G, Chen E, Cole SW. 2009. Health psychology: developing biologically plausible models linking the
social world and physical health. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 60:501–24
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

367

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Miyake A, Kost-Smith LE, Finkelstein ND, Pollock SJ, Cohen GL, Ito TA. 2010. Reducing the gender
achievement gap in college science: a classroom study of values afﬁrmation. Science 330:1234–37
Mofﬁtt TE, Arseneault L, Belsky D, Dickson N, Hancox RJ, et al. 2011. A gradient of childhood self-control
predicts health, wealth, and public safety. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108:2693–98
Murray SL, Grifﬁn DW, Rose P, Bellavia G. 2006. For better or worse? Self-esteem and the contingencies of
acceptance in marriage. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 32:866–80
Napper L, Harris PR, Epton T. 2009. Developing and testing a self-afﬁrmation manipulation. Self Identity
8:45–62
Nickerson C, Schwarz N, Diener E, Kahneman D. 2003. Zeroing in on the dark side of the American dream:
a closer look at the negative consequences of the goal for ﬁnancial success. Psychol. Sci. 14:531–36
Norris S. 2008. Coping with Illness. Video ﬁle. La Jolla: Univ. Calif. Telev. (UCTV). http://www.uctv.tv/
search-details.asp?showID=15400
Obradović J, Burt KB, Masten AS. 2010. Testing a dual cascade model linking competence and symptoms
over 20 years from childhood to adulthood. J. Clin. Child Adolesc. Psychol. 39:109–17
Ochsner KN, Bunge SA, Gross JJ, Gabrieli JD. 2002. Rethinking feelings: an fMRI study of the cognitive
regulation of emotion. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 14:1215–29
Ogedegbe GO, Boutin-Foster C, Wells MT, Allegrante JP, Isen AM, et al. 2012. A randomized controlled
trial of positive-affect intervention and medication adherence in hypertensive African Americans. Arch.
Intern. Med. 172:322–26
Overall NC, Simpson JA, Struthers H. 2013. Buffering attachment-related avoidance: softening emotional
and behavioral defenses during conﬂict discussions. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 104:854–71
Paluck EL. 2009. Reducing intergroup prejudice and conﬂict using the media: a ﬁeld experiment in Rwanda.
J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 96:574–87
Pennebaker JW, Chung CK. 2011. Expressive writing: connections to physical and mental health. In The
Oxford Handbook of Health Psychology, ed. HS Friendman, pp. 417–37. New York: Oxford Univ. Press
Peterson JC, Charlson ME, Hoffman Z, Wells MT, Wong S, et al. 2012. A randomized controlled trial
of positive-affect induction to promote physical activity after percutaneous coronary intervention. Arch.
Intern. Med. 172:329–36
Pietersma S, Dijkstra A. 2012. Cognitive self-afﬁrmation inclination: an individual difference in dealing with
self-threats. Br. J. Soc. Psychol. 51:33–51
Pratto F, John OP. 1991. Automatic vigilance: the attention-grabbing power of negative social information.
J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 61:380–91
Pressman SD, Cohen S. 2007. Use of social words in autobiographies and longevity. Psychosom. Med. 69:262–69
Raudenbush, SW. 1984. Magnitude of teacher expectancy effects on pupil IQ as a function of the credibility
of expectancy induction: a synthesis of ﬁndings from 18 experiments. J. Educ. Psychol. 76:85–97
Reardon SF. 2011. The widening academic achievement gap between the rich and the poor: new evidence
and possible explanations. In Whither Opportunity? Rising Inequality and the Uncertain Life Chances of
Low-Income Children, ed. R Murnane, G Duncan, pp. 91–116. New York: Sage Found.
Reed MB, Aspinwall LG. 1998. Self-afﬁrmation reduces biased processing of health-risk information. Motiv.
Emot. 22:99–132
Robinson TN. 2010. Stealth interventions for obesity prevention and control: motivating behavior change. In
Obesity Prevention: The Role of Brain and Society on Individual Behavior, ed. L Dube, A Bechara, A Dagher,
A Drewnowski, J Lebel, P James, R Yada, pp. 319–28. New York: Elsevier
Rokeach M. 1973. The Nature of Human Values. New York: Free Press
Rosenthal R. 1994. Interpersonal expectancy effects: a 30-year perspective. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 3:176–79
Ross LD, Nisbett RE. 2011. The Person and the Situation: Perspectives of Social Psychology. London: Pinter &
Martin
Sabaté E. 2003. Adherence to Long-Term Therapies: Evidence for Action.Geneva: World Health Organ.
Sapolsky RM. 2004. Why Zebras Don’t Get Ulcers: The Acclaimed Guide to Stress, Stress-Related Diseases, and
Coping—Now Revised and Updated. New York: Holt Paperb.
Sapolsky RM. 2010. Foreword. In Formative Experiences: The Interaction of Caregiving, Culture, and Developmental Psychobiology, ed. CM Worthman, PM Plotsky, DS Schechter, CA Cummings, pp. xxiii–xxvi.
New York: Cambridge Univ. Press

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

368

Cohen

·

Sherman

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Savitsky K, Epley N, Gilovich T. 2001. Do others judge us as harshly as we think? Overestimating the impact
of our failures, shortcomings, and mishaps. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 81:44–56
Schimel J, Arndt J, Banko KM, Cook A. 2004. Not all self-afﬁrmations were created equal: the cognitive and
social beneﬁts of afﬁrming the intrinsic (versus extrinsic) self. Soc. Cogn. 22:75–99
Schmeichel BJ, Vohs KD. 2009. Self-afﬁrmation and self-control: afﬁrming core values counteracts ego depletion. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 96:770–82
Schreier HM, Schonert-Reichl KA, Chen E. 2013. Effect of volunteering on risk factors for cardiovascular
disease in adolescents: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA Pediatr. 167:327–32
Schulz R. 1976. The effects of control and predictability on the psychological and physical well-being of the
institutionalized aged. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 33:563–73
Schulz R, Hanusa BH. 1978. Long-term effects of control and predictability-enhancing interventions: ﬁndings
and ethical issues. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 36:1194–201
Shapiro JR, Williams AM, Hambarchyan M. 2012. Are all interventions created equal? A multi-threat approach
to tailoring stereotype threat interventions. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 104:277–88
Sherman DAK, Nelson LD, Steele CM. 2000. Do messages about health risks threaten the self? Increasing
the acceptance of threatening health messages via self-afﬁrmation. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 26:1046–58
Sherman DK. 2013. Self-afﬁrmation: understanding the effects. Soc. Personal. Psychol. Compass. In press
Sherman DK, Bunyan DP, Creswell JD, Jaremka LM. 2009. Psychological vulnerability and stress: the effects of
self-afﬁrmation on sympathetic nervous system responses to naturalistic stressors. Health Psychol. 28:554–
62
Sherman DK, Cohen GL. 2006. The psychology of self-defense: self-afﬁrmation theory. In Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, ed. MP Zanna, 38:183–242. San Diego, CA: Academic
Sherman DK, Cohen GL, Nelson LD, Nussbaum AD, Bunyan DP, Garcia J. 2009. Afﬁrmed yet unaware:
exploring the role of awareness in the process of self-afﬁrmation. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 97:745–64
Sherman DK, Hartson KA. 2011. Reconciling self-protection with self-improvement: self-afﬁrmation theory. In The Handbook of Self-Enhancement and Self-Protection, ed. M Alicke, C Sedikides, pp. 128–51.
New York: Guilford
Sherman DK, Hartson KA, Binning KR, Purdie-Vaughns V, Garcia J, et al. 2013. Deﬂecting the trajectory and
changing the narrative: how self-afﬁrmation affects academic performance and motivation under identity
threat. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 104:591–618
Sherman DK, Kim HS. 2005. Is there an “I” in “team?” The role of the self in group-serving judgments.
J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 88:108–20
Shnabel N, Purdie-Vaughns V, Cook JE, Garcia J, Cohen GL. 2013. Demystifying values-afﬁrmation interventions: writing about social belonging is a key to buffering against identity threat. Personal. Soc. Psychol.
Bull. 39:663–76
Silverman A, Logel C, Cohen GL. 2012. Self-afﬁrmation as a deliberate coping strategy: the moderating role
of choice. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 49:93–98
Sivanathan N, Molden DC, Galinsky AD, Ku G. 2008. The promise and peril of self-afﬁrmation in deescalation of commitment. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 107:1–14
Sivanathan N, Pettit NC. 2010. Protecting the self through consumption: status goods as afﬁrmational commodities. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 46:564–70
Smith A. 1759/2011. The Theory of Moral Sentiments. New York: Empire
Stanton AL, Danoff-Burg S, Sworowski LA, Collins CA, Branstetter AD, et al. 2002. Randomized, controlled
trial of written emotional expression and beneﬁt ﬁnding in breast cancer patients. J. Clin. Oncol. 20:4160–
68
Steele CM. 1988. The psychology of self-afﬁrmation: sustaining the integrity of the self. In Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology, ed. L Berkowitz, 21:261–302. New York: Academic
Steele CM. 2010. Whistling Vivaldi and Other Clues to How Stereotypes Affect Us. New York: Norton
Steele CM, Southwick LL, Critchlow B. 1981. Dissonance and alcohol: drinking your troubles away.
J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 41:831–46
Steele CM, Spencer SJ, Aronson J. 2002. Contending with group image: the psychology of stereotype and
social identity threat. In Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, ed. MP Zanna, 34:379–440. New York:
Academic
www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

369

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Steele CM, Spencer SJ, Lynch M. 1993. Self-image resilience and dissonance: the role of afﬁrmational resources. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 64:885–96
Stephens NM, Markus, HR, Fryberg SA. 2012. Social class disparities in health and education: reducing
inequality by applying a sociocultural self model of behavior. Psychol. Rev. 119:723–44
Sterling P. 2004. Principles of allostasis: optimal design, predictive regulation, pathophysiology and rational
therapeutics. In Allostasis, Homeostasis, and the Costs of Adaptation, ed. J Schulkin, pp. 17–64. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge Univ. Press
Stinson DA, Logel C, Shepherd S, Zanna MP. 2011. Rewriting the self-fulﬁlling prophecy of social rejection:
self-afﬁrmation improves relational security and social behavior up to 2 months later. Psychol. Sci. 22:1145–
49
Stone J, Aronson E, Crain AL, Winslow MP, Fried CB. 1994. Inducing hypocrisy as a means of encouraging
young adults to use condoms. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 20:116–28
Stone J, Whitehead J, Schmader T, Focella E. 2011. Thanks for asking: self-afﬁrming questions reduce backlash
when stigmatized targets confront prejudice. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 47:589–98
Taylor SE. 2007. Social support. In Foundations of Health Psychology, ed. HS Friedman, pp. 145–71. New York:
Oxford Univ. Press
Taylor SE. 2010. Mechanisms linking early life stress to adult health outcomes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
107:8507–12
Taylor VJ, Walton GM. 2011. Stereotype threat undermines academic learning. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull.
37:1055–67
Thomaes S, Bushman BJ, de Castro BO, Cohen GL, Denissen JJ. 2009. Reducing narcissistic aggression by
buttressing self-esteem: an experimental ﬁeld study. Psychol. Sci. 20:1536–42
Thomaes S, Bushman BJ, de Castro BO, Reijntjes A. 2012. Arousing “gentle passions” in young adolescents:
sustained experimental effects of value afﬁrmations on prosocial feelings and behaviors. Dev. Psychol.
48:103–10
Toma CL, Hancock JT. 2013. Self-afﬁrmation underlies Facebook use. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 39:321–31
Tugade MM, Fredrickson BL. 2004. Emotions: positive emotions and health. In Encyclopedia of Health and
Behavior, ed. N Anderson, pp. 306–10. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
van Koningsbruggen GM, Das E. 2009. Don’t derogate this message! Self-afﬁrmation promotes online
type 2 diabetes risk test taking. Psychol. Health 24:635–49
van Koningsbruggen GM, Das E, Roskos-Ewoldsen DR. 2009. How self-afﬁrmation reduces defensive processing of threatening health information: evidence at the implicit level. Health Psychol. 28:563–68
Verghese A, Brady E, Kapur CC, Horwitz RI. 2011. The bedside evaluation: ritual and reason. Ann. Intern.
Med. 155:550–53
Vohs KD, Park JK, Schmeichel BJ. 2013. Self-afﬁrmation can enable goal disengagement. J. Personal. Soc.
Psychol. 104:14–27
Wakslak CJ, Trope Y. 2009. Cognitive consequences of afﬁrming the self: the relationship between selfafﬁrmation and object construal. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 45:927–32
Walton GM, Cohen GL. 2011. A brief social-belonging intervention improves academic and health outcomes
of minority students. Science 331:1447–51
Walton GM, Spencer SJ. 2009. Latent ability: grades and test scores systematically underestimate the intellectual ability of negatively stereotyped students. Psychol. Sci. 20:1132–39
Ward A, Atkins DC, Lepper MR, Ross L. 2011. Afﬁrming the self to promote agreement with another:
lowering a psychological barrier to conﬂict resolution. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 37:1216–28
Wilson TD. 2011. Redirect: The Surprising New Science of Psychological Change. New York: Little, Brown
Wilson TD, Linville PW. 1982. Improving the academic performance of college freshmen: attribution therapy
revisited. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 42:367–76
Wood JV, Perunovic WQ, Lee JW. 2009. Positive self-statements: power to some, peril for others. Psychol.
Sci. 20:860–66
Woolf K, McManus IC, Gill D, Dacre J. 2009. The effect of a brief social intervention on the examination
results of UK medical students: a cluster randomised controlled trial. BMC Med. Educ. 9:35
Worthman CM, Plotsky PM, Schechter DS, Cummings CA, eds. 2010. Formative Experiences: The Interaction
of Caregiving, Culture, and Developmental Psychobiology. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

PS65CH13-Cohen

370

Cohen

·

Sherman

PS65CH13-Cohen

ARI

31 October 2013

13:5

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

Yeager DS, Purdie-Vaughns V, Garcia J, Apfel N, Brzustoski P, et al. 2014. Breaking the cycle of mistrust:
wise interventions to provide critical feedback across the racial divide. J. Exp. Psychol.: Gen. In press.
http://psycnet.apa.org/psycarticles/2013-28213-001.pdf. doi:10.1037/a0033906
Yeager DS, Walton GM. 2011. Social-psychological interventions in education: they’re not magic. Rev. Educ.
Res. 81:267–301
Zhao X, Peterson EB, Kim W, Rolfe-Redding J. 2012. Effects of self-afﬁrmation on daily versus occasional
smokers’ responses to graphic warning labels. Comm. Res. In press. http://crx.sagepub.com/content/
early/2012/11/09/0093650212465433.full.pdf+html. doi:10.1177/0093650212465433
Zolnierek KBH, DiMatteo MR. 2009. Physician communication and patient adherence to treatment: a metaanalysis. Med. Care 47:826–34

www.annualreviews.org • Self-Affirmation and Social Psychological Intervention

371

PS65-FrontMatter

ARI

13 November 2013

20:27

Contents

Annual Review of
Psychology

Prefatory

Volume 65, 2014

I Study What I Stink At: Lessons Learned from a Career in Psychology
Robert J. Sternberg p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 1
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

Stress and Neuroendocrinology
Oxytocin Pathways and the Evolution of Human Behavior
C. Sue Carter p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p17
Genetics of Behavior
Gene-Environment Interaction
Stephen B. Manuck and Jeanne M. McCaffery p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p41
Cognitive Neuroscience
The Cognitive Neuroscience of Insight
John Kounios and Mark Beeman p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p71
Color Perception
Color Psychology: Effects of Perceiving Color on Psychological
Functioning in Humans
Andrew J. Elliot and Markus A. Maier p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p95
Infancy
Human Infancy. . . and the Rest of the Lifespan
Marc H. Bornstein p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 121
Adolescence and Emerging Adulthood
Bullying in Schools: The Power of Bullies and the Plight of Victims
Jaana Juvonen and Sandra Graham p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 159
Is Adolescence a Sensitive Period for Sociocultural Processing?
Sarah-Jayne Blakemore and Kathryn L. Mills p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 187
Adulthood and Aging
Psychological Research on Retirement
Mo Wang and Junqi Shi p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 209
Development in the Family
Adoption: Biological and Social Processes Linked to Adaptation
Harold D. Grotevant and Jennifer M. McDermott p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 235
vi

PS65-FrontMatter

ARI

13 November 2013

20:27

Individual Treatment
Combination Psychotherapy and Antidepressant Medication Treatment
for Depression: For Whom, When, and How
W. Edward Craighead and Boadie W. Dunlop p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 267
Adult Clinical Neuropsychology

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

Sport and Nonsport Etiologies of Mild Traumatic Brain Injury:
Similarities and Differences
Amanda R. Rabinowitz, Xiaoqi Li, and Harvey S. Levin p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 301
Self and Identity
The Psychology of Change: Self-Afﬁrmation and Social
Psychological Intervention
Geoffrey L. Cohen and David K. Sherman p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 333
Gender
Gender Similarities and Differences
Janet Shibley Hyde p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 373
Altruism and Aggression
Dehumanization and Infrahumanization
Nick Haslam and Steve Loughnan p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 399
The Sociocultural Appraisals, Values, and Emotions (SAVE) Framework
of Prosociality: Core Processes from Gene to Meme
Dacher Keltner, Aleksandr Kogan, Paul K. Piff, and Sarina R. Saturn p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 425
Small Groups
Deviance and Dissent in Groups
Jolanda Jetten and Matthew J. Hornsey p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 461
Social Neuroscience
Cultural Neuroscience: Biology of the Mind in Cultural Contexts
Heejung S. Kim and Joni Y. Sasaki p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 487
Genes and Personality
A Phenotypic Null Hypothesis for the Genetics of Personality
Eric Turkheimer, Erik Pettersson, and Erin E. Horn p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 515
Environmental Psychology
Environmental Psychology Matters
Robert Gifford p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 541

Contents

vii

PS65-FrontMatter

ARI

13 November 2013

20:27

Community Psychology
Socioecological Psychology
Shigehiro Oishi p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 581
Subcultures Within Countries
Social Class Culture Cycles: How Three Gateway Contexts Shape Selves
and Fuel Inequality
Nicole M. Stephens Hazel Rose Markus, and L. Taylor Phillips p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 611
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2014.65:333-371. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 01/03/14. For personal use only.

Organizational Climate/Culture
(Un)Ethical Behavior in Organizations
Linda Klebe Treviño, Niki A. den Nieuwenboer, and Jennifer J. Kish-Gephart p p p p p p p 635
Job/Work Design
Beyond Motivation: Job and Work Design for Development, Health,
Ambidexterity, and More
Sharon K. Parker p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 661
Selection and Placement
A Century of Selection
Ann Marie Ryan and Robert E. Ployhart p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 693
Personality and Coping Styles
Personality, Well-Being, and Health
Howard S. Friedman and Margaret L. Kern p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 719
Timely Topics
Properties of the Internal Clock: First- and Second-Order Principles of
Subjective Time
Melissa J. Allman, Sundeep Teki, Timothy D. Grifﬁths, and Warren H. Meck p p p p p p p p 743
Indexes
Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors, Volumes 55–65 p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 773
Cumulative Index of Article Titles, Volumes 55–65 p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 778
Errata
An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Psychology articles may be found at
http://psych.AnnualReviews.org/errata.shtml

viii

Contents

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
Much Ado About Grit: A Meta-Analytic Synthesis of the Grit
Literature
Marcus Credé, Michael C. Tynan, and Peter D. Harms
Online First Publication, June 16, 2016. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/pspp0000102

CITATION
Credé, M., Tynan, M. C., & Harms, P. D. (2016, June 16). Much Ado About Grit: A Meta-Analytic
Synthesis of the Grit Literature. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. Advance online
publication. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/pspp0000102

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
2016, Vol. 110, No. 4, 000

© 2016 American Psychological Association
0022-3514/16/$12.00 http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/pspp0000102

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Much Ado About Grit: A Meta-Analytic Synthesis of the Grit Literature
Marcus Credé and Michael C. Tynan

Peter D. Harms

Iowa State University

University of Alabama

Grit has been presented as a higher order personality trait that is highly predictive of both success and
performance and distinct from other traits such as conscientiousness. This paper provides a meta-analytic
review of the grit literature with a particular focus on the structure of grit and the relation between grit
and performance, retention, conscientiousness, cognitive ability, and demographic variables. Our results
based on 584 effect sizes from 88 independent samples representing 66,807 individuals indicate that the
higher order structure of grit is not confirmed, that grit is only moderately correlated with performance
and retention, and that grit is very strongly correlated with conscientiousness. We also find that the
perseverance of effort facet has significantly stronger criterion validities than the consistency of interest
facet and that perseverance of effort explains variance in academic performance even after controlling for
conscientiousness. In aggregate our results suggest that interventions designed to enhance grit may only
have weak effects on performance and success, that the construct validity of grit is in question, and that
the primary utility of the grit construct may lie in the perseverance facet.
Keywords: grit, performance, meta-analysis, perseverance of effort, consistency of interest

over many years” (Duckworth as quoted in Perkins-Gough, 2013,
p. 16). Duckworth et al. argue that grit can help to explain why
some individuals perform better than their scores on ability tests
might predict and that grit was a core contributor to the success of
highly accomplished individuals such as Albert Einstein. Recently,
Duckworth (2013a) has even argued that grit is as good or even a
better predictor of success than cognitive ability; a strong claim
given meta-analytic findings that cognitive ability correlates about
␳ ⫽ .50 with performance in academic and work settings (Sackett
et al., 2012; Schmidt & Hunter, 1998).
Despite the widespread enthusiasm for grit as a potentially novel
predictor and determinant of performance there are sound empirical and theoretical reasons why a critical reappraisal of the nature
of the grit construct, its contribution to our understanding of
performance, and its general position within the nomological network may be warranted. It is the goal of this paper to present
findings from a meta-analytic synthesis of the rapidly growing
empirical literature on grit to help shed light on the nature and
construct validity of grit, and to highlight potentially new areas of
inquiry for grit researchers. We begin by reviewing the literature
relating to five core theoretical features of grit: (a) the proposed
hierarchical structure of grit, (b) the relation of grit with performance, (c) the distinction of grit from conscientiousness, (d) the
distinction of grit from cognitive ability, and (e) the lack of group
differences on grit.

Interest in noncognitive variables as potential predictors and
determinants of academic performance has been spurred by metaanalytic findings that variables such as study habits and study
skills (Credé & Kuncel, 2008; Robbins et al., 2004), personality
traits such as conscientiousness (Poropat, 2009, 2014), test anxiety
(Hembree, 1988; Seipp, 1991), adjustment (Credé & Niehorster,
2012), emotional intelligence (Perera & DiGiacomo, 2013), and
learning strategies (Credé & Phillips, 2011; Richardson, Abraham
& Bond, 2012), exhibit relations with academic performance that
are often comparable to relations between admissions test scores
and academic performance (e.g., Hezlett et al., 2001). Many of
these noncognitive characteristics also appear to be responsive to
interventions. For example, meta-analytic reviews have demonstrated that interventions can reduce anxiety (Hembree, 1988), and
improve study skills (Hattie, Biggs, & Purdie, 1996) as well as
social and personal skills (Durlak, Weissberg, & Pachan, 2010).
One additional noncognitive variable that has received widespread attention and that has been widely touted as an important
predictor of success and performance is a personality trait referred
to as grit (Duckworth, Peterson, Matthews, & Kelly, 2007; Duckworth & Quinn, 2009). Grit is defined as “perseverance and
passion for long-term goals” (Duckworth, Peterson, Matthews, &
Kelly, 2007, p. 1087) and as “. . . not just resilience in the face of
failure, but also having deep commitments that you remain loyal to

Grit as a Hierarchical Construct
Grit is typically operationalized as a higher-order construct with
two lower order facets: “perseverance of effort” and “consistency
of interest.” These two facets (hereafter referred to as perseverance
and consistency), respectively refer to the tendency to work hard
even in the face of setbacks and the tendency to not frequently
change goals and interests. Both are thought to contribute to
success: persistence because the process of attaining mastery in a

Marcus Credé and Michael C. Tynan, Department of Psychology, Iowa
State University; Peter D. Harms, School of Management, University of
Alabama.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Marcus
Credé, Department of Psychology, Iowa State University, W112 Lagomarcino Hall, 901 Stange Road, Ames, IA 50011-1041. E-mail: mcrede@
iastate.edu
1

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

2

CREDÉ, TYNAN, AND HARMS

field often involves initial failures that the individual must persist
through, and consistency because many hours of deliberate practice are normally required to achieve mastery (Ericsson, Krampe,
& Tesch-Römer, 1993). That is, individuals who either disengage
their efforts in the face of obstacles or who constantly change their
interests are unlikely to ever engage in enough deliberate practice
to achieve high levels of performance. The distinction between the
two facets is reflected in the subscales of the two primary selfreport inventories used to measure grit: the Grit Scale (Duckworth
et al., 2007) and the Short Grit Scale (Duckworth & Quinn,
2009)— both of which can be found on Angela Duckworth’s
homepage (https://sites.sas.upenn.edu/duckworth/pages/research).
Although some researchers examine perseverance and consistency
as two separate constructs, most research on grit only reports
findings at the level of the overall grit score.
This practice appears to be informed by two factors. First,
Duckworth et al. (2007) in their discussion of the two facets state
that “. . . neither factor was consistently more predictive of outcomes than the other, and in most cases, the two together were
more predictive than either alone” (p. 1091). Second, Duckworth
and Quinn (2009) reported examining the theoretical higher-order
factor structure of grit using confirmatory factor analysis, and
claimed support for the higher-order structure based on their
finding that the higher order model (comprised of two first-order
factors and one second-order factor) exhibits significantly better fit
than a single-factor model. However, the reported analysis is
problematic because a model with one second-order factor and two
first-order factors is not identified at the higher-order level (Kline,
2011); this means that no unique loadings onto the higher-order
factor can be computed without additional constraints being imposed. However, it does not appear that Duckworth and Quinn
imposed the type of equality constraints on the loadings of the
first-order factors onto the higher-order factor that would be required to achieve identification because they report nonidentical
loadings of the first-order factors onto the higher-order factor.
Importantly, even if an equality constraint had been imposed at the
higher-order level the resultant higher-order model would have
exhibited identical fit to a model with two correlated first-order
factors and no higher-order factor (see Credé & Harms, 2015 for
a discussion). That is, a model in which the persistence and
consistency facets are simply two correlated constructs would
exhibit identical fit to the higher-order model. Interestingly, Duckworth and colleagues had tested the fit of such a two-factor model
in an earlier paper (Duckworth et al., 2007), and reported relatively
poor fit for the model (i.e., comparative fit index ⫽ .83, root mean
square error of approximation ⫽ .11). The confirmatory factor
analysis strategy for determining whether a higher-order grit construct exists is therefore not particularly meaningful because standard indexes of model fit cannot be used to distinguish between a
higher-order model and a model with two correlated factors.
A potentially more useful approach would involve examining
the correlation between the two theoretical facets of grit; high
correlations would suggest that a higher order construct is plausible. However, empirical estimates of the strength of this relation
exhibit substantial variability, with some reporting correlations
that are close to zero (e.g., Chang, 2014; Datu, Valdez, & King,
2015; Jordan, Gabriel, Teasley, Walker, & Schraeder, 2015), while
others have reported very strong correlations (e.g., Arslan, Akin, &
Çîtemel, 2013; Meriac, Slifka, & LaBat, 2015). A meta-analytic

synthesis will help to establish a population estimate of the correlation between the two facets and thereby allow readers to make a
more informed judgment about whether or not grit exhibits the
hypothesized higher-order structure. This will in turn help to
determine whether the practice of simply summing across the
perseverance and persistence items to compute an overall grit
score (as recommended by Duckworth et al., 2007) is reasonable,
or whether the two facets should be considered separately.

Grit as a Predictor of Success and Performance
Proponents of grit as a predictor of performance have argued
that between-person differences in grit can help to explain why
two individuals with the same level of ability in a particular
domain are often observed to perform at substantially different
levels. Specifically, individuals with high levels of grit are thought
to be able to better utilize their capabilities because they are less
distracted by short-term goals and less discouraged by the failures
and setbacks that are commonly encountered in many performance
domains. Indeed, Duckworth et al. (2007) described that the importance of grit for success had long been noted by prior research
into highly accomplished individuals (e.g., Howe, 1999). Arguments for the importance of grit are also in line with work on the
development of expertise that has highlighted the importance of
sustained deliberative practice (e.g., Ericsson, Krampe, & TeschRömer, 1993; Krampe & Ericcson, 1996). Indeed, recent work by
Duckworth, Kirby, Tsukayama, Berstein and Ericsson (2011) has
explicitly tied grit to success in spelling bees via the mediating
mechanism of deliberative practice. That is, individuals who are
high on grit are more likely to engage in the amount of deliberative
practice that is required to achieve expertise.
At the same time, there are a number of theoretically plausible
moderators of the grit-performance relation that suggest that the
relation may not be strong in all— or even most—settings. First,
the grit-performance relation may be moderated by the nature of
the performance domain. Specifically, high levels of grit may be
most useful when the task is difficult but well defined; that is, high
levels of sustained effort and deliberative practice are required to
succeed and the manner in which performance is to be attained is
relatively clear (see MacNamara, Hambrick & Oswald, 2014).
Thus, grit may be an excellent predictor of an individual’s ability
to complete military basic training or succeed in well-defined
academic tasks, but be less well related to performance on tasks
that are very easy (thus not requiring grit) or performance on tasks
that are novel and ill-defined and that therefore require both
creativity and the willingness to abandon unsuccessful strategies
(i.e., tasks on which grit may be counterproductive). Second, the
grit-performance relation may be moderated by other individual
differences such as ability and metacognition (Credé & Phillips,
2011). That is, high levels of grit may not necessarily be adaptive
unless it is accompanied by the general potential or ability to
succeed in a domain and the ability to engage in the type of
reflection and self-monitoring that the self-regulated learning literature (e.g., Zimmerman, 1990) and the social– cognitive view of
learning (e.g., Ryan & Pintrich, 1997; Zimmerman, 1994, see also
Kohn, 2014) has identified as important determinants of learning
and performance. For example, cadets who lack some minimum
level of physical ability to pass the highly strenuous tests of
physical ability in a military academy are unlikely to benefit

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

GRIT META-ANALYSIS

substantially from grit. Similarly, a cadet who is unable to recognize that a particular approach to studying for class material is not
working is unlikely to perform well in academic courses.
Third, the grit-performance relation may be moderated by the
level of grit itself. Very high levels of grit may become dysfunctional if they reduce the likelihood of help-seeking behaviors that
have themselves been linked to performance (e.g., Karabenick,
2003) or if they increase the likelihood that an individual persists
too long in attempting to solve a problem that is particularly
difficult rather than spending their time on other, more solvable
problems (see Lucas, Gratch, Cheng, & Marsella, 2015). This
would, in turn, suggest that interventions designed to enhance grit
levels may not benefit all individual equally. A recent large-scale
evaluation of the impact of resiliency interventions (Paunesku et
al., 2015) found that such interventions benefit primarily those
students who were most at risk of dropping out of high schools and
provided less benefit for other students. Meta-analytic evidence
suggests similar effects for resilience interventions in working
populations (Vanhove, Herian, Perez, Harms, & Lester, 2015). A
similar nonlinear relation may also exist for grit.
A more nuanced conceptualization of grit’s contribution to performance also seems warranted when reconsidering the biographical
details of some of the highly accomplished scientific figures referenced by Duckworth et al. (2007) to highlight the importance of grit.
For example, it is true that Albert Einstein persisted for many years in
his attempt to develop the field equations that represent the mathematical description of general theory of relativity, but it is also true
that Einstein persisted for years in pursuing an avenue of investigation
that was based on an earlier mathematical error. Einstein also appears
to have only resolved some of the challenging mathematical obstacles
after consulting with the mathematicians Marcel Grossman and (later)
David Hilbert (Earman & Glymour, 1978) who, according to some
accounts (e.g., Parker, 2004), almost scooped Einstein in the development of the mathematical framework for the general theory of
relativity because of Einstein’s delay in seeking assistance. That is,
persistence in this narrow case almost resulted in “failure” and Einstein only “succeeded” in this particular endeavor once he recognized
his mathematical limitations and sought the help of more accomplished mathematicians.
The possibility that the grit-performance relation is not uniformly
strong is also strongly suggested by an examination of the empirical
literature. Some have found that grit scores are relatively strongly
related to success as suggested by the initial findings by Duckworth
and colleagues (e.g., Strayhorn, 2013), but many others (e.g., Chang,
2014; Cross, 2013; Davidson, 2014; Hogan, 2013; Sheehan, 2014)
have failed to find strong relations between grit scores and indicators
of success. This is particularly the case for studies examining academic success. Indeed, many of the reported relations between grit
and academic success are weaker or equal to the relation of ␳ ⫽ .21
and ␳ ⫽ .23 that has been reported between conscientiousness and
academic performance in two recent large-scale meta-analytic reviews (e.g., Porapat, 2009; Richardson, Abraham, & Bond, 2012).
Meta-analytic synthesis will not only help to clarify the strength of the
relation between grit and success but will also help to clarify whether
the observed variability in relations is simply a function of sampling
error and other study artifacts (e.g., differences in the reliability in the
measurement of variables), or if this variability reflects the presence
of meaningful moderators.

3

A meta-analytic summary should also help to address possible
confusion among readers of the grit literature about the ability of grit
to predict the successful completion of rigorous programs. This confusion may have arisen because the authors of both of the foundational papers (Duckworth et al., 2007; Duckworth & Quinn, 2009)
appear to confuse odds ratios with probabilities in their discussion of
logistic regression results, resulting in incorrect inferences about the
size of observed effects. This misunderstanding may have led readers
to infer a much greater predictive power for grit scores than is
warranted. For example, Duckworth and Quinn (2009) discussed the
ability of grit scores to predict the successful completion a summer
program for cadets from the United States Military Academy at West
Point and interpret an odds ratio of 1.99 to mean that “Cadets who
scored a standard deviation higher than average on the Grit-S were
99% more likely to complete summer training” (p. 171). This interpretation is incorrect because approximately 94% of all cadets successfully completed the program. A relatively small increase in the
completion rate from, say, 95% to 97.5% associated with a one point
increase in grit scores would, of course, represent an odds ratio of 2,
but this is only a 2.6% increase in the likelihood of completing the
program.
A meta-analytic synthesis will also help to establish whether
either of the two facets of grit exhibit higher levels of criterion
validity than the other or whether the two are largely equivalent in
their relation with important outcomes as suggested by Duckworth
and colleagues (2007, p. 1091). This might, in turn, change the
manner in which grit scores are presented and interpreted. Many
grit researchers follow the recommendations by Duckworth et al.
and examine only an overall grit score. However, facets are often
better predictors than broad traits (e.g., Paunonen & Ashton,
2001), and substantial differences between the grit facets to predict
important criteria might suggest that this scoring strategy should
be revisited.
A meta-analytic synthesis of the strength of the relation between
grit and success will also help to inform judgments about whether
interventions designed to enhance grit are likely to have an impact
on performance. Initial reports of the high predictive validity of
grit scores and their relative independence from indicators of
cognitive ability, combined with claims that grit can be taught
(Perkins-Gough, 2013), has resulted in some schools implementing interventions designed to increase students’ levels of grit. For
example, The Knowledge is Power Program network of public
charter schools is training its teachers to foster grit in their pupils
(Shechtman, DeBarger, Dornsife, Rosier, & Yarnall, 2013), while
many school districts across the US are reportedly considering
integrating the teaching of grit into curricula (Cohen, 2015). Grit
was even highlighted as a promising focus of school interventions
in a U.S. Department of Education report (Shechtman et al., 2013).
The time and resources that are likely to be devoted to grit-based
interventions in schools are likely to be nontrivial and should
therefore only be based on the best available knowledge about the
role of grit in predicting and determining performance.

The Distinction of Grit From Conscientiousness
An interest in what Duckworth and colleagues refer to as grit,
perseverance, and consistency is not new to psychology. Studies of
attributes such as will power, tenacity, determination, persistence
of motives, and volitional perseveration date back over 80 years

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

4

CREDÉ, TYNAN, AND HARMS

(see Ryans, 1939 for an early review). More recently, researchers
have investigated a variety of other trait-like constructs that are
characterized by persistence and consistency including proactivity
(e.g., Crant, 1995), persistence (e.g., De Fruyt, Van de Wiele, &
Van Heeringen, 2000), industriousness (e.g., Eisenberger, 1992;
Jackson, Paunonen, & Tremblay, 2000), need for achievement
(McClelland, 1985), conscientiousness, and some of the facets of
conscientiousness such as industriousness, self-control, and order
(Roberts, Chernyshenko, Stark & Goldberg, 2005). The conceptual
similarities between these constructs and grit raises the possibility
that the proponents of grit may have fallen victim to what Kelley
(1927) referred to as the “jangle fallacy”—the belief that two
things are different simply because they have different names. The
contribution of grit to the psychological literature would, of
course, be severely limited if the construct was simply a case of
“old wine in new bottles” and it would therefore appear to be
important to formally establish the discriminant validity of grit
relative to these related constructs. There has however been almost
no empirical investigation of the discriminant validity of grit from
these other constructs using the types of methodologies (e.g.,
Mulitrait-multimethod matrices, confirmatory factor analyses)
commonly employed to determine discriminant validity, despite
the fact that grit has been explicitly presented as a construct that is
distinct from these previously examined constructs—particularly
conscientiousness and need for achievement (Duckworth et al.,
2007; Duckworth & Quinn, 2009; Perkins-Gough, 2013). The
bivariate relation of grit with conscientiousness has often been
reported by researchers but even for conscientiousness (and its
facets) there are both empirical and theoretical reasons for suspecting that the overlap with grit may be stronger than is widely
assumed.
For example, the definition of grit as “perseverance and passion
for long-term goals” (Duckworth et al., 2007) is highly similar to
the definitions given by Costa and McCrae (1992) for the selfdiscipline facet (“capacity to begin tasks and follow through to
completion despite boredom or distractions”) and the achievement
striving facet of conscientiousness (“need for personal achievement and sense of direction”). This theoretical similarity is also
reflected in the considerable similarity in the items that are found
in the Duckworth et al. (2007) perseverance subscale and items in
widely used inventories of conscientiousness such as those provided by the International Personality Item Pool (IPIP, Goldberg,
1999). For example, perseverance items such as “I finish whatever
I begin” and “I am a hard worker” are very similar to IPIP items
used to measure achievement striving such as “I carry out my
plans” and “I work hard.” Items from the consistency scale overlap
less strongly with items from conscientiousness inventories and
are instead more similar to IPIP items used to measure the adventurousness facet of openness to experience and the IPIP measure of
planfulness that is modeled after the Achievement via Conformance scale found in the California Personality Inventory (Gough,
1996).
A cursory examination of the empirical grit literature also suggests that the grit— conscientiousness relation may be much stronger than is commonly assumed. While some (e.g., Cooper, 2014)
have presented evidence the grit is largely distinct from conscientiousness, numerous others have reported correlations between grit
and conscientiousness that approach unity when correcting the
observed correlations for unreliability. Reed, Pritschet and Cutton

(2012), for example, report a correlation of ␳ ⫽ .92 based on 1165
college students, Engel (2013) reports a correlation of ␳ ⫽ .95
based on a smaller sample of 88, and Meriac, Slifka, and LaBat
(2015) report a disattenuated correlation of ␳ ⫽ .98 based on a
sample of 322 students. Even Duckworth et al. (2007) and Duckworth and Quinn (2009) report correlations between conscientiousness and grit scores that rise to ␳ ⫽ .97 (N ⫽ 1,554); ␳ ⫽ .90
(N ⫽ 706), ␳ ⫽ .83 (N ⫽ 190), and ␳ ⫽ .80 (N ⫽ 1,308) after
correcting for the unreliability of both conscientiousness scores
and grit scores. High correlations such as these have led some
(e.g., MacCann & Roberts, 2010) to suggest that grit should be
considered a facet of conscientiousness—a position that seems
theoretically plausible when considering that both grit and the
self-control or self-discipline facet of conscientiousness focus on
the deferment of short-term gain for long-term goals (see Costa &
McCrae, 1992; Roberts, Bogg, Walton, Chernyshenko, & Stark,
2004). High observed correlations between grit and conscientiousness are also of concern when considering that a concurrent
assessment of the same personality trait using different scales
typically yields much lower correlations of around r ⫽ .50 (e.g.,
Pace & Brannick, 2010; Miller, Price & Campbell, 2012). Metaanalytic synthesis of the literature on the grit-conscientiousness
relation will help clarify whether the strength of the relation is such
that grit might be a case of the “old wine in new bottles” phenomenon.

The Distinction of Grit From Cognitive Ability
Grit is typically described as being largely distinct from cognitive ability (Duckworth et al., 2007; Duckworth & Quinn, 2009;
Perkins-Gough, 2013), although Duckworth (2013a, 2013b) has
also suggested a negative relation between grit and cognitive
ability in noting that “. . . gritty people, on average, tend to be
slightly less talented” Duckworth (2013b, p. 18). This distinction,
if correct, suggests that grit might explain unique variance in
performance over and above the substantial variance in performance accounted for by cognitive ability (e.g., Kuncel, Hezlett,
Ones, 2004). Further, a finding that grit is largely orthogonal from
general cognitive ability would also suggest that interventions
designed to enhance grit levels might result in substantial increases
in performance. Primary research findings have found broad support for the assertion that cognitive ability and grit are largely
distinct. Many of the studies in this domain utilize admissions test
scores as a proxy for cognitive ability test scores but this approach
seems reasonable when considering that cognitive ability tests
administered in research settings have questionable validity because many test takers will not be motivated to exert maximal
effort on ability tests in a low-stake setting (Duckworth, Quinn,
Lynam, Loeber, & Stouthamer-Loeber, 2011). Most commonly
used college admissions test scores are highly correlated with
cognitive ability test scores (e.g., Frey & Dotterman, 2004) and are
also taken under maximal performance (i.e., high stakes) conditions and are therefore likely to represent a sound indicator of
cognitive ability. Research examining the relation between grit
scores and admissions test scores have largely found very weak
relations (e.g., Chang, 2014; Duckworth et al., 2007; EskreisWinkler, Duckworth, Shulman, & Beal, 2014; Kelly, Matthews, &
Bartone, 2014).

GRIT META-ANALYSIS

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Group Differences in Grit Scores
Concerns about the reliance on cognitive ability tests for the
prediction of success and performance have often revolved around
the persistent finding that groups exhibit nontrivial mean score
differences on such tests (e.g., Camara & Schmidt, 1999; Davis et
al., 2013). A finding that grit exhibits smaller differences between
groups is likely to make the construct more attractive in settings
where scores are used for selection purposes or for making other
high-stakes decisions because the likelihood of adverse impact on
legally protected groups is reduced. Prior research suggests only
one type of group difference. Duckworth et al. suggested that grit
might increase with age—a phenomenon that has also been observed for conscientiousness (Roberts, Walton, & Viechtbauer,
2006)— but prior findings from the personality literature (e.g.,
Costa, Terracciano, & McCrae, 2001; Foldes, Duehr, & Ones,
2008) suggest that differences across ethnicities and gender are
likely to be more modest than those observed for ability measures.
Empirical findings on the direction and strength of the relation
between grit scores and demographic variables such as age (e.g.,
Engel, 2013, Eskreis-Winkler et al., 2014), gender (e.g., Allen,
2014; Davidson, 2014), and ethnicity (e.g., Chang, 2014; EskreisWinkler, Shulman, & Duckworth, 2014) have been mixed and a
meta-analytic synthesis will help to clarify whether average grit
scores are largely similar across groups.

The General Position of Grit Within the
Nomological Network
Grit has been not only been related to performance, cognitive
ability, and conscientiousness but also to a wide array of other
variables reflecting either states or traits. These include Big Five
traits (e.g., Eskreis-Winkler et al., 2014), optimism (e.g., Lovering
et al., 2015), psychological well-being (e.g., MacCann & Roberts,
2010); suicide ideation (Blalock, Young, & Kleiman, 2015), intended persistence in academic programs (e.g., Bowman et al.,
2015), and life satisfaction (e.g., Samson et al., 2011). A metaanalytic synthesis of the relation of grit with these other variables
will further help to clarify the general position of grit within the
broader nomological network.

5

with academic performance in college: (a) indicators of cognitive
ability such as scores on the SAT and (b) prior academic performance such as high school grade point average (GPA; Sackett et
al., 2012). Other predictors that correlate approximately at ␳ ⫽ .40
with academic performance include study skills and study habits
(Credé & Kuncel, 2008), academic adjustment (Credé & Niehorster, 2012), academic self-efficacy (Robbins et al., 2004), and class
attendance (Credé et al., 2010). These appear to be the best known
predictors of academic performance in college. Other variables
that meta-analyses have shown to exhibit weaker but practically
still very meaningful relations of around ␳ ⫽ .20 with academic
performance include (a) specific learning strategies (Credé &
Phillips, 2011), (b) emotional intelligence (Perera & DiGiacomo,
2013), (c) conscientiousness (Porapat, 2009), and (d) test anxiety
(Hembree, 1988).
The ability to predict retention is typically weaker. Metaanalytic findings indicate that the best predictors are: academic
self-efficacy (␳ ⫽ .36) and academic-related skills (␳ ⫽ .37,
Robbins et al., 2004), institutional attachment (␳ ⫽ .29) and social
adjustment (␳ ⫽ .25, Credé & Niehorster, 2012), high school
grades (␳ ⫽ .20, Robbins, Allen, Casillas, Peterson, & Le, 2006),
and SAT and ACT scores (␳ ⫽ .17, Mattern & Patterson, 2009;
Robbins et al., 2006).

Method
Search Strategy
Potential sources for inclusion in our review were identified
using keyword, abstract, and title searches of the PsycINFO,
Dissertations Abstracts, and ERIC databases using the search term
“grit.” This yielded a total of 778 potential data sources. These
search results were supplemented by an examination of the reference lists of identified sources. We also examined the first 500
search results of the Internet using the Google search engine and
the search term “grit” to identify additional unpublished sources of
information. Potential sources for inclusion were first screened by
examining the abstract and title of the source and all possible
sources were then examined more closely to determine if the
reported data met the inclusion or exclusion criteria.

Interpreting Criterion-Related Validity Estimates
Cohen’s (1988) guidelines for what constitutes small (r ⫽ .10),
medium (r ⫽ .30), and large (r ⫽ .50) effect sizes are widely used
to describe the size of the relation between a predictor variable and
a criterion variable. However, the American Psychological Association (Wilkinson, 1999) has also encouraged researchers to place
effect sizes in a practical and theoretical context. To this end we
briefly discuss meta-analytic estimates of the criterion-related validity of various widely studied predictors of academic performance and retention. We use these meta-analytic estimates to
inform our assessment of the relative ability of grit to predict
academic performance and retention, although it is also important
to note that even a relatively low criterion validity can be practically very important— especially when the predictor provides information about the criterion that is not provided by other predictors and when the criterion is important.
Prior meta-analyses of predictors of academic performance have
identified two variables that correlate at approximately ␳ ⫽ .50

Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
Sources were included in our review if they reported on the
Pearson correlation between scores on any of the Duckworth et al.
(2007, 2009) measures of grit and other variables— or if they
reported information that could be used to estimate the size of such
a correlation (e.g., means and standard deviations for two criteria
groups). The year of publication, source of the material, and
country of origin of the data were not used to exclude any sources,
although non-English sources were excluded. Sources were also
excluded if they reported correlations for individuals below a
middle school age because personality is still highly fluid at earlier
ages, and because prior meta-analyses on personality as a predictor
of achievement (Poropat, 2014) found that the strength of the
relation at younger ages was very different to the relation at older
ages. We also excluded one study that only reported on significant
correlations (and excluded nonsignificant correlations) because the
inclusion of this data would have resulted in an upwardly biased

6

CREDÉ, TYNAN, AND HARMS

effect size estimate. When studies did not report data in a format
that could be coded and when these studies had been published in
the last five years we attempted to contact the authors to request
the necessary information. Data from a total of 73 studies representing data from 88 unique samples and 66,807 individuals was
ultimately included in the analyses.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Coding Procedure
All articles were coded by two of the authors using a systematic
coding procedure, one of whom has extensive experience coding
articles for meta-analytic analyses. An accuracy check revealed
98.8% agreement in coding across the four most important coding
categories. 60% of coding errors were errors of commission (e.g.,
incorrect coding of an effect size) and 40% were errors of omission
(e.g., an effect size that could have been computed was not coded).
All disagreements were resolved via discussion. Each correlation
that was included in our review was described using 10 coding
categories: (a) the size of the correlation, (b) the sample size, (c)
the reliability of the grit scores, (d) the reliability of the correlate
scores, (e) the name of the correlate, (f) the source of grit ratings
(self-ratings or other-ratings), (g) the source of the correlate data
(self-ratings, other-ratings, records), (h) whether the grit scores
reflected overall grit or either of the two facets: consistency and
perseverance, (i) the source of the publication (peer-reviewed vs.
not peer-reviewed), and (j) the year of publication. Self-reported
grades are very highly correlated with actual grades (Kuncel,
Credé, & Thomas, 2005), and we therefore included correlations
with grades irrespective of whether the grade information was
based on self-reports or were obtained from records. When sources
reported correlations involving both self-reported grades and
grades obtained from records we coded the correlations involving
grades obtained from records. A summary of the coding of the
most important variables is included in the Appendix.

Transformations
Our coding process involved three transformations of data. First,
we used formulas presented by Hunter and Schmidt (2004) to
calculate estimates of the correlation between grit and correlate
variables when the original sources had artificially dichotomized
the correlate variable (e.g., presenting grit scores for “low” and
“high” scoring students). The artificial dichotomization of data
results in downwardly biased estimates of the population correlation if such a correction is not made. Second, we used the formula
presented by Ghiselli, Campbell, and Zedeck (1981) to calculate
composite correlations when the original source only presented
correlations involving the facets of grit and/or facets of the correlate variable. For example, Bowman et al. (2015), presents correlations among the two facets of grit, fall GPA, and spring GPA; the
six correlations among these four variables were used to arrive at
an estimate of the correlation between overall grit and overall
GPA. Mosier reliability estimates for composite variables (Mosier,
1943) were also calculated whenever possible. Finally, we computed point-biserial correlations between retention and grit when
the mean and standard deviation of grit scores were reported for
both the retained and nonretained group.

Criterion Categories
Grit researchers have examined the relation of grit with a wide
variety of indicators of success. Meta-analytic synthesis requires a
grouping of similar criteria with each other but because success
criteria can be grouped in a wide variety of ways we present
meta-analytic estimates for 10 criterion categories. First, we present separate meta-analytic estimates of the relation between grit
and high school GPA, college GPA, and postgraduate GPA. Second, we aggregate these into a broader general GPA criterion
category (i.e., GPA across all three educational levels). For this
general GPA criterion category we relied on the correlations for
the more recent college GPA when authors reported correlations
involving both high school GPA and college GPA. We then also
combined this general GPA category further with correlations
involving grades in individual courses to form an academic performance criterion category. Third, we present meta-analytic estimates of the point-biserial correlation between grit and retention.
Most studies examining retention do so in an academic or military
setting (e.g., degree completion, completion of basic training) but
one study also examined marital status as an indicator of retention
(i.e., staying married vs. getting a divorce or separating), and we
therefore present meta-analytic estimates both with and without
the study on marital retention. We also present findings for a
criterion representing a collection of nonacademic criteria comprised of performance in spelling bees, military settings, and
athletics. Finally, we also present meta-analytic estimates of the
relation between grit and the intent to persist in both college and
with a particular employer.

State, Trait, and Demographic Categories
Grit researchers have examined the relation between grit and a
variety of other variables that represent both relatively stable
personality traits such as the Big Five personality traits and cognitive ability, and variables that have a strong mood and emotion
component and that could therefore be described as falling somewhere along the state-trait continuum (e.g., happiness, depression,
positive affect). We use the descriptors of these variables as given
in our source articles to group these various state and trait variables
into categories and computed meta-analytic estimates for those
categories for which at least three effect sizes were reported. We
also report meta-analytic estimates of the relation between grit and
four demographic variables (gender, age, year in school and ethnicity).

Statistical Method
We used the Hunter and Schmidt (2004) interactive metaanalytic method based on a random-effects model to arrive at
population estimates of the size of the relations between grit and
other variables. The Schmidt and Le (2004) software was used to
compute meta-analytic estimates of the relations involving grit and
we corrected for unreliability in the measurement of the dependent
variable and unreliability in the measurement of the independent
variable. Grit scores are likely to be exhibit some level of range
restriction in many samples but the absence of normative data on
grit scores and variance in how grit is measured (e.g., number of
items, number of response options) did not allow us to correct for
range restriction.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

GRIT META-ANALYSIS

Corrections for unreliability. To correct for the attenuating
effect of measurement error on the size of the observed correlations we constructed reliability artifact distributions from the reliability information that was described in the included studies.
These reliability distributions are described in Table 1. The included studies did not report information on the reliability of
grades but to facilitate an apples-to-apples comparison with the
recent meta-analytic summary of the relation between conscientiousness and academic performance by Poropat (2009) we corrected for the unreliability of grades using a distribution of reliability estimates for that was largely similar to the reliability
estimates used by Poropat (2009). For GPA information taken
from records we used the average of reliability estimates (␣ ⫽ .90)
for all courses across four years as reported by Bacon and Bean
(2006) while for self-reported GPA we used the operational validity estimates of .90 for college GPA and .82 for high school
GPA as reported in the meta-analysis by Kuncel et al. (2005).
Other analytic decisions. For the meta-analysis involving the
retention criteria we took a dual analytical approach. More than
half of the studies examining the relation between grit and retention did not report means and standard deviations for those individuals who dropped out of a program and for those individual
who stayed in the program. Instead these authors reported odds
ratios, but odds ratios cannot be directly transformed into a pointbiserial correlation when the independent variable is treated as a
continuous variable. We therefore present two meta-analytic estimates for the grit-retention relation. We provide one estimate
Table 1
Artifact Distributions Used for Meta-Analytic Computations
Variable

k␣

Mean ␣

SD␣

Overall grit
Perseverance
Consistency
Overall academic performance
Overall GPA
College GPA
Graduate school GPA
High school GPA
Intent to persist at current employer
Intent to persist in college
Cognitive ability
Agreeableness
Conscientiousness
Emotional stability
Extroversion
Openness to experience
Generalized self-efficacy
Optimism
Gratitude
Mental toughness
Hope
Positive affect
Life satisfaction
Work satisfaction (college and job)
Depression
Happiness
Resiliency
Self-control

46
10
11
4
4
2
2
2
4
2
2
11
17
11
11
12
2
1
3
3
4
1
5
1
5
3
3
3

.79
.71
.74
.88
.88
.90
.90
.86
.93
.70
.87
.75
.79
.81
.83
.76
.90
.86
.81
.84
.77
.89
.87
.89
.86
.69
.88
.84

.07
.13
.11
.04
.04
.00
.00
.06
.05
.25
.07
.14
.09
.07
.10
.06
.06
.08
.12
.17
.03
.05
.14
.07
.04

Note. k␣ ⫽ number of reliability estimates in distribution; Mean ␣ ⫽
mean of the reliability estimates; SD␣ ⫽ standard deviation of the reliability estimates; GPA ⫽ grade point average.

7

based purely on those studies that report data that could be transformed into a point-biserial correlation, and then provide another
estimate that includes correlation values computed by taking the
root of the Nagelkerke R2 values reported for those studies that
reported odds ratios from bivariate logistic regression models.
Nagelkerke R2 values tend to be too high as an estimate of the
strength of the bivariate relation (Allison, 2014) but we include
these values to provide readers with an estimate based on the most
complete data. We remind readers that this estimate is likely to be
upwardly biased.
We present meta-analytic estimates of the relations of overall
grit (or the two grit facets) with other variables whenever at least
three studies reported on such a relation. We summarize our
meta-analytic findings for each relation using six pieces of information: (a) k refers to the number of studies used to compute the
estimates, (b) N refers to the total sample size used to compute the
estimate, (c) robs refers to the sample-size weighted average observed correlation, (d) ␳ refers to the estimate of the population
correlation, (e) SD␳ refers to the estimate of the standard deviation
of effect sizes after taking into account the variability that is due to
sampling error and differences in the reliability of measurement
between studies, and (f) 10% and 90% coefficients of variation
represent the upper and lower bounds of the 80% credibility
interval. The width of the credibility interval is indicative of the
presence of undetected moderators. That is, wide credibility intervals indicate that the correlation can be expected to vary widely
across settings.
To examine whether grit scores explain incremental variance in
academic performance outcomes over and above the variance
explained by conscientiousness we constructed a full meta-analytic
intercorrelations matrix between grit, conscientiousness, and academic performance by importing the conscientiousness correlations of ␳ ⫽ .21 for high school GPA and ␳ ⫽ .23 for college GPA
as reported by Poropat (2009), and using the average of these (␳ ⫽
.22) for overall academic performance. These correlation matrices
were then used to perform hierarchical regression analyses based
on the harmonic mean of sample sizes.

Results
Before proceeding with our primary analyses we first examined
the data from the studies included in this meta-analytic review for
publication and source bias.

Publication and Source Bias
We examine the possibility that the literature included in this
meta-analytic review represents a biased sample of the research on
grit in two ways. First, to examine whether the published and
unpublished literature report grit-performance relations of different magnitudes we report separate meta-analytic estimates based
on those studies that were published in peer-reviewed journals and
all other studies (e.g., dissertations, conference presentations).
Because of the limited number of total studies that report correlations at the facet level we only perform this analysis for overall
grit. Results are presented in Table 2. In general the evidence for
source bias is weak with only small differences in correlations
reported for overall academic performance, the overall GPA criterion, and undergraduate GPA. None of the differences in correlations were significant at ␣ ⫽ .05.

CREDÉ, TYNAN, AND HARMS

8

Table 2
Separate Meta-Analytic Estimates of Grit-Criteria Relations for Peer-Reviewed and Nonpeer-Reviewed Publications
Peer-reviewed publications

Nonpeer-reviewed publications

Criterion

k

N

robs

␳

SD␳

10% CV

90% CV

k

N

robs

␳

SD␳

10% CV

90% CV

Academic performance
GPA (all levels)
Undergraduate GPA
High school GPA

14
14
11
8

6,440
6,440
5,657
4,381

.15
.15
.15
.14

.18
.18
.17
.17

.12
.12
.12
.15

.03
.03
.02
⫺.02

.34
.34
.33
.36

25
23
19
9

6,701
6,159
4,869
1,983

.15
.13
.13
.11

.17
.16
.16
.14

.09
.07
.07
.10

.07
.07
.07
.01

.28
.25
.25
.27

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Note. k ⫽ number of studies; N ⫽ number of subjects; robs ⫽ sample size weighted mean observed correlation; ␳ ⫽ true score correlation; SD␳ ⫽ standard
deviation of true score correlation; 10% CV and 90% CV ⫽ lower and upper bound of 80% credibility intervals; GPA ⫽ grade point average. Confidence
intervals are not shown here due to space limitations but can be obtained from first author by request.

Second, we use Egger’s test of funnel-plot asymmetry (Eggers,
Smith, Schneider, & Minder, 1997) to examine whether there is
evidence in the meta-analysis for the exclusion of small studies
with weak effects. Studies with small sample sizes that find weak
effects may not be published and not found via literature searches
and their exclusion may result in an overestimate of the strength of
an effect. Egger’s test regresses the standard normal deviate of the
effect size for each sample onto the precision of the effect size
estimate. The intercept of the regression line provides information
about the size of any asymmetry; statistically significant negative
intercepts suggesting that small studies with weak effects may
have been suppressed from the literature. Because of the relatively
small number of studies that examined any one relation we only
perform a single test of asymmetry for the relation based on the
largest number of studies: the relation between grit and overall
academic performance. For this relation Egger’s test indicated no
significant asymmetry with the intercept being negative but weak
and not significantly different from zero (a ⫽ ⫺.15, p ⫽ .85).
The absence of evidence for strong source bias and publication
bias suggests that our meta-analytic estimates are unlikely to be
substantially biased in either a positive or negative direction by
missing studies. We therefore present meta-analytic estimates of
the relation of grit with criteria, state and trait variables, and
demographic variables in Tables 3, 4, and 5.

Relation Between Perseverance and Consistency
Our meta-analytic estimate of the relation between perseverance and consistency (k ⫽ 17, N ⫽ 22,048, ␳ ⫽ .60, SD␳ ⫽ .21),
indicates a generally strong relation although the width of the
credibility interval suggests that the strength of this relation is
substantially moderated. As an exploratory follow-up analysis
we compared the relation observed for the two different grit
scales and found a stronger relation when researchers relied on
the short grit scale (k ⫽ 11, N ⫽ 18,996, ␳ ⫽ .66, SD␳ ⫽ .15)
than when the original grit scale was used (k ⫽ 6, N ⫽ 3,052,
␳ ⫽ .27, SD␳ ⫽ .17).

Relations With Criteria
Overall grit exhibits a relation with overall academic performance of ␳ ⫽ .18 (k ⫽ 39, N ⫽ 13,141, SD␳ ⫽ .11) and ␳ ⫽ .17
with the overall GPA criterion (k ⫽ 37, N ⫽ 12,601, SD␳ ⫽ .10).
Among the academic performance criteria grit was approximately
as strongly related to college GPA (k ⫽ 30, N ⫽ 10,526, ␳ ⫽ .17,
SD␳ ⫽ .10) as it was to high school GPA (k ⫽ 17, N ⫽ 6,364, ␳ ⫽

.16, SD␳ ⫽ .14). Contrary to early assertions by Duckworth et al.
(2007) that both facets predicted success outcomes equally well,
the perseverance facet of grit exhibited much stronger relations
with all academic performance criteria than the consistency facet.
For example, perseverance correlated at ␳ ⫽ .26 (k ⫽ 11, N ⫽
5,221, SD␳ ⫽ .12) with overall academic performance while consistency correlated at only ␳ ⫽ .10 (k ⫽ 11, N ⫽ 5,221, SD␳ ⫽
.02). A comparison of the correlations of perseverance and consistency with four academic performance criteria using the procedure for comparing correlated correlation coefficients described by
Meng, Rosenthal, and Rubin (1992) showed that the correlations
differed significantly (p ⬍ .001) in all four cases.
Grit correlated with retention at ␳ ⫽ .12 when the marital
success study is included (k ⫽ 11, N ⫽ 17,525, SD␳ ⫽ .09), at ␳ ⫽
.18 (k ⫽ 10, N ⫽ 11,163 SD␳ ⫽ .03) when it was excluded, and at,
␳ ⫽ .16 (k ⫽ 5, N ⫽ 2,705, SD␳ ⫽ .06) if the upwardly biased
correlations estimated from Nagelkerke R2 values are excluded.
Grit was correlated at ␳ ⫽ .21 (k ⫽ 7, N ⫽ 4,116, SD␳ ⫽ .00) with
performance in nonacademic domains. The relation between grit
and the intent to persist in college and with the current employer
was ␳ ⫽ .18 (k ⫽ 5, N ⫽ 3,967, SD␳ ⫽ .00), and ␳ ⫽ .15 (k ⫽ 4,
N ⫽ 519, SD␳ ⫽ .00), respectively.

Relation With State and Trait Variables
Consistent with the claim that grit and cognitive ability are
largely orthogonal, grit exhibited only a very weak relation with
cognitive ability (k ⫽ 21, N ⫽ 11,513, ␳ ⫽ .05, SD␳ ⫽ .12).
Similarly weak relations with cognitive ability were also observed
for both the perseverance facet (k ⫽ 5, N ⫽ 2,204, ␳ ⫽ ⫺.01,
SD␳ ⫽ .04) and consistency facet (k ⫽ 5, N ⫽ 2,204, ␳ ⫽ .00,
SD␳ ⫽ .00).
Grit exhibited much stronger relations with other trait variables.
Conscientiousness was very strongly correlated with overall grit
(k ⫽ 22, N ⫽ 18,826, ␳ ⫽ .84, SD␳ ⫽ .07) and also with
perseverance (k ⫽ 8, N ⫽ 4,967, ␳ ⫽ .83, SD␳ ⫽ .14) and
consistency (k ⫽ 8, N ⫽ 4,967, ␳ ⫽ .61, SD␳ ⫽ .17). Grit also
exhibited a very strong relation with self-control (k ⫽ 4, N ⫽
2,615, ␳ ⫽ .72, SD␳ ⫽ .05), a variable that is often seen to be a
facet of conscientiousness (e.g., Roberts et al., 2005). Grit also
exhibited a relatively strong relation with emotional stability (k ⫽
14, N ⫽ 14,501, ␳ ⫽ .41, SD␳ ⫽ .04), but this should not be
surprising when considering that low levels of emotional stability
are likely to be associated with an inconsistency of interest because
negative affect states may be interpreted as a signal that the
activity being engaged in is no longer interesting. Grit also

519

4

.13

.15
.14
.14
.13
.07
.14
.10
.16
.19
.13

robs

.15

.18
.17
.17
.16
.08
.16
.12
.18
.21
.18

␳

.00

.11
.10
.10
.14
.00
.06
.09
.03
.00
.00

SD␳

.15

.04
.04
.04
⫺.02
.08
.08
.00
.14
.21
.18

10% CV

.15

.31
.30
.30
.34
.08
.23
.24
.23
.21
.18

90% CV
5,221
5,065
4,595
3,313

2,959

4

N

11
10
8
7

k

.15

.20
.20
.20
.22

robs

.22

.26
.26
.25
.29

␳

.00

.12
.12
.12
.08

SD␳

.22

.11
.11
.11
.19

10% CV

Perseverance of effort

.22

.41
.41
.40
.39

90% CV

2,959

5,221
5,065
4,595
3,313

N

17 22,048

4

11
10
8
7

k

.44

.09

.08
.08
.08
.11

robs

.60

.12

.10
.10
.09
.13

␳

.21

.05

.02
.03
.03
.06

SD␳

.34

.06

.07
.06
.05
.05

10% CV

Consistency of interest

.87

.19

.13
.13
.14
.21

90% CV

13
22
14
13
14
21
4
3
3
3
6
5
3
9
6
5
4
3
4

Agreeableness
Conscientiousness
Emotional stability
Extraversion
Openness
Cognitive ability
Whole candidate score (military)
Generalized self-efficacy
Optimism
Gratitude
Mental toughness
Hope
Positive affect
Life satisfaction
Work satisfaction (college and job)
Depression
Happiness
Resiliency
Self-control

14,395
18,826
14,501
14,395
14,585
11,513
4,770
1,908
2,059
1,415
3,817
2,378
670
2,266
3,439
3,865
726
480
2,615

N
.25
.66
.33
.19
.15
.04
.02
.36
⫺.04
.24
.37
.33
.38
.25
.10
⫺.40
.22
.08
.59

robs
.33
.84
.41
.23
.19
.05
.02
.43
⫺.04
.30
.46
.42
.46
.30
.11
⫺.48
.30
.09
.72

␳
.07
.07
.04
.09
.14
.12
.00
.11
.12
.09
.08
.05
.03
.08
.02
.10
.00
.09
.05

SD␳
.23
.75
.36
.12
.01
⫺.11
.02
.28
⫺.20
.19
.35
.35
.42
.20
.09
⫺.61
.30
⫺.02
.66

10% CV
.42
.92
.46
.35
.37
.20
.02
.57
.11
.41
.56
.49
.49
.40
.13
⫺.35
.30
.21
.78

90% CV
3,203
4,967
3,203
3,203
3,203
2,204

975
3,243

3
5

N

3
8
3
3
3
5

k

.41
.19

.28
.61
.30
.32
.32
⫺.01

robs

.54
.25

.39
.83
.40
.41
.45
⫺.01

␳

.00
.08

.03
.14
.14
.09
.07
.04

SD␳

.54
.15

.36
.65
.22
.29
.11
⫺.06

10% CV

Perseverance of effort

.54
.34

.43
1.00
.58
.53
.78
.04

90% CV

3
5

3
8
3
3
3
5

k

975
3,243

3,203
4,967
3,203
3,203
3,203
2,204

N

.16
.04

.23
.47
.29
.07
⫺.02
⫺.00

robs

.20
.05

.17
.61
.37
.09
⫺.03
⫺.00

␳

.00
.09

.00
.17
.00
.05
.05
.00

SD␳

.20
⫺.07

.22
.39
.37
.02
⫺.09
⫺.00

10% CV

Consistency of interest

.20
.17

.23
.84
.37
.15
.03
⫺.00

90% CV

Note. k ⫽ number of studies; N ⫽ number of subjects; robs ⫽ sample size weighted mean observed correlation; ␳ ⫽ true score correlation; SD␳ ⫽ standard deviation of true score correlation; 10%
CV and 90% CV ⫽ lower and upper bound of 80% credibility intervals. Confidence intervals are not shown here due to space limitations but can be obtained from first author by request.

k

Correlate

Overall grit

Table 4
Meta-Analytic Estimates of the Relations Between Grit and Trait and State Variables

Note. k ⫽ number of studies; N ⫽ number of subjects; robs ⫽ sample size weighted mean observed correlation; ␳ ⫽ true score correlation; SD␳ ⫽ standard deviation of true score correlation; 10%
CV and 90% CV ⫽ lower and upper bound of 80% credibility intervals; GPA ⫽ grade point average. Confidence intervals are not shown here due to space limitations but can be obtained from first
author by request.
a
Estimates include estimates of point-biserial correlations computed by taking root of Nagelkerke R2 values.

13,141
12,601
10,526
6,364
1,141
2,705
17,525
11,163
4,116
3,967

39
37
30
17
3
5
11
10
7
5

Academic performance
GPA (all levels)
Undergraduate GPA
High school GPA
Graduate school GPA
Retention (general)
Retention (general)a
Retention (without marriage)a
Nonacademic performance
Intent to persist in college
Intent to persist with current
employer
Grit—perseverance

N

k

Correlate/Criterion

Overall grit

Table 3
Meta-Analytic Estimates of the Relations Between Grit and Performance Criteria

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

GRIT META-ANALYSIS

9

.07
.04
.06
.01
.01
⫺.07
.11
⫺.02
⫺.02
.05
.00
.00
4 2,961
.04
.06
5 3,301 ⫺.02 ⫺.02
4 2,786 ⫺.02 ⫺.02

⫺.01
⫺.02
⫺.02

4 2,961
5 3,301
4 2,786

.03
.02
.00

.04
.02
⫺.00

.02
.01
.05

.09
⫺.03
.05
.03
.03
8 5,040
.09
⫺.04
.05
.03
.02
8 5,040

.14
.18
.12
.02
.08
.02
.05
⫺.03
.07
⫺.02
.00
⫺.02
.02
⫺.09
.07
.04
.05
.01
.04
.00
.05
Gender (Male ⫽ 0, Female ⫽ 1) 25 18,750
.05
.05
Age
22 12,349
.11
.12
Year in school
4 2,961
.05
.05
Ethnic minority status
9 15,261
.01
.01
African American
7 14,403
.03
.03
Asian
4 11,959
.01
.02
Hispanic
5 12,302 ⫺.02 ⫺.02

SD␳ 10% CV 90% CV
␳
robs
Correlate

k

N

robs

␳

SD␳ 10% CV 90% CV k

N

robs

␳

SD␳ 10% CV 90% CV k

N

Consistency of interest
Perseverance of effort
Overall grit

Table 5
Meta-Analytic Estimates of the Relations Between Grit and Demographic Variables

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Note. k ⫽ number of studies; N ⫽ number of subjects; robs ⫽ sample size weighted mean observed correlation; ␳ ⫽ true score correlation; SD␳ ⫽ standard deviation of true score correlation; 10%
CV and 90% CV ⫽ lower and upper bound of 80% credibility intervals. Confidence intervals are not shown here due to space limitations but can be obtained from first author by request.

CREDÉ, TYNAN, AND HARMS

10

exhibited relatively strong relations with a number of other
variables that are sometimes presented as having a causal
influence on success and performance, including, generalized
self-efficacy (k ⫽ 3, N ⫽ 1,908, ␳ ⫽ .43, SD␳ ⫽ .11), mental
toughness (k ⫽ 6, N ⫽ 3,817, ␳ ⫽ .46, SD␳ ⫽ .08), positive
affect (k ⫽ 3, N ⫽ 670, ␳ ⫽ .46, SD␳ ⫽ .03), and depression
(k ⫽ 5, N ⫽ 3,865, ␳ ⫽ ⫺.48, SD␳ ⫽ .12).

Relation With Demographic Variables
As expected, the relations between grit and demographic variables such as gender (k ⫽ 25, N ⫽ 18,750, ␳ ⫽ .05, SD␳ ⫽ .07),
year in school (k ⫽ 4, N ⫽ 2,961, ␳ ⫽ .05, SD␳ ⫽ .05), and ethnic
minority status (k ⫽ 9, N ⫽ 15,261, ␳ ⫽ .01, SD␳ ⫽ .01) were all
very weak with the exception of age, which exhibited a slight
positive correlation with overall grit (k ⫽ 22, N ⫽ 12,349, ␳ ⫽ .12,
SD␳ ⫽ .04) in line with the prediction by Duckworth et al. (2007)
that grit would increase with age. This increase is similar to the
general increase in conscientiousness observed with age (Roberts
et al., 2006).

Incremental Validity
The incremental validity estimates from these regression results
are summarized in Table 6. Results for Model 1 indicate that
overall grit explains no variance in either overall academic performance or high school GPA after controlling for conscientiousness, and explains only a very small amount of incremental
variance in college GPA (i.e., ⌬R ⫽ .004). Importantly, conscientiousness explains incremental variance in these outcomes if first
controlling for overall grit. Results for Model 2 show that perseverance explained a substantial amount of incremental variance in
overall academic performance (⌬R ⫽ .040), high school GPA
(⌬R ⫽ .085), and a somewhat lower amount for college GPA
(⌬R ⫽ .023). Consistency explained almost no unique variance in
the three criteria after controlling for either conscientiousness (see
Model 3) or both conscientiousness and persistence (Model 4) and
the negative sign of the regression coefficients for consistency for
the overall academic performance and college GPA criteria also
suggests a possible suppressor effect. Perseverance explained relatively large amounts of unique variance in three criteria even after
controlling for both conscientiousness and consistency (Model 5).
Overall, the incremental validity findings suggest that both overall
grit and the consistency facet of grit add little to our ability to
understand or predict academic performance, while the perseverance facet does offer an important improvement in explanatory
power.

Discussion
Proponents of grit have asserted that grit is a higher order
construct composed of a perseverance facet and a consistency
facet, that grit scores are highly predictive of success (and a better
predictor of success than cognitive ability), and that grit scores
provide information about individuals that is meaningfully distinct
from conscientiousness. Three primary findings from our metaanalytic review of the grit literature suggest that the validity of
these assertions may need to be revisited; although our findings
also suggest that a revised approach to the study of grit may still

GRIT META-ANALYSIS

11

Table 6
Incremental Validity Estimates Based on Hierarchical Regression Analysis Using Meta-Analytic Intercorrelations
Criteria
Overall academic
performance
Model
Model 1

Model 4

Step
Step
Step
Step
Step
Step
Step

Model 5

Step 2
Step 1

Model 2
Model 3
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Step
1
2
1
2
1
2
1

Step 2

High school GPA

College GPA

Predictor

␤

⌬R

␤

⌬R

␤

⌬R

Conscientiousness
Overall grit
Conscientiousness
Perseverance
Conscientiousness
Consistency
Conscientiousness
Perseverance
Consistency
Conscientiousness
Consistency
Perseverance

.23
⫺.02
.01
.25
.25
⫺.05
.05
.28
⫺.10
.05
⫺.10
.28

.220 (.040)
.000 (.180)
.220 (.000)
.040 (.260)
.220 (.114)
.004 (.100)
.260 (.171)

.26
⫺.06
⫺.10
.37
.21
.00
⫺.08
⫺.06
.39
⫺.08
⫺.06
.39

.210 (.052)
.002 (.160)
.210 (.005)
.085 (.290)
.210 (.080)
.000 (.130)
.295 (.168)

.33
⫺.11
.07
.19
.28
⫺.08
.11
.22
⫺.11
.11
⫺.11
.22

.230 (.064)
.004 (.170)
.230 (.003)
.023 (.250)
.230 (.149)
.009 (.090)
.253 (.178)

.011 (.100)
.224 (.011)
.047 (.260)

.003 (.130)
.210 (.008)
.088 (.290)

.015 (.090)
.239 (.016)
.027 (.250)

Note. GPA ⫽ grade point average. ⌬R values in table are all adjusted values based on the harmonic mean of sample sizes. Standardized betas are those
observed at Step 2 for all variables. Incremental R values in parentheses are those observed if the order of variables for the hierarchical regression is
reversed. Harmonic means ranged from 5,540 to 18,774.

hold value for our understanding of the determinants of performance.
First, our findings indicate that the current evidence does not
support the claim that grit is a higher-order construct that is
characterized by two lower-order facets. The original factor analytic studies could not speak to the presence of a higher-order
factor structure because of methodological limitations, and our
results indicate that the practice of combining perseverance scores
and consistency scores into an overall grit score appears to result
in a significant loss in the ability to predict performance. That is,
perseverance is a much better predictor of performance than either
consistency or overall grit and should therefore probably be treated
as a construct that is largely distinct from consistency to maximize
its utility.
Second, overall grit exhibits relations with academic performance and retention that are only modest and that do not compare
favorably with other well-known predictors of academic performance such as cognitive ability (Sackett et al., 2012), study habits
and skills (Credé & Kuncel, 2008), and academic adjustment
(Credé & Niehorster, 2012). Indeed, meta-analytic reviews of the
literatures for some of these other predictors report correlations
with academic performance and retention that are more than twice
as big as those observed for overall grit in this review. At the
same time it should be remembered that variables that exhibit
small to moderate effect sizes can still be very useful in highstakes settings because even marginal improvements in individuals’ performance— or organizations ability to predict this performance— can have very meaningful positive effects. For
example, a grit intervention that increasing the retention rate in
college by even a single percentage point would potentially
benefit thousands of college students. Similarly, even a small
increase in the ability to predict future performance in a selection setting may yield very substantial financial benefits for an
organization (see Hunter & Hunter, 1984 for a discussion).
Such a benefit would be particularly large if the variable in
question reflected information about individuals that was dis-

tinct from the information reflected by other well-known predictors of performance and retention.
Our third primary finding suggests that the incremental value of
grit for the prediction of performance is likely to be limited. Grit
scores exhibited very strong correlations with conscientiousness
and with self-control—a facet of conscientiousness. Indeed, the
size of the correlation (␳ ⫽ .84) with overall conscientiousness is
so strong as to not only limit the incremental value of grit scores
for the prediction of performance over and above conscientiousness but also suggest that grit may be redundant with conscientiousness. Indeed, the correlation between overall grit and conscientiousness, and between persistence and conscientiousness (␳ ⫽
.89) is much stronger than what is typically found between scores
on two different global measures of conscientiousness (␳ ⫽ .63;
Pace & Brannick, 2010). This, in turn, suggests that grit research
may have fallen victim to the jangle fallacy and that grit as
currently measured is simply a repackaging of conscientiousness
or one of the facets of conscientiousness. McCornack (1956), of
course, illustrated that two variables can be very strongly correlated but still exhibit very different correlations with a third variable but the meta-analytic estimates of the relation between overall
grit and GPA in middle/high school (␳ ⫽ .16) and college (␳ ⫽
.17) are largely identical (if somewhat weaker) to those reported
for conscientiousness in the recent meta-analytic review by Porapat (2009): ␳ ⫽ .21 for middle/high school GPA and ␳ ⫽ .23 for
college GPA.
Although our findings indicate that a critical reappraisal of
the grit construct is warranted, three meta-analytic findings
reported in this paper do hold some promise for proponents of
grit as a predictor of success and as a potential focus of
interventions. First, grit predicts retention approximately as
well as many more traditional predictors of retention such as
cognitive ability and high school grades—although not as well
as some other noncognitive predictors. This suggests that the
assessment of grit may be useful in settings in which retention
is problematic (e.g., higher education) because it may allow

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

12

CREDÉ, TYNAN, AND HARMS

researchers to identify individuals who might benefit the most
from interventions that target grit or offer assistance in some
other fashion. Second—as noted earlier— our meta-analytic
results show that the perseverance of effort facet of grit exhibits
substantially higher criterion validity for the grade criteria than
the consistency of interest facet. Indeed, the observed criterion
validity of perseverance for the high school GPA criterion is
also significantly higher than the criterion validity observed for
overall grit scores and also for conscientiousness (Poropat,
2009). This suggests that the focus of grit researchers should
shift to perseverance as the most promising avenue of future
research. Third, our hierarchical regression results based on
meta-analytic estimates suggest that perseverance of effort
scores explain incremental variance over and above conscientiousness in the various grade criteria. This is, of course,
encouraging, but the only moderately high correlations among
scores on most personality traits assessed via two different
inventories (see Pace & Brannick, 2010) mean that such incremental validity findings would be observed even if grit was
simply a different manifestation of conscientiousness as our
other results suggest.
Even modest predictor-criterion relations can be very important in applied settings, especially when individuals’ standing
on the predictor can be impacted by simple interventions.
Whether it is possible to enhance grit via interventions is not yet
clear although evidence that social and personal skills as well as
resiliency are responsive to interventions (Durlak et al., 2010;
Paunesku et al., 2015) suggest that grit interventions may have
some positive effect. Although we do believe that our results
regarding the validity of the perseverance facet offer some
promise we also believe that our overall results should lead to
a reevaluation of the appropriateness of planned or existing grit
interventions. Schools and colleges have limited resources to
devote to interventions and are likely to be best served by
focusing those resources on variables that have been demonstrated to be (a) most strongly related to performance and
persistence/retention and (b) responsive to interventions. Fortunately there are a number of variables that meet both of those
requirements. For example, study skills and habits have been
shown to correlate approximately ␳ ⫽ .40 with college GPA
(Credé & Kuncel, 2008), while Hattie et al. (1996) showed that
study skills interventions can have moderate positive effects on
study skills. College students’ adjustment to college has been
shown to be similarly predictive of academic performance (␳ ⫽
.39 for academic adjustment), is also one of the best predictors
of retention in college (␳ ⫽ .29 for institutional attachment) and
can be slightly improved by simple interventions such as orientation programs (see Credé & Niehorster, 2012 for a review).
Simple class attendance is also very strongly related to academic performance, and making class attendance compulsory
appears to dramatically reduce the proportion of students who
fail a class (Credé et al., 2010). Study skills and study habits,
adjustment to college, and class attendance are thus far more
strongly related to academic performance and retention than
grit, and there is sound evidence that interventions can improve
students’ standing on these constructs (especially for study
skills and habits).

Limitations and Future Research
Meta-analyses are limited by the nature and quality of the
data present in a literature. As such this meta-analysis of the grit
literature has some notable limitations. First, the literature
relating grit to academic performance is primarily based on
concurrent designs. This, in turn, may have resulted in inflated
estimates of the grit-academic performance relation because
individuals’ knowledge of their academic performance may
influence their responses to the measure of grit. Second, there
are at least three reasons why the grit literature may be characterized by a nontrivial amount of range restriction. All of the
examined studies relied on self-reports of grit and the social
desirability of grit items may have resulted in range restriction
in self-reported grit scores. Individuals may also generally not
be aware of their true level of grit and unintentionally report
inflated levels of grit (Kruger & Dunning, 1999). Further,
samples drawn from populations that have been selected based
on prior performance may exhibit some range restriction on
grit. For example, cadets at the US Military Academy at West
Point have likely exhibited outstanding academic performance
in high school and may therefore have a lower range of grit
scores than the range found in the general population. We were
unable to correct for range restriction in our meta-analysis
because of the lack of normative data and the variability in how
the grit scales were used by researchers but future research may
be able to estimate the level of range restriction that is present
in samples. Third, many of the studies examining the relation
between grit and retention were characterized by very high base
rates of retention (i.e., low rates of dropout). Duckworth et al.
(2007) for example report data on one sample from the United
States Military Academy in which 94.2% of the sample were
retained through the examined period. Such low base rates
severely attenuate the size of the correlation that can be observed. In such circumstances meta-analyses could make corrections for range restriction, but such a correction would
require information about the size of the standard deviation for
the retention criteria in the general population and we are not
aware of a reasonable estimate for this value. Finally, although
the empirical grit literature is sufficiently large to allow us to
comment with relative confidence on average population effect
sizes the literature is not yet large enough to allow moderator
analyses characterized by high power (Hunter & Schmidt,
2004). An exploration of the reasons for the occasionally wide
credibility intervals will require the accumulation of further
data.
We believe that future research in this domain should consider five broad issues. First, researchers should attempt to
examine whether grit exhibit the type of stability that is associated with other personality traits or whether it is responsive to
interventions. Grit interventions will need to be tested to evaluate the malleability of grit but there are sound theoretical
reasons why such interventions may be effective. Eisenberger
(1992) argued that industriousness—a construct that is similar
to grit— can be acquired via reinforcement and that repeated
reinforcement for high effort (i.e., grit) can eventually result in
a generalized increase in effort across tasks even when these
tasks are not extrinsically reinforced. This work will not only
require long-term experimental manipulations in the form of

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

GRIT META-ANALYSIS

reinforcements for high effort but should help to establish the
degree to which grit is truly trait-like and also help to clarify the
type of grit interventions that are likely to be most effective.
Second, grit researchers should consider examining criteria that
span to different domains (e.g., work settings), a greater range
of difficulty and a greater variety of task types (e.g., intellective
tasks vs. creative tasks). This may help to establish boundary
conditions for the influence of grit on success and performance.
Third, grit researchers should consider examining the potential
moderators of the grit-performance relation discussed earlier:
the moderating role of the performance domain; the moderating
role of individual differences such as ability and metacognition;
and the moderating role of the level of grit. Fourth, it may also
be useful to examine the degree to which scores on measures of
grit are related to scores on measures of motivation. A popular
definition of motivation is that it reflects “an individual’s
intensity, direction, and persistence of effort toward achieving
a goal” (e.g., Robbins, Judge, & Campbell, 2010) and as such
bears clear conceptual similarities to grit. Finally, it is possible
that the grit literature may benefit from a refinement of the grit
scale using methods based on Item Response Theory. It is
unlikely that the relatively short measures of grit are equally
good at assessing low, medium, and high levels of grit. This
lack of depth and breadth in item content could lead to attenuation of the reported effects (see Credé, Harms, Niehorster, &
Gaye-Valentine, 2012). Better measures of grit would not only
help to clarify the nature of the grit-performance relation but
would also be important for the evaluation of future grit interventions.

Conclusion
Grit as a predictor of performance and success and as a focus of
interventions holds much intuitive appeal, but grit as it is currently
measured does not appear to be particularly predictive of success
and performance and also does not appear to be all that different to
conscientiousness. We hope that greater rigor in scale development, a greater focus on the perseverance facet, and a more
nuanced approach in study design will help future grit researchers
to develop boundary conditions for grit in its role as in influence
on performance and success.

References
References marked with an asterisk indicate studies included in the
meta-analysis.
ⴱ

Allen, B. R. (2014). An analysis of student success predictors for technical
college persistence. (Unpublished doctoral thesis). Edgewood College,
Madison, WI.
Allison, P. D. (2014). Measuring fit for logistic regression. Research paper
1485–2014. SAS Institute.
ⴱ
Anestis, M. D., Kleiman, E. M., Lavender, J. M., Tull, M. T., & Gratz,
K. L. (2014). The pursuit of death versus escape from negative affect:
An examination of the nature of the relationship between emotion
dysregulation and both suicidal behavior and non-suicidal self-injury.
Comprehensive Psychiatry, 55, 1820 –1830. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j
.comppsych.2014.07.007
ⴱ
Anestis, M. D., & Shelby, E. A. (2015). Grit and perseverance in suicidal
behavior and non-suicidal self-injury. Death Studies, 39, 211–218.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/07481187.2014.946629

ⴱ

13

Arouty, D. (2015). Does character matter? The role of grit and resilience
in predicting academic success. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation).
Hofstra University, Hempstead, NY.
ⴱ
Arslan, S., Akin, A., & Çîtemel, N. (2013). The predictive role of grit on
metacognition in Turkish university students. Studia Psychologica, 55,
311–320.
Bacon, D. R., & Bean, B. (2006). GPA in research studies: An invaluable
but neglected opportunity. Journal of Advanced Academics, 26, 274 –
293.
ⴱ
Batres, I. (2011). The relationship of grit, subjective happiness, and
meaning in life on alternative education students’ GPA and attendance.
(Unpublished doctoral thesis). University of La Verne, La Verne, CA.
ⴱ
Black, K. R. (2014). Grit in college students: Associations with achievement and parental influences. (Unpublished master’s thesis). West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV.
Blalock, D. V., Young, K. C., & Kleiman, E. M. (2015). Stability amidst
turmoil: Grit buffers the effects of negative life events on suicide
ideation. Psychiatry Research, 228, 781–784. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.psychres.2015.04.041
ⴱ
Bowman, N. A., Hill, P. L., Denson, N., & Bronkema, R. (2015). Keep on
truckin’ or stay the course? Exploring grit dimensions as differential
predictors of educational achievement, satisfaction, and intentions. Social Psychological & Personality Science, 6, 639 – 654. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1177/1948550615574300
ⴱ
Buller, E. F. (2012). The relationship between grit and academic, military
and physical performance at the United States Military Academy. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS.
Camara, W. J., & Schmidt, A. E. (1999). Group differences in standardized
testing and social stratification. New York, NY: College Entrance
Examination Board.
ⴱ
Chambers, R., Brawley, A. M., Castille, C. M., & Tubré, T. (2012).
Examining the validity of the resilience quotient. Poster presented at the
26th National Conference on Undergraduate Research, Ogden, UT.
Chamorro-Premuzic, T., Furnham, A., & Ackerman, P. L. (2006). Incremental
validity of the Typical Intellectual Engagement Scale as predictor of different academic performance measures. Journal of Personality Assessment, 87,
261–268. http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/s15327752jpa8703_07
ⴱ
Chang, W. (2014). Grit and academic performance: Is being grittier
better? (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of Miami, Miami, FL.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences
(2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cohen, R. M. (2015). Will students soon be tested for “grit”? The American Prospect. Retrieved from http://prospect.org/blog/tapped/willstudents-soon-be-tested-grit
ⴱ
Cooper, A. D. (2014). Exploring the use of non-cognitive factors in
predicting college academic outcomes. (Unpublished master’s thesis).
University of Tennessee, Chattanooga, TN.
Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (1992). Revised NEO Personality Inventory
(NEO-PI-R) and NEO Five-Factor Inventory (NEO-FFI) Professional
Manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (1992). The NEO PI-R professional manual.
Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Costa, P. T., Terracciano, A., & McCrae, R. R. (2001). Gender differences
in personality traits across cultures: Robust and surprising findings.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 322–331. http://dx
.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.81.2.322
Crant, J. M. (1995). The proactive personality scale and objective job
performance among real estate agents. Journal of Applied Psychology,
80, 532–537. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.80.4.532
Credé, M., & Harms, P. D. (2015). 25 years of higher order confirmatory
factor analysis in the organizational sciences: A critical review and
development of reporting recommendations. Journal of Organizational
Behavior, 36, 845– 872. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/job.2008

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

14

CREDÉ, TYNAN, AND HARMS

Credé, M., Harms, P. D., Niehorster, S., & Gaye-Valentine, A. (2012). An
evaluation of the consequences of using short measures of the Big Five
personality traits. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102,
874 – 888. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0027403
Credé, M., & Kuncel, N. R. (2008). Study habits, study skills, and study
attitudes: The third pillar supporting collegiate academic performance.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 3, 415– 453. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1111/j.1745-6924.2008.00089.x
Credé, M., & Niehorster, S. (2012). Adjustment to college as measured by
the Student Adaptation to College Questionnaire: A quantitative review
of its structure and relationships with correlates and consequences.
Educational Psychology Review, 24, 133–165. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1007/s10648-011-9184-5
Credé, M., & Phillips, L. A. (2011). A meta-analytic review of the
Motivated Strategies for Learning Questionnaire. Learning and Individual Differences, 21, 337–346. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.lindif.2011.03
.002
Credé, M., Roch, S., & Kieszczynska, U. M. (2010). Class attendance in
college: A meta-analytic review of the relationship of class attendance
with grades and student characteristics. Review of Educational Research,
80, 272–295. http://dx.doi.org/10.3102/0034654310362998
ⴱ
Cross, T. M. (2013). Staying the course: Grit, academic success and
non-traditional doctoral students. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation).
Pepperdine University, Malibu, CA.
ⴱ
Datu, J. A. D., Valdez, J. P. M., & King, R. B. (2015). Perseverance
counts but consistency does not! Validating the Short Grit Scale in a
collectivist setting. Current Psychology. Advance online publication.
ⴱ
Davidson, B. A. (2014). Examining the relationship between noncognitive skills and leadership: The influence of hope and grit on
transformational leadership behavior. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS.
Davis, D., Dorsey, J. K., Franks, R. D., Sackett, P. R., Cynthia, A., & Zhao,
X. (2013). Do racial and ethnic group differences in performance on the
MCAT exam reflect test bias? Academic Medicine, 88, 593– 602. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1097/ACM.0b013e318286803a
ⴱ
DeCandia, G. M. (2014). Relationships between academic identity and
academic achievement in low-income urban adolescents. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). State University of New Jersey, New
Brunswick, NJ.
De Fruyt, F., Van De Wiele, L., & Van Heeringen, C. (2000). Cloninger’s
psychobiological model of temperament and character and the fivefactor model of personality. Personality and Individual Differences, 29,
441– 452. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0191-8869(99)00204-4
ⴱ
DiMenichi, B. C., & Richmond, L. L. (2015). Reflecting on past failures
leads to increased perseverance and sustained attention. Journal of
Cognitive Psychology, 27, 180 –193. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
20445911.2014.995104
Duckworth, A. L. (2013a). The key to success? Grit. Retrieved from
https://www.ted.com/talks/angela_lee_duckworth_the_key_to_
success_grit?language⫽en#t-9644
Duckworth, A. L. (2013b). Research psychologist Angela Duckworth,
2013 MacArthur Fellow/MacArthur Foundation. Retrieved from https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v⫽_hAwj1eGvDw
ⴱ
Duckworth, A. L., Kirby, T. A., Tsukayama, E., Berstein, H., & Ericsson,
K. A. (2011). Deliberate practice spells success: Why grittier competitors
triumph at the national spelling bee. Social Psychological & Personality
Science, 2, 174 –181. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1948550610385872
ⴱ
Duckworth, A. L., Peterson, C., Matthews, M. D., & Kelly, D. R. (2007).
Grit: Perseverance and passion for long term goals. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 1087–1101. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
0022-3514.92.6.1087
ⴱ
Duckworth, A. L., & Quinn, P. D. (2009). Development and validation of
the short grit scale (Grit-S). Journal of Personality Assessment, 91,
166 –174. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223890802634290

Duckworth, A. L., Quinn, P. D., Lynam, D. R., Loeber, R., & StouthamerLoeber, M. (2011). Role of test motivation in intelligence testing.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 198, 7716 –7720. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1018601108
Durlak, J. A., Weissberg, R. P., & Pachan, M. (2010). A meta-analysis of
After-School Programs that seek to promote personal and social skills in
children and adolescents. American Journal of Community Psychology,
45, 294 –309. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10464-010-9300-6
Earman, J., & Glymour, C. (1978). Lost in the tensors: Einstein’s struggles
with covariance principles 1912–1916. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, 9, 251–278. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/00393681(78)90008-0
Eggers, M., Smith, G. D., Schneider, M., & Minder, C. (1997). Bias in
meta-analysis detected by a simple, graphical test. British Medical
Journal, 315, 629 – 634. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.315.7109.629
Eisenberger, R. (1992). Learned industriousness. Psychological Review,
99, 248 –267. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037//0033-295x.99.2.248
ⴱ
Engel, L. I. (2013). What predicts first semester college performance?
Cognitive ability, SAT, conscientiousness, and grit. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Hofstra University, Hempstead, NY.
Ericsson, K. A., Krampe, R. T., & Tesch-Römer, C. (1993). The role of
deliberate practice in the acquisition of expert performance. Psychological Review, 100, 363– 406. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.100.3
.363
ⴱ
Eskreis-Winkler, L., Duckworth, A. L., Shulman, E. P., & Beal, S. (2014).
The grit effect: Predicting retention in the military, the workplace,
school and marriage. Frontiers in Psychology. Advance online publication. http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00036
ⴱ
Eskreis-Winkler, L., Shulman, E. P., & Duckworth, A. L. (2014). Survivor
mission: Do those who survive have a drive to thrive at work? The
Journal of Positive Psychology, 9, 209 –218. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
17439760.2014.888579
Field, A., & Gillett, R. (2010). How to do meta-analysis. The British
Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 63, 665– 694.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1348/000711010X502733
ⴱ
Fillmore, E. P. (2015). Grit and beliefs about intelligence: The relationship and the role these factors play in the self-regulatory processes
involved in medical students learning gross anatomy. (Unpublished
doctoral dissertation). Indiana University, Bloomington, IN.
Foldes, H. J., Duehr, E. E., & Ones, D. S. (2008). Group differences in
personality: Meta-analysis comparing five U.S. racial groups. Personnel
Psychology, 61, 579 – 616. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.2008
.00123.x
Frey, M. C., & Dotterman, D. K. (2004). Scholastic assessment or g? The
relationship between the Scholastic Assessment Test and General Cognitive Ability. Psychological Science, 15, 373–378. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1111/j.0956-7976.2004.00687.x
Ghiselli, E. E., Campbell, J. P., & Zedeck, S. (1981). Measurement theory
for the behavioral sciences. San Francisco, CA: Freeman & Company.
Goldberg, L. R. (1999). A broad-bandwidth, public domain, personality
inventory measuring the lower level facets of several five-factor models.
In I. Mervielde, I. Deary, F. De Fruyt, & F. Ostendorf (Eds.), Personality
psychology in Europe (Vol. 7, pp. 7–28). Tilburg, The Netherlands:
Tilburg University Press.
Gough, H. G. (1996). CPI manual (3rd ed.). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting
Psychologists Press.
ⴱ
Hammer, J. H., & Good, G. E. (2010). Positive psychology: An empirical
examination of beneficial aspects of endorsement of masculine norms.
Psychology of Men & Masculinity, 11, 303–318. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1037/a0019056
ⴱ
Haran, U., Ritov, I., & Mellers, B. A. (2013). The role of actively
open-minded thinking in information acquisition, accuracy, and calibration. Judgment and Decision Making, 8, 188 –201.

GRIT META-ANALYSIS

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

ⴱ

Harms, P. D. (2015). [Grit, Conscientiousness, Performance, & Satisfaction]. Unpublished raw data.
Hattie, J., Biggs, J., & Purdie, N. (1996). Effects of learning skills interventions on student learning: A meta-analysis. Review of Educational
Research, 66, 99 –136. http://dx.doi.org/10.3102/00346543066002099
Hembree, R. (1988). Correlates, causes, effects, and treatment of test
anxiety. Review of Educational Research, 58, 47–77. http://dx.doi.org/
10.3102/00346543058001047
Hezlett, S. A., Kuncel, N. R., Vey, M. A., Ahart, A., Ones, D. S.,
Campbell, J. P., & Camara, W. (2001). The predictive validity of the
SAT: A comprehensive meta-analysis. In D. S. Ones & S. A. Hezlett
(Eds.), Predicting performance: The interface of I/O psychology and
educational research. Symposia presented at the annual conference
of the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology, San
Diego, CA.
ⴱ
Hill, P. L., Burrow, A. L., & Bronk, K. C. (2014). Persevering with
positivity and purpose: An examination of purpose commitment and
positive affect as predictors of grit. Journal of Happiness Studies.
Advance online publication.
ⴱ
Hogan, M. L. (2013). Non-cognitive traits that impact female success in
BigLaw. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0019056
Howe, M. J. A. (1999). Genius explained. New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
Hunter, J. E., & Hunter, R. F. (1984). Validity and utility of alternative
predictors of job performance. Psychological Bulletin, 96, 72–98. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.96.1.72
Hunter, J. E., & Schmidt, F. L. (2004). Methods of meta-analysis: Correcting error and bias in research findings (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
ⴱ
Incantalupo-Kuhner, J. (2015). Teacher dispositions and perceived environment: The relationship among grit, resiliency, and perceptions of
school climate. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Hofstra University,
Hempstead, NY.
ⴱ
Ivcevic, Z., & Brackett, M. (2014). Predicting school success: Comparing
conscientiousness, grit, and emotion regulation ability. Journal of Research in Personality, 52, 29 –36. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2014.06
.005
Jackson, D. N., Paunonen, S. V., & Tremblay, P. F. (2000). Six factor
personality questionnaire manual. Port Huron, MI: Sigma Assessment
Systems.
ⴱ
Jordan, M. H., Gabriel, T. J., Teasley, R., Walker, W. J., & Schraeder, M.
(2015). An integrative approach to identifying factors related to longterm career commitments: A military example. Career Development
International, 20, 163–178. http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/CDI-05-20130071
ⴱ
Joseph, A. I. (2009). The role of grit in predicting performance in
collegiate athletes. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Capella University, Minneapolis, MN.
Karabenick, S. A. (2003). Seeking help in large college classes: A personcentered approach. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 28, 37–58.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0361-476X(02)00012-7
ⴱ
Karlson, R. W. (2014). Perry’s scheme of intellectual and ethical development influence on Duckworth’s Short Grit Score in interior design
students. (Unpublished master’s thesis). University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.
Kelley, T. L. (1927). Interpretation of Educational Measurement. World
Books: Yonkers-on-Hudson, NY.
ⴱ
Kelly, D. R., Matthews, M. D., & Bartone, P. T. (2014). Grit and hardiness
as predictors of performance among West Point cadets. Military Psychology, 26, 327–342. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/mil0000050
ⴱ
Khaler, K. L. (2014). On beating the odds: A study of successful community college students. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Michigan
State University, East Lansing, MI.

ⴱ

15

Kleiman, E. M., Adams, L. M., Kashdan, T. B., & Riskind, J. H. (2013).
Gratitude and grit indirectly reduce risk of suicidal ideations by enhancing meaning in life: Evidence for a mediated moderation model. Journal
of Research in Personality, 47, 539 –546. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp
.2013.04.007
Kline, R. B. (2011). Principles and practices of structural equation modeling (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Kohn, A. (2014, April 6). The downside of “grit.” Washington Post.
Retrieved from http://www.alfiekohn.org/article/downside-grit/
Krampe, R. T., & Ericsson, K. A. (1996). Maintaining excellence: Deliberate practice and elite performance in young and older pianists. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 125, 331–359. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1037/0096-3445.125.4.331
Kruger, J., & Dunning, D. (1999). Unskilled and unaware of it: How
difficulties in recognizing one’s own incompetence lead to inflated
self-assessments. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77,
1121–1134. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.77.6.1121
Kuncel, N. R., Credé, M., & Thomas, L. L. (2005). The reliability of
self-reported grade point averages: A meta-analysis and summary of the
literature. Review of Educational Research, 75, 63– 82. http://dx.doi.org/
10.3102/00346543075001063
Kuncel, N. R., Hezlett, S. A., & Ones, D. S. (2004). Academic performance, career potential, creativity, and job performance: Can one construct predict them all? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
86, 148 –161. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.86.1.148
ⴱ
Lovering, M. E., Heaton, K. J., Banderet, L. E., Neises, K., Andrews, J.,
& Cohen, B. S. (2015). Psychological and physical characteristics of
U.S. marine recruits. Military Psychology, 27, 261–275. http://dx.doi
.org/10.1037/mil0000082
Lucas, G. M., Gratch, J., Cheng, L., & Marsella, S. (2015). When the going
gets tough: Grit predicts costly perseverance. Journal of Research in
Personality, 59, 15–22. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2015.08.004
MacCann, C., & Roberts, R. D. (2010). Do time management, grit, and
self-control relate to academic achievement independently of conscientiousness? In R. Hicks (Ed.), Personality and individual differences:
Current directions (pp. 79 –90). Queensland, Australia: Australian Academic Press.
MacNamara, B. N., Hambrick, D. Z., & Oswald, F. L. (2014). Deliberate
practice and performance in music, games, sports, education, and professions: A meta-analysis. Psychological Science, 25, 1608 –1618. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1177/0956797614535810
ⴱ
Maddi, S. R., Erwin, L. M., Carmody, C. L., Villareal, B. J., White, M.,
& Gundersen, K. K. (2013). Relationship of hardiness, grit, and emotional intelligence to internet addiction, excessive consumer spending,
and gambling. The Journal of Positive Psychology, 8, 128 –134. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/17439760.2012.758306
ⴱ
Maddi, S. R., Matthews, M. D., Kelly, D. R., Villareal, B., & White, M.
(2012). The role of hardiness and grit in predicting performance and
retention of USMA cadets. Military Psychology, 24, 19 –28. http://dx
.doi.org/10.1080/08995605.2012.639672
Mattern, K. D., & Patterson, B. F. (2009). Is performance on the SAT
related to college retention? Research Report 2009 –7. The College
Board, New York, NY.
McClelland, D. C. (1985). How motives, skills, and values determine what
people do. American Psychologist, 40, 812– 825. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1037/0003-066X.40.7.812
McCornack, R. L. (1956). A criticism of studies comparing weighting
methods. Journal of Applied Psychology, 40, 343–345. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1037/h0045635
ⴱ
McCutcheon, C. A. (2014). Perseverance and persistence in achieving
educational goals: A case study of an adult charter high school examining perseverance of students utilizing a mixed methods approach.
(Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Ball State University, Muncie, IN.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

16

CREDÉ, TYNAN, AND HARMS

Meng, X. L., Rosenthal, R., & Rubin, D. B. (1992). Comparing correlated
correlation coefficients. Psychological Bulletin, 111, 172–175. http://dx
.doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.111.1.172
ⴱ
Meriac, J. P., Slifka, J. S., & LaBat, L. R. (2015). Work ethic and grit: An
examination of empirical redundancy. Personality and Individual Differences, 86, 401– 405. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2015.07.009
Miller, J. D., Price, J., & Campbell, W. K. (2012). Is the Narcissistic
Personality Inventory still relevant? A test of independent grandiosity
and entitlement scales in the assessment of narcissism. Assessment, 19,
8 –13. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1073191111429390
ⴱ
Morris, R. B. (2011). Can chameleons lead change? The effect of
resistance to change on high self-monitoring leaders’ strength of
purpose. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Columbia University,
New York, NY.
Mosier, C. I. (1943). On the reliability of a weighted composite. Psychometrika, 8, 161–168. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF02288700
ⴱ
Office of Institutional Research & Assessment. (2012). Social Science
Survey: GRIT & AMBITION Scales. (Unpublished manuscript). Metropolitan Community College-Blue River, Independence, MO. Retrieved from http://www.mcckc.edu/services/research/files/GRIT%
20Report%20S12.pdf
Pace, V. L., & Brannick, M. T. (2010). How similar are personality scales
of the “same” construct? A meta-analytic investigation. Personality and
Individual Differences, 49, 669 – 676. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.paid
.2010.06.014
Parker, B. (2004). Albert Einstein’s vision: Remarkable discoveries that
shaped modern science. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books.
Paunesku, D., Walton, G. M., Romero, C., Smith, E. N., Yeager, D. S., &
Dweck, C. S. (2015). Mind set interventions are a scalable treatment for
academic underachievement. Psychological Science, 26, 784 –793.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0956797615571017
Paunonen, S. V., & Ashton, M. C. (2001). Big Five factors and facets and
the prediction of behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 524 –539.
ⴱ
Pennings, S. M., Law, K. C., Green, B. A., & Anestis, M. D. (2015). The
impact of grit on the relationship between hopelessness and suicidiality.
International Journal of Cognitive Therapy, 8, 130 –142. http://dx.doi
.org/10.1521/ijct.2015.8.2.130
Perera, H. N., & DiGiacomo, M. (2013). The relationship of trait emotional
intelligence with academic performance: A meta-analytic review. Learning and Individual Differences, 28, 20 –33. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j
.lindif.2013.08.002
Perkins-Gough, D. (2013). The significance of grit: A conversation with
Angela Lee Duckworth. Educational Leadership, 71, 14 –20.
ⴱ
Piña-Watson, B., López, B., Ojeda, L., & Rodriguez, K. M. (2015).
Cultural and cognitive predictors of academic motivation among Mexican American adolescents: Caution against discounting the impact of
cultural processes. Journal of Multicultural Counseling and Development, 43, 109 –121. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/j.2161-1912.2015.00068.x
Poropat, A. E. (2009). A meta-analysis of the five-factor model of personality and academic performance. Psychological Bulletin, 135, 322–338.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0014996
Poropat, A. E. (2014). A meta-analysis of adult-rated personality and
academic performance in primary education. The British Journal of
Educational Psychology, 84, 239 –252. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/bjep
.12019
ⴱ
Reed, J., Pritschet, B. L., & Cutton, D. M. (2012). Grit, conscientiousness,
and the transtheoretical model of change for exercise behavior. Journal
of Health Psychology, 18, 612– 619. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/
1359105312451866
Richardson, M., Abraham, C., & Bond, R. (2012). Psychological correlates
of university students’ academic performance: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 138, 353–387. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1037/a0026838

ⴱ

Richmond, M. (2015). g and non-g influences on GPA for Hispanics and
Whites: A structural equation modeling (SEM) approach to Spearman’s
law of diminishing returns (SLDOR). (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). The University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX.
Robbins, S. B., Allen, J., Casillas, A., Peterson, C. H., & Le, H. (2006).
Unravelling the differential effects of motivational and skills, social, and
self-management measures from traditional predictors of college outcomes. Journal of Educational Psychology, 98, 598 – 616.
Robbins, S. P., Judge, T. A., & Campbell, T. T. (2010). Organizational
Behavior. Financial Times Prentice Hall: Harlow, England.
Robbins, S. B., Lauver, K., Le, H., Davis, D., Langley, R., & Carlstrom, A.
(2004). Do psychosocial and study skills factors predict college outcomes? A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 130, 261–288. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.130.2.261
Roberts, B. W., Bogg, T., Walton, K. E., Chernyshenko, O. S., & Stark,
S. E. (2004). A lexical investigation of the lower order structure of
conscientiousness. Journal of Research in Personality, 38, 164 –178.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0092-6566(03)00065-5
Roberts, B. W., Chernyshenko, O. S., Stark, S., & Goldberg, L. R. (2005).
The structure of conscientiousness: An empirical investigation based on
seven major personality questionnaires. Personnel Psychology, 58, 103–
139. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.2005.00301.x
Roberts, B. W., Walton, K., & Viechtbauer, W. (2006). Patterns of meanlevel change in personality traits across the life course: A meta-analysis
of longitudinal studies. Psychological Bulletin, 132, 1–25. http://dx.doi
.org/10.1037/0033-2909.132.1.1
ⴱ
Robertson-Kraft, C. (2014). Teachers’ motivational responses to new
teacher performance management systems: An evaluation of the pilot of
Aldine ISD’s INVEST system. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
ⴱ
Robertson-Kraft, C., & Duckworth, A. L. (2014). True grit: Trait-level
perseverance and passion for long-term goals predicts effectiveness and
retention among novice teachers. Teachers College Record, 116,
030302.
ⴱ
Rojas, J. P. (2015). The relationship among creativity, grit, academic
motivation, and academic success in college students. Theses and
Dissertations–Educational, School, and Counseling Psychology. Paper
39. Retrieved from http://uknowledge.uky.edu/edp_etds/39
Ryan, A. M., & Pintrich, P. R. (1997). “Should I ask for help?” The role
of motivation and attitudes in adolescents’ help seeking in math class.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 89, 329 –341. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1037/0022-0663.89.2.329
Ryans, D. G. (1939). The measurement of persistence: An historical
review. Psychological Bulletin, 36, 715–739. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
h0060780
Sackett, P. R., Kuncel, N. R., Beatty, A. S., Rigdon, J. L., Shen, W., &
Kiger, T. B. (2012). The role of socioeconomic status in SAT-grade
relationships and in college admissions decisions. Psychological Science, 23, 1000 –1007. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0956797612438732
ⴱ
Samson, A. C., Proyer, R. T., Ceschi, G., Pedrini, P. P., & Ruch, W.
(2011). The fear of being laughed at in Switzerland: Regional differences and the role of positive psychology. Swiss Journal of Psychology,
70, 53– 62. http://dx.doi.org/10.1024/1421-0185/a000039
Schmidt, F. L., & Hunter, J. E. (1998). The validity and utility of selection
methods in personnel psychology: Practical and theoretical implications
of 85 years of research findings. Psychological Bulletin, 124, 262–274.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.124.2.262
Schmidt, F. L., & Le, H. A. (2004). Software for the Hunter-Schmidt
meta-analysis method: Version 2.0. [Computer Software]. Iowa city, IA:
University of Iowa.
ⴱ
Schrepfer-Tarter, A. (2013). An exploratory study of the academic optimism of principals. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

GRIT META-ANALYSIS
Seipp, B. (1991). Anxiety and academic performance: A meta-analysis of
findings. Anxiety Research, 4, 27– 41. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
08917779108248762
Shechtman, N., DeBarger, A. H., Dornsife, C., Rosier, S., & Yarnall, L.
(2013). Promoting grit, tenacity, and perseverance: Critical factors for
success in the 21st century. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Education, Office of Education Technology. Retrieved from http://
pgbovine.net/OET-Draft-Grit-Report-2-17-13.pdf
ⴱ
Sheehan, K. (2014). Storm clouds in the mind: A comparison of hope, grit,
happiness, and life satisfaction in traditional and alternative high school
students. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Hofstra University,
Hempstead, NY.
ⴱ
Shishim, M. D. (2012). The relationship between college student success
and well-being determinants: An exploratory study of measures. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of California, Santa Barbara,
CA. California Polytechnic University, San Luis Obispo, CA.
ⴱ
Singh, K., & Jha, S. D. (2008). Positive and negative affect, and grit as
predictors of happiness and life satisfaction. Journal of the Indian
Academy of Applied Psychology, 34, 40 – 45.
ⴱ
Stewart, S. B. (2015). Grit and self-control as predictors of first-year
student success. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). The University of
Southern Maine, Portland, ME.
ⴱ
Strayhorn, T. L. (2013). What role does grit play in the academic success
of black male collegians at predominantly white institutions? Journal of
African American Studies, 18, 1–10. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12111012-9243-0
ⴱ
Suzuki, Y., Tamesue, D., Asahi, K., & Ishikawa, Y. (2015). Grit and work
engagement: A cross-sectional study. PLoS ONE, 10, e0137501. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0137501
Vanhove, A., Herian, M., Perez, A., Harms, P. D., & Lester, P. (2015). Can
resilience be developed at work? A meta-analytic review of resiliencebuilding program effectiveness. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology. Advance online publication. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1111/joop.12123
ⴱ
Von Culin, K. R., Tsukayama, E., & Duckworth, A. L. (2014). Unpacking
grit: Motivational correlates of perseverance and passion for long-term

17

goals. The Journal of Positive Psychology, 9, 306 –312. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1080/17439760.2014.898320
ⴱ
Warden, D., Myers, C., & Harrell, B. (2015). Academic Achievement of
Tradition and Nontraditional College Students. Poster presented at the
61st Annual Meeting of the Southeastern Psychological Association,
March 18 –21, 2015.
ⴱ
Waring, A. (2015). The influence of attachment and grit on life satisfaction and romantic relationship satisfaction. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of La Verne, La Verne, CA.
ⴱ
Watson, H. (2013). Predicting college students’ positive psychology
attributes with dimensions of executive functioning. (Unpublished
master’s thesis). Middle Tennessee State University, Murfreesboro,
TN.
ⴱ
Wenner, J. R. (2015). Predictors of prosocial behavior and civic involvement: Differences in middle aged and older adults. (Unpublished master’s thesis). North Dakota State University, Fargo, ND.
ⴱ
Weston, L. C. (2015). A replication and extension of psychometric research on the grit scale. (Unpublished master’s thesis). University of
Maryland, College Park, MD.
Wilkinson, L. (1999). Statistical methods in psychology journals: Guidelines and explanations. American Psychologist, 54, 594 – 604. http://dx
.doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.54.8.594
ⴱ
Wolters, C. A., & Hussain, M. (2015). Investigating grit and its relation
with college students’ self-regulated learning and academic achievement. Metacognition and Learning, 10, 293–311. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1007/s11409-014-9128-9
Zimmerman, B. J. (1990). Self-regulated learning and academic achievement: An overview. Educational Psychology, 25, 3–17. http://dx.doi
.org/10.1207/s15326985ep2501_2
Zimmerman, B. J. (1994). Dimensions of academic self-regulation: A
conceptual framework for education. In D. Schunk & B. Zimmerman
(Eds.), Self-regulation of learning and performance: Issues and educational applications (pp. 283–301). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
ⴱ
Zimmerman, E., & Brogan, L. (2015). Grit and legal education. Pace Law
Review, 36, 112.

(Appendix follows)

CREDÉ, TYNAN, AND HARMS

18

Appendix
Summary of Studies That Reported Relations Between Grit and Performance, Retention,
Big Five Personality Traits, and Cognitive Ability

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Authors
Allen (2014)
Arouty (2015):
Sample 1
Arouty (2015):
Sample 1
Arouty (2015):
Sample 2
Black (2014)
Bowman et al. (2015):
Sample 1
Bowman et al. (2015):
Sample 1
Bowman et al. (2015):
Sample 1
Bowman et al. (2015):
Sample 2
Bowman et al. (2015):
Sample 2
Bowman et al. (2015):
Sample 2
Bowman et al. (2015):
Sample 2
Bowman et al. (2015):
Sample 2
Bowman et al. (2015):
Sample 2
Bowman et al. (2015):
Sample 3
Bowman et al. (2015):
Sample 3
Bowman et al. (2015):
Sample 3
Bowman et al. (2015):
Sample 3
Bowman et al. (2015):
Sample 3
Bowman et al. (2015):
Sample 3
Buller (2012)
Buller (2012)
Buller (2012)
Chambers et al.
(2012)
Chang (2014)
Chang (2014)
Chang (2014)
Cooper (2014)
Cooper (2014)
Cooper (2014)
Cooper (2014)
Cooper (2014)
Cooper (2014)
Cross (2013)
Davidson (2014)
Davidson (2014)
DeCandia (2014)
Duckworth & Quinn
(2009): Study 2
Duckworth & Quinn
(2009): Study 2
Duckworth & Quinn
(2009): Study 2
Duckworth & Quinn
(2009): Study 4

N

Grit type

Grit
␣

Performance
r

Type

⫺.02

College GPA

.75

⫺.06

College GPA

Overall

.75

⫺.08

High school GPA

110
97

Overall
Overall

.82
.77

.02
.22

High school GPA
College GPA

417

Consistency

.14

College GPA

417

Overall

.31

College GPA

417

Perseverance

.26

College GPA

938

Consistency

.13

High school GPA

938

Consistency

.10

College GPA

938

Overall

.26

High school GPA

938

Overall

.23

College GPA

938

Perseverance

.30

High school GPA

938

Perseverance

.29

College GPA

1,089

Consistency

.11

High school GPA

1,089

Consistency

.09

College GPA

1,089

Overall

.20

High school GPA

1,089

Overall

.21

College GPA

1,089

Perseverance

.22

High school GPA

1,089
968
968
1,123

Perseverance
Overall
Overall
Overall

.25
.10
.22

College GPA
College GPA
Nonacademic

106
342
342
342
515
515
515
515
515
515
669
116
116
413

Overall
Consistency
Overall
Perseverance
Consistency
Consistency
Overall
Overall
Perseverance
Perseverance
Overall
Overall
Overall
Overall

.79
.79
.81
.81
.79
.79

.18
⫺.08
.09
.21
.14
.07
.18
.16
.16
.19
.09
⫺.03
.05
.18

1,554

Consistency

.77

1,554

Overall

1,554

Perseverance

.70

Overall

.86

30

Overall

124

Overall

124

279

.32

Retention
r

Type

.07

General

C
r

A
␣

r

E
␣

r

ES
␣

r

O
␣

r

g
␣

r

⫺.15

.25

General

.08

General

College GPA
College GPA
College GPA
College GPA
High school GPA
College GPA
High school GPA
College GPA
High school GPA
College GPA
Graduate GPA
High school GPA
College GPA
High school GPA

High school GPA

(Appendix continues)

⫺.07

.74

.50

.38

.79

.10

.82

.04

.89

.24

.84

.07

.77

.08
.03
⫺.07
⫺.03

.49

.79

.20

.82

.17

.89

.28

.84

.24

.77

.00

.42

.79

.23

.82

.25

.89

.21

.84

.34

.77

.04

.64

.84

.18

.80

.12

.88

.32

.87

⫺.02

.82

.73

.84

.23

.80

.19

.88

.37

.87

.07

.82

.74

.84

.25

.80

.26

.88

.42

.87

.14

.82

GRIT META-ANALYSIS

19

Appendix (continued)

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Authors
Duckworth & Quinn
(2009): Study 6
Duckworth et al.
(2011)
Duckworth et al.
(2007): Study 2
Duckworth et al.
(2007): Study 3
Duckworth et al.
(2007): Study 4
Duckworth et al.
(2007): Study 4
Duckworth et al.
(2007): Study 4
Duckworth et al.
(2007): Study 5
Duckworth et al.
(2007): Study 5
Duckworth et al.
(2007): Study 6
Engel (2013)
Eskreis-Winkler et al.
(2014): Study 1
Eskreis-Winkler et al.
(2014): Study 2
Eskreis-Winkler et al.
(2014): Study 3
Eskreis-Winkler et al.
(2014): Study 4
Fillmore (2015)
Hill et al. (2014)
Hogan (2013)
Hogan (2013)
Hogan (2013)
Hogan (2013)
Ivcevic & Brackett
(2014)
Ivcevic & Brackett
(2014)
Joseph (2009)
Karlson (2014)
Kelly et al. (2014)
Kelly et al. (2014)
Kelly et al. (2014)
Kelly et al. (2014)
Kelly et al. (2014)
Khaler (2014)
MacCann & Roberts
(2010)
MacCann & Roberts
(2010)
MacCann & Roberts
(2010)
McCutcheon (2014)
Meriac et al. (2015)
Meriac et al. (2015)
Meriac et al. (2015)
Morris (2011):
Sample 1
Morris (2011):
Sample 2
Office of Institutional
Research &
Assessment (2012)
Reed et al. (2012)
Richmond (2015):
Sample 1
Richmond (2015):
Sample 2

N

Grit type

Grit
␣

190

Overall

.82

190

Overall

.82

706

Overall

.85

139

Overall

1,218

Overall

1,218
1,218

Performance
r

.17

Type

Retention
r

Type

A

E

ES

O

r

␣

r

␣

r

␣

r

␣

.70

.86

.44

.84

.12

.84

.28

.79

Nonacademic
.77

.86

.24

.82

.22

.89

.38

.85

r

g
␣

.18

.68

.17

.68

.14

.84

r

.25

College GPA

⫺.20

.79

.06

College GPA

⫺.05

Overall

.79

.19

Nonacademic

Overall

.79

.20a

General

a

General

1,308

Overall

.79

1,308

Overall

.79

79
88

Overall
Overall

.80
.82

677

Overall

.77

.14a

General

a

.12

General

.02

College GPA

442

Overall

.79

.18

4,813

Overall

.90

.18

6,362
384
337
405
425
423
477

Overall
Overall
Overall
Overall
Overall
Overall
Overall

.79

213

Overall

.00
.35

.71

.82

⫺.08

.77

.80

.02
⫺.09
⫺.07

.64

.39

.25

.48

.19

General
a

.15

Marriage .71
.60

High school GPA
College GPA
Graduate GPA
Non–Academic

.72

.14

High school GPA

Overall
Overall
Overall
Consistency
Overall
Overall
Overall
Perseverance
Overall

.72
.80

.18
.01

Nonacademic
Nonacademic

.06
.05
.14

College GPA
College GPA
Nonacademic

.02
⫺.15

College GPA
College GPA

.20

.21

.33

.08

291

Consistency

.81

291

Overall

291
134
322
322
322

Perseverance
Overall
Consistency
Overall
Perseverance

74

.81

.27

.80

.16

.86

.37

.83

.05

.77

⫺.27
⫺.02
⫺.03
.20

.80

.64

Grade in class

⫺.01
.07
.04
.24

213
57
15
993
993
993
1,308
993
21

C

General

⫺.04

.12

High school GPA

.46

.14

High school GPA

.58

.15

High school GPA

.84

.00
.05

.70

.84

.75
.78
.65

.69
.77
.63

.79
.79
.79

Overall

.77

.48

.85

.15

.80

.31

.88

.31

.81

.34

.78

76

Overall

.77

.40

.85

.12

.80

.19

.88

.20

.81

⫺.06

.78

470
1,165

Overall
Overall

.79

.72

.78

144

Overall

.75

.23

College GPA

.72

.72

.13

.81

.08

.89

.34

.79

⫺.03

.76

⫺.22

199

Overall

.64

⫺.06

College GPA

.63

.80

.16

.75

.10

.87

.25

.81

.01

.73

⫺.11

.01

.20

.10

General

College GPA

(Appendix continues)

CREDÉ, TYNAN, AND HARMS

20
Appendix (continued)

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Authors
Robertson-Kraft
(2014)
Robertson-Kraft &
Duckworth (2014):
Study 1
Robertson-Kraft &
Duckworth (2014):
Study 2
Robertson-Kraft &
Duckworth (2014):
Study 2
Rojas (2015):
Sample 1
Rojas (2015):
Sample 2
Sheehan (2014)
Sheehan (2014)
Sheehan (2014)
Stewart (2015)
Stewart (2015)
Stewart (2015)
Stewart (2015)
Stewart (2015)
Stewart (2015)
Strayhorn (2013)
Strayhorn (2013)
Suzuki et al. (2015)
Suzuki et al. (2015)
Suzuki et al. (2015)
Third Author (2015):
Sample 1
Third Author (2015):
Sample 1
Third Author (2015):
Sample 1
Third Author (2015):
Sample 2
Third Author (2015):
Sample 2
Third Author (2015):
Sample 2
Warden et al. (2015):
Sample 1
Warden et al. (2015):
Sample 2
Weston (2015)
Weston (2015)
Weston (2015)
Wolters & Hussain
(2015)
Wolters & Hussain
(2015)
Wolters & Hussain
(2015)
Wolters & Hussain
(2015)
Wolters & Hussain
(2015)
Wolters & Hussain
(2015)
Wolters & Hussain
(2015)
Zimmerman & Brogan
(2015)

N

Grit type

Grit
␣

Performance
r

Type

2,662

Overall

.68

154

Overall

.82

.02

College GPA

307

Overall

.85

⫺.09

College GPA

127

Overall

.85

187

Overall

.84

.11

College GPA

Overall
Consistency
Overall
Perseverance
Overall
Overall
Consistency
Consistency
Perseverance
Perseverance
Overall
Overall
Overall
Consistency
Perseverance

.84
.73
.73
.70

.87
.87
.87
.76
.89

.22
.02
.25
.39
.19
.22
.17
.26
.11
.08
.35
.38

College GPA
High school GPA
High school GPA
High school GPA
College GPA
High school GPA
College GPA
High school GPA
College GPA
High school GPA
High school GPA
College GPA

156

Consistency

.55

.08

156

Overall

.74

156

Perseverance

.60

971

Consistency

971
971

817
179
179
179
88
88
88
88
88
88
140
140
1,134
1,134
1,134

Retention
r

Type

C

A

E

ES

O

r

␣

r

␣

r

␣

r

␣

.58

.59

.30

.59

.06

.71

.29

.60

r
.24

g
␣

r

.65
.16

.06

.05
.09
⫺.02
.23
.56
.35
.47

.52
.52
.52

Grade in class

.22

.80

.10

Grade in class

.42

.80

.09

Grade in class

.52

.80

.86

.35

.86

Overall

.85

.60

.86

Perseverance

.81

.68

.86

67

Overall

.31

College GPA

72
33
33
33

Overall
Overall
Consistency
Perseverance

.33

College GPA

.39
.20
.35

.37
.37
.37

.37
.01
.43

.56
.56
.56

.28
.26
.18

.86
.86
.86

.45
⫺.07
.57

.85
.85
.85

.65
.52
.51

213

Overall

.72

.26

213

Overall

.72

⫺.02

College GPA

213

Consistency

.74

.1

213

Consistency

.74

⫺.12

213

Perseverance

.64

.29

College GPA

213

Perseverance

.64

.09

High school GPA

High school GPA
College GPA
High school GPA

49

Overall

.00

Graduate GPA

49

Overall

.17

College GPA

⫺.27

Note. N ⫽ sample size; C ⫽ conscientiousness; A ⫽ agreeableness; E ⫽ extraversion; ES ⫽ emotional stability; O ⫽ openness; g ⫽ cognitive ability;
GPA ⫽ grade point average. No local reliability estimates for cognitive ability were reported. This appendix only includes studies reporting on the relations
between grit and grit facets on one hand and performance, retention, Big Five personality, and cognitive ability on the other hand. Coded results from all
other studies are available from the first author on request.
a
Correlations estimate from Nagelkerke R2 values.

Received November 4, 2015
Revision received March 24, 2016
Accepted April 4, 2016 䡲

Journal of Educational Psychology
2016, Vol. 108, No. 3, 329 –341

© 2016 American Psychological Association
0022-0663/16/$12.00 http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/edu0000062

A Stitch in Time: Strategic Self-Control in High School
and College Students
Angela L. Duckworth, Rachel E. White,
Alyssa J. Matteucci, and Annie Shearer

James J. Gross
Stanford University

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

University of Pennsylvania

A growing body of research indicates that self-control is critical to academic success. Surprisingly little
is known, however, about the diverse strategies students use to implement self-control or how well these
strategies work. To address these issues, the author conducted a naturalistic investigation of self-control
strategies (Study 1) and 2 field experiments (Studies 2 and 3). In Study 1, high school students described
the strategies they use to manage interpersonal conflicts, get academic work done, eat healthfully, and
manage other everyday self-control challenges. The majority of strategies in these self-nominated
incidents as well as in 3 hypothetical academic scenarios (e.g., studying instead of texting friends) were
reliably classified using the process model of self-control. As predicted by the process model, students
rated strategies deployed early in the impulse-generation process (situation selection, situation modification) as being dramatically more effective than strategies deployed later (attentional deployment,
cognitive change, response modulation). In Study 2, high school students randomly assigned to implement situation modification were more likely to meet their academic goals during the following week
than students assigned either to implement response modulation or no strategy at all. In Study 3, college
students randomly assigned to implement situation modification were also more successful in meeting
their academic goals, and this effect was partially mediated by decreased feelings of temptation
throughout the week. Collectively, these findings suggest that students might benefit from learning to
initiate self-control when their impulses are still nascent.
Keywords: self-control, self-regulated learning, metacognition, metacognitive skills, character

Moffitt et al., 2011), affirming age-old speculation that the ability
to manage conflicting desires may be at least as critical to psychosocial development as any other competency (Aristotle, 350
BCE/1999; Freud, 1977; James, 1899). In the current investigation, we systematically examine how high school and college
students exercise self-control in their everyday lives and test the
relative effectiveness of strategies deployed earlier, when impulses
are still nascent, rather than later, when impulses have grown in
strength.

A burgeoning research literature shows that students who can
resist momentarily rewarding temptations in the service of more
enduringly valued goals excel academically (Duckworth & Carlson, 2013; Mischel, Shoda, & Rodriguez, 1989; Véronneau, HiattRacer, Fosco, & Dishion, 2014), thrive socially (Eisenberg, Hofer,
Sulik, & Spinrad, 2014), and flourish physically (Tsukayama,
Toomey, Faith, & Duckworth, 2010). Remarkably, the predictive
power of self-control for consequential life outcomes rivals that of
family socioeconomic status and general intelligence (Daly, Delaney, Egan, & Baumeister, 2015; Duckworth & Seligman, 2005;

Defining and Describing Self-Control
Self-control refers to the voluntary regulation of conflicting
thoughts, feelings, and actions in accordance with long-term goals.
In a self-control dilemma, the individual wants to do something
that is immediately rewarding and, in addition, wants to do something else that has more enduring personal value. For example,
students are often confronted with choosing between engaging
diversions (e.g., texting friends) and academic work (e.g., doing
algebra homework) whose benefits are recognizably greater but,
alas, redound in the distant future. Although middle and high
school students say that academic work is more important to their
personal futures than any other waking activity, they also experience it as dramatically less enjoyable (Galla, Duckworth, Rikoon,
& Haimm, 2014). Likewise, holding one’s temper in a heated
argument and eating healthfully rather than snacking on junk food
are more beneficial in the long-run than they are gratifying in the
moment.

Angela L. Duckworth, Rachel E. White, Alyssa J. Matteucci, and Annie
Shearer, Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania; James J.
Gross, Department of Psychology, Stanford University.
Annie Shearer is now at the Center for Family Intervention Science,
Drexel University. The writing of this article was supported by the Character Lab, the Templeton Foundation, the National Institute on Aging grant
5-K01-AG033182-02, the National Institute on Aging grant R24
AG048081-01, and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. The content is
solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent
the official views of the funding agencies.
We gratefully acknowledge the research assistance of Leigh Andrews,
Ihno Lee, Katherine Loboda, Adam Millar, Ashleigh Seely, and Arianna
Ulloa in the preparation of this article.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Angela L.
Duckworth, Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, 3701
Market Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104. E-mail: duckwort@psych.upenn.edu
329

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

330

DUCKWORTH, WHITE, MATTEUCCI, SHEARER, AND GROSS

As we have defined it, self-control is an aspect of motivated
behavior, a term that in its broadest sense encompasses all intentional, goal-directed behavior. The term motivation can also be
used more specifically to refer to setting goals and evaluating their
desirability and feasibility; when used in this narrower sense,
motivation can be distinguished from volition (i.e., how effectively
students strive toward their goals once they are committed to them;
Achtziger & Gollwitzer, 2008). This distinction is important because committing to goals does not guarantee subsequently taking
steps toward their realization (Kuhl, 1984). For example, some
students genuinely want to do well in school but are unable to
autonomously regulate their behavior in ways that effectively
advance them toward that aim (Corno & Mandinach, 2004; Zimmerman & Martinez-Pons, 1990). It is exactly this gap— between
intention and striving—that interests us here.
A popular view of self-control equates the capacity to resist
temptation with internal fortitude. Indeed, lay language—willpower, force of will, just do it, just say no—implies that we
necessarily use a great deal of energy to suppress an undesirable
impulse or elevate a desirable one. Accordingly, in the social
psychology literature, the ego depletion model suggests that resolving self-control conflicts exhausts a finite energy resource,
leading to subsequent failures of self-control (Baumeister, 2014)
and a subjective sense of strain (Inzlicht, Legault, & Teper, 2014;
Kurzban, Duckworth, Kable, & Myers, 2013). Likewise, in the
developmental literature, self-control is commonly referred to as
effortful control (Rothbart & Rueda, 2005). Not surprisingly, much
of the research on mechanisms of self-control has focused on
top-down cognitive processes that inhibit lower-level impulses and
support goal-directed behavior.
Whereas effortfully modulating responses in the heat of the
moment is the most obvious way individuals exercise self-control,
it may be the least effective. It turns out that even young children
have less obvious but more artful means of manipulating their own
behavior. For instance, preschoolers forgoing immediate gratification (e.g., one marshmallow) for larger, delayed rewards (e.g., two
marshmallows) can wait significantly longer when they cover their
eyes or stare at the ceiling, when the treats are hidden from view
by an opaque cover, or when they imagine them to be fluffy, white,
and inedible clouds (Carlson & Beck, 2009; Mischel, 2014). Outside of the laboratory, there are many more “tricks,” as the economist Schelling (1984) put it, by which our future self can outmaneuver its myopic present self (p. 290).

The Process Model of Self-Control
We have recently proposed that self-control strategies—whether
obvious or less obvious— can be organized according to their
underlying mechanism and the stage at which they are used (Duckworth, Gendler, & Gross, 2014). Specifically, the process model
of self-control begins with the premise that impulses are response tendencies to think, feel, or act that develop over time.
As shown in the bottom part of Figure 1, impulses come into
being and either increase or decrease in intensity through a
recursive situation-attention-appraisal-response sequence. Impulses of sufficient strength are enacted; those that fail to reach
threshold are not. Often, impulses do not conflict. However, we
sometimes experience conflicting impulses. When an immedi-

Figure 1. The process model of self-control (adapted from Duckworth,
Gendler, and Gross (2014).

ately rewarding impulse is at odds with an impulse of greater
value to us in the long-run, we need to intervene.
This conception of impulse generation suggests that five categories of self-control strategies can be identified, corresponding to
distinct stages of impulse generation. These categories are shown
in the top portion of Figure 1. To illustrate, consider a student who
first encounters a particular situation (e.g., walks into his bedroom)
and decides whether to modify it (e.g., turning off his cell phone).
Next, he pays attention to particular features of the situation (e.g.,
looks at his textbooks), and appraises the situation (e.g., “I should
get my homework out of the way before dinner”) in a way that,
finally, gives rise to the generation of an impulse (e.g., starting his
homework). As we elaborate below, all strategies work by diminishing the strength of momentarily rewarding but ultimately undesirable impulses or, alternatively, amplifying the strength of
enduringly beneficial but relatively less enjoyable ones. The most
important prediction of the process model is that intervening
earlier in the cycle of impulse generation, when impulses are still
developing, is more effective than intervening later.

Situational Strategies
Situation selection strategies are the most forward-looking and
involve intentionally choosing to be in places or with people that
facilitate self-control. For example, in a recent mixed-age focus
group on academic success, we listened to a tenth-grade student
sagely advise a fifth grader in the same school: “If I knew at your
age what I know now, I would have chosen different friends. Your
friends really influence you. I got into the wrong crowd. It was
really hard to get back on track.” Although direct empirical evidence on situation selection in adolescent students is lacking, it has
recently been established that in adulthood, adults who are more
self-controlled report intentionally avoiding situations replete with
temptation (Ent, Baumeister, & Tice, 2015; Imhoff, Schmidt, &
Gerstenberg, 2014). Relatedly, for drug addicts, encounters with
trigger cues are perhaps the strongest predictor of recidivism, and
treatment programs invariably advise deliberately avoiding people,
places, and objects that induce craving (Bonson et al., 2002;
Doyle, Friedmann, & Zywiak, 2013; Goldstein, 1994; Kelley,
2004; O’Brien, 1976; Osgood, Wilson, O’Malley, Bachman, &
Johnston, 1996; Schroeder et al., 2001; Weiss, 2005).
As a practical matter, unfortunately, students cannot always
transport themselves to different locations, nor can they easily

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

STRATEGIC SELF-CONTROL

“switch their friends,” even if they know that doing so would help
them realize their long-term goals. What else can students do?
Situation modification strategies entail purposefully changing
physical or social circumstances in ways that facilitate self-control.
For example, adults eat less when using smaller plates and drink
less when using taller, skinnier cups (Wansink, 2004; Wansink &
Van Ittersum, 2003; Wansink, Van Ittersum, & Painter, 2006).
Recovering alcoholics can take Antabuse to dissuade themselves
from drinking (Banys, 1988). As early as 6 years old, children
know that it is easier to resist treats when they are hidden from
view (Mischel & Mischel, 1983). More relevant to the self-control
problems of students, a few studies have linked situation modification with academic performance. In one study, college students
who voluntarily self-imposed deadlines for long-term projects
turned in better work than students who were able to turn in their
work anytime during the semester (Ariely & Wertenbroch, 2002).
Likewise, Zimmerman (1989) and Marcus (1988) found that successful students manipulate their environments (e.g., turned off the
TV) to facilitate concentration.

Cognitive Strategies
Next, there are three cognitive strategies, beginning with attentional deployment strategies. These entail directing our focus to
features of the situation which strengthen desirable impulses or
diminish undesirable impulses. Without direct tutelage, children
learn this cognitive skill fairly early in life (Carlson & Beck, 2009;
Peake, Hebl, & Mischel, 2002), but more recently Sesame Street’s
Cookie Monster has been providing direct instruction. In one
episode, after learning how to pronounce “delayed gratification,”
he models looking away from a cookie he is trying not to eat. “Me
going to look away from cookie,” he declares, turning his back.
“Me not going to look at . . .” Soon, his attention is recaptured:
Sniff, sniff. He turns to glance in the cookie’s direction, then turns
away again, underscoring that attention deployment is far from
effortless: “Oooh! This hard! This hard for monster!” (PBS, 2013).
Once we have chosen where to place our attention, we can use
cognitive change strategies to diminish our undesired impulses and
amplify our desired ones. Cognitive change strategies entail thinking about our situation differently. For example, we can reappraise
an argument by imagining ourselves as a third-party spectator to
the conflict (Finkel, Slotter, Luchies, Walton, & Gross, 2013;
White, Kross, & Duckworth, 2015) a technique called “going to
the balcony” in the field of negotiations (Ury, 2007). It is likewise
possible for preschool children to pretend that a marshmallow is
“just a picture” and for adults to mentally recast cigarettes as
poison (Mischel, 2014). Still, it’s not easy to change our thoughts.
Indeed, while more effective than response modulation, intentionally changing the way we appraise our situation is far from
effortless (Sheppes & Gross, 2011).
Of all the self-control strategies, response modulation is the
most straightforward. In the “heat of the moment,” we can voluntarily suppress an undesirable impulse (e.g., to reach for a cookie)
or amplify a desirable one (e.g., to eat the apple that came with the
school lunch). Unfortunately, the human capacity to exert cognitive control over goal-incongruent impulses is far from perfect. For
example, hiding our emotions (e.g., trying not to cry when sad or
trying not to smile when amused) sometimes works but often
doesn’t, and even when successful, takes a physiological toll

331

(Gross & Levenson, 1993). The cost of waiting until the last
opportunity to modulate conflicting impulses is also phenomenological; it feels awful to deny oneself a momentary pleasure or to
enforce an action whose benefits lie entirely in the distant future.

The Current Investigation
Given the importance of self-control to successful “studenting”
(Corno & Mandinach, 2004) and other aspects of healthy development, two urgent unanswered questions concern the strategies
that students use to navigate everyday self-control dilemmas and
their relative effectiveness. The first question is descriptive and is
concerned with whether the process model of self-control can
organize students’ diverse self-control efforts into theoretically
coherent categories. The second question is normative and addresses the important question of which self-control tactics are
most effective. The process model predicts that the earlier students
attempt to turn the tide of their own conflicting impulses in favor
of their long-term objectives, the better. As noted above, there is
some empirical evidence supporting this supposition, but to date,
research has focused on other age groups (e.g., preschool children,
mature adults) or life domains (e.g., dieting, addiction, emotion
regulation).
We focused our investigation on high school and college students, rather than younger learners, for several reasons. First,
students are accorded increasing independence from parents,
teachers, and other adults as they grow older (Steinberg, 2013). In
tandem, brain areas subserving self-control mature with age (Carlson, Zelazo, & Faja, 2013), and generally, older students are more
autonomous learners than younger students (Zimmerman &
Martinez-Pons, 1990). It is therefore not surprising that relative to
other personality traits and IQ, Big Five conscientiousness—which
encompasses self-control and closely related traits (Eisenberg,
Duckworth, Spinrad, & Valiente, 2014)—is more strongly related
to academic performance in secondary and postsecondary schooling than in earlier grades (Poropat, 2009). Another reason for
focusing on adolescents is that decisions and outcomes during this
transitional stage have long-term implications for adult development (Moffitt et al., 2011).
We began with a naturalistic investigation of high school students (Study 1), who described self-control dilemmas they had
experienced and told us how they dealt with them. We also asked
students to indicate how they would respond to hypothetical scenarios in which the impulse to do academic work conflicted with
diversions like texting or videogames. We expected that the majority of self-control attempts would be classifiable using the
process model, that all five stages of the process model would be
represented in their responses, and, further, that when asked to
consider exemplar strategies, they would rate strategies deployed
earlier in the process of impulse generation as more effective than
those deployed later.
Next, in Study 2, we conducted a random-assignment field
experiment to more confidently establish the relative effectiveness
of earlier versus later strategies. Specifically, we asked high school
students to set a specific study goal for the following week and
then instructed them to use either situation modification, response
modulation, or no particular strategy at all. As noted above, we
chose to examine situation modification rather than situation selection because we assumed that some students might not be able

332

DUCKWORTH, WHITE, MATTEUCCI, SHEARER, AND GROSS

In Study 1, we asked high school students to describe incidents
from their personal lives in which they needed self-control and,
next, to indicate what they actually did. Prior research with middle
school students suggests that self-control is called for primarily in
the domains of academic work and interpersonal conflict (Tsukayama, Duckworth, & Kim, 2013), but we expected older students to grapple with additional dilemmas more common in adulthood (e.g., saving money, exercising; Tsukayama, Duckworth, &
Kim, 2012). Next, we asked students how they might handle three
hypothetical academic self-control dilemmas (e.g., studying vs.
playing videogames). To determine the utility of the process model
for organizing self-control strategies for this age group, two trained
coders classified these four open-ended responses according to the
model’s five categories. Finally, to test the prediction that early
deployed strategies are more effective than later-deployed strategies, we asked students to rate the effectiveness of specific responses to these three hypothetical scenarios, each designed to
represent one of the model’s categories.

Internet (e.g., watch YouTube videos, check your Instagram feed,
etc.) or play video games.” And, finally, the procrastination scenario read: “You have a long-term project due and don’t want to
wait until the last minute to get it done. But there are a lot of more
fun things to do, like playing video games and watching TV.”
After telling us what they would do in these three hypothetical
academic scenarios, students were asked to judge the effectiveness
of self-control responses we provided that represented each of the
five strategies defined by the process model of self-control. The
instructions were as follows: “We’ve talked to a lot of other
students about this situation. We find that five kinds of responses
are really common. Now that you’ve seen these options, rate how
effective you think each strategy would be for each of the three
hypothetical scenarios on a scale from 0 to 100 (0 ⫽ least effective,
100 ⫽ most effective)”. For example, students read and then rated
five different approaches to the texting scenario corresponding to
strategies in the process model. In this context, “I would move to
a different location to avoid being near my phone” represented
situation selection; “I would change something about my phone
like turn off the volume or put it face down” represented situation
modification; “I would not look directly at my phone. I would
instead look directly at my academic work” represented attentional
deployment; “I would change the way I think about this situation.
For example, I would change the way I think about texting or
change the way I think about the assignment” represented cognitive change; and “I would force myself not to use the phone. I
would try to use willpower to overcome that urge” represented
response modulation.

Method

Data Analysis and Coding

Participants. Participants were students from a suburban high
school in the Northeast United States. This study was added to a
survey of students enrolled in a foreign language course. Opt-in
parental consent and student assent were obtained for N ⫽ 577
students enrolled in Grades 9 through 12. Participants ranged in
age from 13 to 19 years (M ⫽ 15.49, SD ⫽ 1.13). Approximately
70% of the students were White, 15% were Hispanic, 8% were
Black, 7% were Asian, 1% were of other ethnic backgrounds; 58%
were female, and 14% were from low-income families, as indicated by eligibility for free or reduced-price meals.
Procedure and measures. Students in Grades 9 through 12
were asked to complete surveys in a single 45-min session during
the school day. In the first part of the session, they were asked to
“tell a story of a specific incident where you used self-control
when you really needed it. What were you trying to do and what
actually happened? What did you try to do to be self-controlled in
this situation?”
In the second part of the session, we described three common
academic self-control dilemmas based on pilot interviews. These
hypothetical scenarios were presented in random order, and each
was followed by an open-ended question: “What would you do to
get your studying done?” The texting scenario read, “You have set
a goal of getting better grades this year than last year. Unfortunately, you’re having difficulty staying focused on your studying
for long periods of time because you keep texting with your
friends.” The Internet/videogame scenario read, “You have to
study for a big exam but the class is a really boring one. Every time
you sit down to study, you find yourself tempted to surf the

Two trained coders categorized students’ descriptions of selfcontrol incidents in their own lives using domains (e.g., work,
interpersonal conflict, eating, physical exercise) identified by Tsukayama, Duckworth, and Kim (2012). Less than 1% of responses
could not be coded because they were blank or incomprehensible.
The remaining valid responses were coded, and there were no
disagreements on how to categorize dilemmas.
The same coders then categorized open-ended responses to this
prompt according to the five strategy types in the process model of
self-control (i.e., situation selection, situation modification, attentional deployment, cognitive change, and response modulation).
About 4% of responses could not be categorized because they did
not provide sufficient information, 2% indicated planning, but
did not indicate what action was being planned, 2% of responses could not be classified because students said they failed
to exercise self-control, and 2% were not categorized because
they named a variety of strategies that spanned multiple categories in the process model. Coders concurred on how to
categorize 81% of valid responses (␬ ⫽ .57, p ⬍ .001) and,
through discussion, arrived at a consensus for the remainder.
Likewise, the coders categorized open-ended responses to the
three hypothetical academic self-control scenarios according to the
five strategy types in the process model of self-control. About 6%
of responses could not be coded because they did not provide
sufficient information, 4% were not coded because they included
strategies that spanned multiple categories in the process model,
and 3% of responses could not be classified because they described
failures of self-control. Coders concurred on how to categorize

to choose their situations. As a comparison, we used the most
obvious cognitive strategy: response modulation. In Study 3, we
replicated these findings with college students and, in addition,
tested the process model’s prediction that undesirable impulses
curtailed at the situation modification stage would be weaker than
those countered at the response modulation stage.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Study 1: A Naturalistic Investigation of
Self-Control Strategies

STRATEGIC SELF-CONTROL

87% of the valid responses (␬ ⫽ .58, p ⬍ .001) and, through
discussion, arrived at a consensus on the type of strategy used for
the remainder.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Results
As illustrated in Table 1, students described a wide range of
self-control incidents in their own lives. Most concerned interpersonal (42%) or academic (27%) situations; a smaller proportion of
students described using self-control to regulate their eating (14%),
physical exercise (6%), or behavior in sundry other (11%) domains. Age did not moderate these or any other analyses.
In response to these everyday dilemmas, students said they
deployed a variety of strategies, examples of which are provided in
Table 1. Notably, the majority (90%) of these open-ended responses could be categorized using the process model, and all five
types of strategies were represented. They were not, however,
equally popular, ␹2(4, N ⫽ 522) ⫽ 135.99, p ⬍ .001. As shown in
Figure 2, the most commonly nominated strategy was cognitive
change (38%), followed by response modulation (24%), situation
modification (16%), situation selection (12%), and, finally, attentional deployment (10%).
Taking a closer look at the strategies nominated in the two
most commonly described self-control dilemmas, we found that
students used situation modification more often in academic
situations (29%) than in interpersonal conflicts (6%), ␹2(1, N ⫽
371) ⫽ 37.28, p ⬍ .001. Conversely, students relied on response modulation more often in interpersonal conflicts (35%)
than they did in academic situations (17%), ␹2(1, N ⫽ 371) ⫽
13.42, p ⬍ .001.
As shown in Figure 2 and Table 2, students likewise suggested
a variety of strategies for exercising self-control in three hypothetical academic dilemmas. These hypothetical scenarios pitted academic goals against texting, videogames/Internet, and procrastinating, respectively. The majority (87%) of these responses could
be categorized using the process model. Students were more likely
to recommended situation modification strategies (58%) than cognitive change (17%), situation selection (12%), response modulation (11%), or attentional deployment (1%).
Considering that what students think they should do may differ
from what they actually do, we took a closer look at (n ⫽ 156)
students who elected to describe an everyday self-control incident
that involved academic work (vs. interpersonal conflict, food, etc.).

333

Comparing hypothetical and “real-world” everyday dilemmas in
this subsample, we found no reliable differences in the popularity
of situation selection strategies. Interestingly, students were twice
as likely to suggest situation modification when recommending
what to do in hypothetical academic scenarios (58%) than when
describing what they actually did in similar situations (29%). In
contrast, students used cognitive change more often in their everyday academic lives (32%) than they recommended doing in
hypothetical scenarios (17%). Students used attentional deployment more often in their everyday academic lives (8%) than they
recommended doing in hypothetical scenarios (1%). Finally, students recommended response modulation more often in hypothetical scenarios (28%) than they mentioned using it in their everyday
academic lives (12%). One-sample nonparametric tests confirmed
that these four comparisons were reliable, ps ⬍ .001.
When asked to rate the effectiveness of exemplar strategies from
each of the five categories of the process model, students rated
some strategies as much more effective than others. Effectiveness
ratings were approximately normally distributed, with alphas ranging from .67 to .86 (M ⫽ .79). In a repeated-measures analysis of
variance (ANOVA), effectiveness ratings varied by strategy type,
F(4, 2216) ⫽ 436.94, p ⬍ .001, ␩p2 ⫽ .44. As illustrated in Figure 3,
post hoc pairwise comparisons using a Bonferroni correction
showed that situation selection strategies were rated as more
effective than situation modification strategies, p ⬍ .001, d ⫽ 0.47,
which, in turn, were rated as more effective than attention deployment, cognitive change, or response modulation strategies (ps ⬍
.001 and ds from 1.05 to 1.23). The latter three strategies did not
differ in student-rated effectiveness.

Discussion
To our knowledge, Study 1 is the first naturalistic study of
self-control in the everyday lives of high school students. When
asked about a self-control incident from their own recent experience, most students described managing interpersonal conflicts or
meeting academic work responsibilities. The same domains have
been identified as centrally important in the lives of middle school
students (Tsukayama et al., 2013), though some high school students in Study 1 mentioned self-control goals common in adulthood, including eating healthfully and getting physical exercise.
The process model proved a useful taxonomy for categorizing
the many strategies that students used in the self-control incidents

Table 1
Examples of Self-Control Challenges and Responses in the Everyday Lives of High School Students in Study 1
Type of strategy
Situation selection
Situation modification
Attentional deployment
Cognitive change
Response modulation

Self-control challenge

Self-control response

“I really needed to study for a test and I used self-control to
resist taking a nap and playing on my phone to study.”
“I knew I needed to study to get a good grade because I
needed the A.”
“At around 6pm I start to get hungry. Knowing that dinner is
around 7, I use self-control to stay away from snacks for
that hour. I do this so I still have an appetite for dinner.”
“When doing homework I usually get lazy and go on to
doing other useless things. Lately, I have been using selfcontrol to focus on homework. ”
“I was in a soccer game and a kid continuously fouled me
and was harassing me.”

“I locked myself in my room without my phone and sat
in a desk so I couldn’t fall asleep.”
“I put away all devices that hindered my ability to
focus on my task.”
“I occupied myself with other activities.”
“I simply laid out the cons of what would happen if I
didn’t do my homework, and was motivated to do
it.”
“Instead of retaliating, I used self-control and controlled
my anger and the kid eventually got a yellow card.”

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

334

DUCKWORTH, WHITE, MATTEUCCI, SHEARER, AND GROSS

Figure 2. Categories of self-control strategies suggested by high school
students in Study 1.

from their own lives. Although some of the open-ended responses
required discussion, most were agreed upon by two coders whose
initial categorizations were made independently. Likewise, when
considering three hypothetical academic scenarios, students recommended a heterogeneous array of strategies which, again, were
mostly captured in the process model and were by no means
limited to the most obvious tactic: response modulation. Interestingly, students used situation modification more often to get their
academic work done than to navigate interpersonal conflicts. This
finding suggests that certain contexts lend themselves to particular
self-control strategies, and that situation modification may be more
apt for physical temptations (e.g., a computer or cell phone, either
of which can be turned off) than emotional ones (e.g., losing one’s
temper at a classmate).
Because many students in our sample elected to tell us about an
academic situation (as opposed to an interpersonal conflict or other
type of situation) in which they recalled exercising self-control, we
were able to use this subsample to compare “real world” strategies
with those students suggested in response to hypothetical dilem-

Figure 3. Mean effectiveness ratings of example self-control strategies
by high school students in Study 1. Error bars represent 95% confidence
intervals.

mas. It turns out that when considering hypothetical academic
scenarios, as opposed to recounting what they did in their own
lives, students were more likely to suggest situation modification
and less likely to suggest cognitive change, attentional deployment
and response modulation strategies. This unexpected finding requires further research for a complete explanation. One possibility
is that by explicitly mentioning physical temptations (e.g., cell
phones) in the hypothetical scenarios, we biased students toward
situation modification strategies (e.g., turning off the cell phone).
Alternatively, it may be that when considering a hypothetical
situation, students were able to think more objectively about how
best to act. The later explanation is consistent with a large literature on construal level theory, which has established that mental
representations of hypothetical (vs. actual) situations facilitate
psychological distance, enabling proper consideration of their
goal-relevant and essential features (Fujita, 2011; Fujita, Trope,
Liberman, & Levin-Sagi, 2006).

Table 2
Examples of Responses to Hypothetical Academic Self-Control Challenges by High School Students in Study 1
Type of strategy

Studying vs. texting

Situation selection

“Lock myself in a room without my
phone so that it doesn’t become a
distraction.”

Situation modification

“I would shut off my phone and put it
under my pillow so I wouldn’t be
tempted to touch it.”

Attentional deployment

“Ease off the texting by ignoring my
phone.”

Cognitive change

“I would set up a reward for myself . . .
I would plan something for myself
that I would only do if I got straight
A’s.”
“Not be a baby and just study.”

Response modulation

Studying vs. internet/videogames

Procrastination

“I would go to the library as being
in a quiet and controlled
environment would make me
focus.”
“Remove all distractions and tell one
of my parents I had a big exam so
they would check in on me and
I’d be forced to stay on task.”
“Remind myself that even the most
boring classes count towards my
GPA which will affect my future.”
“I would tell myself that if I study
for an hour, I can reward myself
by playing video games later.”

“Lock myself in my room until it’s done,
because I don’t have a T.V. let alone a
game console in my room.”

“Just deal with it and study.”

“Just do it . . . I just focus and get my
work done.”

“I would ask my mom to take away my
phone and other distractions to make
sure I can get it done on time.”
“Think about the consequences and try
my best to close everything else out”
“Set goals, break the project up into
pieces.”

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

STRATEGIC SELF-CONTROL

When asked to consider self-control strategies that we constructed to represent the five stages in the process model, students
overwhelmingly identified situation selection to be most effective,
followed by situation modification. Rated far less effective than
either of these two situational strategies were the later-deployed
cognitive strategies. Notably, the absence of significant differences
in the perceived effectiveness among the three cognitive strategies
(i.e., attentional deployment, cognitive change, and response modulation) is at odds with empirical evidence that attentional deployment and cognitive change strategies are both more effective than
response modulation (Mischel, 2014; Webb, Miles, & Sheeran,
2012). We discuss possible explanations in the General Discussion
section.

Study 2: A Self-Control Intervention Study
in High School
The self-reported ratings of effectiveness provided by students
in Study 1 support the most direct claim of the process model
regarding the superior effectiveness of earlier deployed strategies.
As a more rigorous test, we conducted Study 2, a field experiment
with high school students. Consistent with our initial intuition that
young people might lack the freedom to choose where and with
whom they would be, students considering both real-life and
hypothetical academic dilemmas in Study 1 nominated situation
modification strategies at least twice as often as situation selection
strategies. As a foil to situation modification, we considered the
most obvious cognitive strategy: response modulation. We did so
in part because there is a long tradition of admonishing students to
“just pay attention!” or “just control yourself!” as an encouragement to their self-control. Thus, although the least sophisticated of
cognitive self-control strategies, response modulation is also the
most straightforward. Accordingly, in Study 2, we randomly assigned students to implement either situation modification, response modulation, or no particular strategy in order to attain
self-identified study goals. One week later, students in all three
conditions reported the extent to which they had accomplished
their goals and the general quality of their studying during the prior
week.

Method
Participants. Participants were students attending a boarding
high school in the Northeast United States. Opt-out parental consent and student assent were obtained for 250 students enrolled in
Grades 9 through 12, but half of students did not complete the
follow-up survey. After confirming that attrition was not related to
treatment condition, these students were excluded from further
analyses, leaving a final sample of N ⫽ 126. Participants ranged in
age from 14 to 19 (Mage ⫽ 16.4, SD ⫽ 1.27). About 58% were
White, 24% Asian, 8% multiracial, 6% African American, 3% of
other ethnic backgrounds, and 1% Hispanic; 57% were female.
Procedure. Students were randomly assigned to one of three
conditions: situation modification (n ⫽ 44), response modulation
(n ⫽ 35), or no-treatment control (n ⫽ 47). All interventions were
introduced as trying to help “students stick to study goals that they
set for themselves.”
All students were first asked to set a study goal that they would
like to accomplish over the coming week. They were then asked to

335

answer two questions about their study habits: “How many days
over the past week did you study?” and “On average, how many
hours per day did you study on the days that you studied last
week?” At the end of the first session, all students provided
demographic information and, in addition, were asked, “How
much do you believe this strategy would work?” (1 ⫽ do not
believe at all to 5 ⫽ strongly believe).
In the situation modification condition, students were instructed
to remove temptations that might distract them from reaching an
academic goal. Following a brief introduction, which introduced
them to the idea of “removing temptations from sight rather than
trying to resist them directly,” they watched an animated video
about relevant research. Specifically, students learned about a
study in which secretaries ate less candy when candy was kept in
bowls placed more than an arm’s reach away (Wansink, Painter, &
Lee, 2006). Next, they watched an expert endorse this strategy in
a clip taken from a media interview (Duckworth, 2013, October 7).
Finally, they were asked to modify their environment to minimize
temptations (e.g., setting reminders or alarms, installing online
apps to block online temptations such as Facebook). We emphasized that students should make any modification they thought
would be useful and asked them to repeat any “temporary”
changes (e.g., turning off the cell phone) as necessary.
Students assigned to the response modulation group were instructed to exert willpower whenever they were faced with temptation. Following a brief introduction, which introduced them to
the idea that “people can actually strengthen their self-control
muscle with repeated practice that consists of actively resisting
immediate temptations (rather than simply avoiding them),” they
watched an animated video about relevant research. Specifically,
students learned about a study in which individuals who practiced
exerting willpower later exhibited increases in healthy eating,
exercise, emotional control, and improvement in study habits
(Oaten & Cheng, 2006). Next, they watched an expert endorse the
concept of strengthening willpower in a media clip (McGonigal,
2012). Finally, they were asked to “practice resisting temptations
when you encounter them.” We emphasized that students should
use willpower whenever they experienced an impulse to indulge in
a temptation that conflicted with their academic goals.
In the no-treatment control condition, students were simply
asked to set a study goal. They were not given any explicit
information about how to achieve this goal.
One week later, all students were asked to report on their
progress toward the goal they had previously identified. Students
reported on the quality of their studying compared to prior weeks
(1 ⫽ a lot worse to 5 ⫽ a lot better) and how well they felt they
accomplished their goal (1 ⫽ extremely poorly to 5 ⫽ extremely
well). As a manipulation check, they were also asked an openended question, “What strategies did you actually use to deal with
temptations over the last week? Be as detailed as possible.” Two
trained coders categorized responses according to the five categories of the process model. About 14% of students did not answer
this question, which was the very last part of the follow-up survey.
An additional 7% could not be categorized because they did not
provide sufficient information; 1% could not be categorized because students named a variety of strategies that spanned multiple
categories in the process model. Coders disagreed about 2% of the
remaining 98 valid responses and resolved these discrepancies
through discussion.

336

DUCKWORTH, WHITE, MATTEUCCI, SHEARER, AND GROSS

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Results
Preliminary analyses. Randomization was successful. There
were no differences across condition in gender, age, or baseline
study habits, nor did any of these variables moderate analyses.
Therefore, these variables were not included in subsequent analyses.
We found a marginally significant effect of group on how much
students believed their strategy would help them at baseline, F(2,
126) ⫽ 2.96, p ⫽ .06, ␩p2 ⫽ .05. However, post hoc pairwise
comparisons showed that anticipated helpfulness of the situation
modification activity was not higher than either the response
modulation activity or no-treatment condition, ns. Indeed, the only
reliable pairwise difference was that the response modulation
group (M ⫽ 3.80, SD ⫽ 0.99) believed in the helpfulness of their
strategy more than the no-treatment group (M ⫽ 3.26, SD ⫽ 1.05),
p ⫽ .04, d ⫽ .50. Including anticipated helpfulness as a covariate
did not affect any results (results available upon request).
At follow-up, participants reported using different self-control
strategies as a function of condition, ␹2(8, N ⫽ 98) ⫽ 20.8, p ⬍
.01. Specifically, participants in the situation modification condition more frequently used situation modification strategies than
participants in the response modulation, ␹2(1, N ⫽ 63) ⫽ 10.5, p ⬍
.001, or no-treatment control conditions, ␹2(1, N ⫽ 71) ⫽ 15.85,
p ⬍ .001. Likewise, participants in the response modulation condition used response modulation more frequently than participants
in the situation modification condition, ␹2(1, N ⫽ 63) ⫽ 5.22, p ⫽
.02. Reported use of response modulation strategies in the response
modulation condition did not significantly differ from the notreatment control condition, ␹2(1, N ⫽ 62) ⫽ 0.88, p ⫽ .35.
Primary analyses. We first ran a one-way ANOVA to compare students’ goal accomplishment across conditions (situation
modification, response modulation, no-treatment control). As illustrated in Figure 4a, there was a significant effect of condition on
goal accomplishment, Welch F(2, 73.24) ⫽ 4.35, p ⫽ .016, ␩p2 ⫽
.06. Planned contrasts accounting for unequal variances revealed
that students in the situation modification condition (M ⫽ 3.39,
SD ⫽ 0.83) better accomplished their goals than students in other
conditions (response modulation control: M ⫽ 2.86, SD ⫽ 1.14;
no-treatment control: M ⫽ 2.91, SD ⫽ 0.85), t(90.72) ⫽ 2.91, p ⬍
.01, d ⫽ 0.56. The no-treatment control and response modulation
control conditions did not differ from one another, t(60.81) ⫽ ⫺0.23,
p ⫽ .82.
Similarly, a one-way ANOVA revealed that study quality also
differed by condition, F(2, 119) ⫽ 5.49, p ⬍ .01, ␩p2 ⫽ .08 (see

Figure 4b). Planned contrasts confirmed that students in the situation modification condition (M ⫽ 3.34, SD ⫽ 0.79) reported
better study quality than students in other conditions (response
modulation control: M ⫽ 3.00, SD ⫽ 0.77; no-treatment control:
M ⫽ 2.76, SD ⫽ 0.87), t(119) ⫽ 2.93, p ⬍ .01, d ⫽ 0.57. The
no-treatment control and response modulation control conditions
did not differ from one another, t(119) ⫽ 1.30, p ⫽ .20.

Discussion
The experimental findings in Study 2 were consistent with our
naturalistic investigation in Study 1. Specifically, high school
students randomly assigned to implement situation modification
were better able to accomplish their study goals the following
week and, in addition, reported their studying that week to be
higher in quality than students randomly assigned to implement
response modulation or no particular strategy. These differences
were large in size and reliable, whereas there were no reliable
differences between the response modulation and no-treatment
conditions.

Study 3: A Self-Control Intervention Study in College
In Study 3, we sought to replicate the findings of Study 2 in a
sample of college students and, further, test the hypothesis that
situation modification would diminish the aversive feelings of
temptation associated with directly modulating impulses. By doing
so, we tested the prediction that impulses addressed earlier in their
gestation would be weaker than those addressed later. Although we
bore no illusions that manipulating the physical surroundings
would make studying especially pleasurable, we did imagine it
might make it relatively less unpleasant. We conjectured that
reduced feelings of temptation might, therefore, mediate the effects of situation modification on goal attainment.

Method
Participants. Participants were undergraduate students recruited from psychology courses at the University of Pennsylvania.
A sample of 159 students (Mage ⫽ 20.4, SD ⫽ 1.09) completed all
study requirements and received course credit for completing the
survey. Participants were 54% Caucasian, 25% Asian, 8% of other
ethnic backgrounds, 7% Hispanic, and 6% African American; 65%
were female.

Figure 4. High school students rating of (a) goal accomplishment and (b) study quality in Study 2. Error bars
represent 95% confidence intervals.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

STRATEGIC SELF-CONTROL

Procedure. Students were randomly assigned to one of three
conditions: situation modification (n ⫽ 52), response modulation
(n ⫽ 52), or no-treatment control (n ⫽ 55). Similar to Study 2, all
interventions were introduced as trying to help “students stick to
study goals that they set for themselves.”
The instructions and activities for the three conditions were
similar to those used in Study 2. Students were asked one question
about their study habits: “On average, how many hours do you
study per day?” All students were also asked to set a study goal
that they would like to accomplish over the coming week. One
important difference is that participants in the situation modification condition used their cell phone cameras to document changes
to their environment, a manipulation check we were not able to
apply in Study 2 given the younger age and associated confidentiality concerns of those participants.
One week later, all students were asked to report on their
progress toward their goal. Specifically, they reported how well
they felt they accomplished their goal (1 ⫽ extremely poorly to
5 ⫽ extremely well), and how tempted they felt by distractions in
their environment over the past week (1 ⫽ not at all tempted to
5 ⫽ extremely tempted). Finally, we asked students to complete a
checklist of five strategies, indicating any and all they had used in
the past week. The five strategies were described without naming
them categorically. For example, students who indicated they had
“changed my surroundings so that the temptation was out of reach
or not easily accessible” were considered having used situation
modification. Students who indicated, “I told myself, I will not
give in to temptation” were considered having used response
modulation.

Results
Preliminary analyses. There were no differences across condition in gender, or age, and these variables did not moderate any
of the subsequent analyses.
However, there was a significant effect of group on the number
of hours studied per day at baseline, F(2, 161) ⫽ 6.44, p ⬍ .01,
␩p2 ⫽ .07. Pairwise comparisons showed that the response modulation group (M ⫽ 4.13, SD ⫽ 1.67) studied more than the
situation modification group (M ⫽ 3.04, SD ⫽ 1.60), p ⬍ .001,
d ⫽ 0.70. There were no differences between either situation
modification or response modulation and the no-treatment group
(M ⫽ 3.54, SD ⫽ 1.48), ps ⬍ .15. Given these differences at
baseline, hours studied was included as a covariate in subsequent
analyses.

337

As a manipulation check, we fit two binary logistic regression
models predicting use of situation modification and response modulation strategies, respectively, from condition and controlling for
hours studied. As expected, participants in the situation modification condition were more likely to use situation modification
strategies than participants in the response modulation condition,
Wald ⫽ 7.53, p ⬍ .01, or the no-treatment control condition,
Wald ⫽ 7.53, p ⬍ .01. Relative to the response modulation group,
participants in the no-treatment control group were equally likely
to use response modulation strategies, Wald ⫽ 1.03, p ⫽ .31, but
participants in the situation modification condition were marginally less likely to use response modulation, Wald ⫽ 2.62, p ⫽ .10.
Primary analyses. A one-way analysis of covariance (ANCOVA)
revealed that students’ success at achieving their goals differed by
condition, F(2, 155) ⫽ 6.48, p ⬍ .01, ␩p2 ⫽ .08. As shown in
Figure 5a, pairwise comparisons revealed that participants in the
situation modification group (M ⫽ 3.56, SD ⫽ 1.05) accomplished
their goal more often than participants in either the response
modulation (M ⫽ 3.06, SD ⫽ 1.04), p ⬍ .01, d ⫽ 0.60, or the
no-treatment group (M ⫽ 2.98, SD ⫽ 1.13), p ⬍ .01, d ⫽ 0.63. The
response modulation group, however, did not differ from the
no-treatment group, p ⫽ .97, d ⫽ 0.01.
Similarly, a separate one-way ANCOVA showed that the level
of temptation students faced over the previous week (M ⫽ 3.77,
SD ⫽ .85) also differed by condition, F(2, 155) ⫽ 5.44, p ⬍ .01,
␩p2 ⫽ .07 (Figure 5b). Participants in the situation modification
group (M ⫽ 3.46, SD ⫽ 0.83) reported having experienced less
temptation over the previous week than participants in either the
response modulation group (M ⫽ 3.97, SD ⫽ 0.83), p ⬍ .01, d ⫽
0.61, or the no-treatment control group (M ⫽ 3.87, SD ⫽ 0.82),
p ⬍ .01, d ⫽ 0.50, but the response modulation group was not
significantly different from the no-treatment group, p ⫽ .54, d ⫽
0.12.
Finally, to test the hypothesis that situation modification could
increase self-reported goal attainment, at least in part, by reducing
temptation, we used Hayes and Preacher’s (2014) Mediate Macro
for SPSS to test whether self-report of overall temptation mediated
the effect of condition on goal accomplishment. Two dummy
codes were created for the two treatment groups (coded as 1) with
the no-treatment group serving as the reference group (coded as 0).
We found that temptation partially mediated goal accomplishment
for the situation modification group (indirect effect ⫽ 0.22; 95%
bootstrapped confidence interval, CI: [0.05, 0.43]), but not for the
response modulation group (indirect effect ⫽ ⫺0.05; 95% boot-

Figure 5. College students rating of (a) goal accomplishment (b) level of temptation in Study 3. Estimated
marginal means controlling for number of hours studied at baseline. Error bars represent 95% confidence
intervals.

338

DUCKWORTH, WHITE, MATTEUCCI, SHEARER, AND GROSS

strapped confidence interval [CI]: ⫺0.22, 0.10), relative to the
no-treatment condition (see Figure 6). This supports our hypothesis that situation modification may be an effective self-control
strategy partly because it reduces the degree to which participants
felt tempted when trying to accomplish their goals during the
week.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Discussion
Study 3 confirmed the findings of Study 2. College students
encouraged to change their physical surroundings in ways that
would help them achieve their study goals were more successful in
actually accomplishing these goals in the following week. As
predicted by the process model, they reported having experienced
less temptation during the same period, and reduced feelings of
temptation partially mediated the effect of condition on selfreported goal attainment.
The contribution of Study 3 to the overall investigation was
several-fold. First, the effect of condition on study goal attainment
replicated findings of Study 2, strengthening the inference that
situation modification strategies are more effective than response
modulation strategies. Second, the mediation results supported the
process model insofar as they indicated that students who used
situation modification strategies were able to curtail the strengthening of undesirable impulses, compared to students who used
response modulation strategies or no particular assigned selfcontrol strategy. Although strong claims about the mediational role
of temptation are inappropriate given our study design (Bullock,
Green, & Ha, 2010), we are encouraged by this preliminary evidence to more rigorously test the extent to which situation modification makes self-control “easier.” Third, whereas Study 1 and
Study 2 involved high school students, Study 3 involved college
students, thus extending the external validity of our investigation
to older students accorded relatively greater autonomy in their
everyday decision making.

Figure 6. The effect of condition on goal accomplishment is partially
mediated by temptation experienced by college students in Study 3. The
coefficients shown are unstandardized. Condition effects are relative to
control (dummy coded as 0). ⴱ p ⬍ .05. ⴱⴱ p ⬍ .001.

General Discussion
Across three studies, we examined how high school and college
students exercise self-control and assessed the relative efficacy of
their efforts to do so. In Study 1, we found that high school
students use self-control in a variety of everyday situations but
most commonly to navigate interpersonal conflicts and to get their
academic work done. When asked how they handled these incidents, students named strategies that could be reliably classified
using the process model of self-control. In response to three
hypothetical academic scenarios (e.g., studying vs. texting friends),
students likewise suggested diverse means of exerting self-control,
but when asked to consider strategies we had written to represent each
of the five strategy types in the process model, they overwhelmingly
rated situation selection as most effective, followed by situation modification, and finally all three later-deployed cognitive strategies (i.e.,
attentional deployment, cognitive change, and response modulation).
We were surprised that students judged response modulation to
be as effective as attentional deployment and cognitive change
strategies. This finding is at odds with theoretical predictions from
the process model as well as empirical research showing that
preschoolers encouraged to direct attention away from tempting
treats or to think about them in “cooler,” less consummatory terms,
are better able to delay gratification (Mischel, 2014; Mischel et al.,
1989). One possibility is that young children benefit more from
these more sophisticated cognitive strategies than do adolescents,
but this explanation is hard to square with evidence that adults
more effectively regulate their emotion when using cognitive
change than when using response modulation (Gross, 2014). Alternatively, differences in effectiveness among these laterdeployed strategies might be real but too small in size for students
in our study to recognize. Relatedly, it may be that any of these
cognitive strategies is more easily reversed than situational strategies, and therefore comparably less effective. For example, when
trying to study rather than spend time on social media, students
might look away or mentally recast that pastime as a threat to their
grade point average— but, alas, it is just as easy to glance back, or
to think instead about how many “likes” you’ve garnered in the
last few minutes. In contrast, it takes effort to reverse the decision
to close the Internet browser, shut down the laptop, or find a
distraction-free room in which to study. All of these possibilities
merit further investigation.
In Studies 2 and 3, high school and college students randomly
assigned to implement situation modification strategies reported
being better able to accomplish their study goals the following
week than were students assigned to implement response modulation or given no explicit self-control strategy at all. We found
evidence in Study 3 that reduced feelings of temptation partially
mediated the effect of condition on goal attainment. These experimental results suggest that students might benefit from direct
instruction in modifying their situations to advantage. Perhaps the
activity we developed merely reminded them of the helpfulness of
situation modification. If so, one can imagine that a comparable
benefit might be realized if the content included in our intervention
was shared with students. For example, instead of simply exhorting students to rely on their willpower, teachers and professors
might instead explain that removing temptations from their surroundings makes staying on task easier.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

STRATEGIC SELF-CONTROL

Collectively, these findings suggest that intervening early in the
development of an impulse may be more effective than intervening
later. Probing how students think about various self-control tactics,
we discovered that they largely recognize that when it comes to
self-control, a stitch in time saves nine. In particular, when presented with hypothetical academic self-control dilemmas, they
recommended situation modification more than any other strategy.
However, situation modification was mentioned less than twice as
often when students told us what they did to manage their academic responsibilities in their own everyday lives. Given how
much more effective students rated situation modification than any
cognitive strategy (ds ⬎ 1), an intriguing possibility, to be pursued
in further research, is that students already recognize what they
“should” do to effectively exercise self-control but do not always
act accordingly.

Limitations and Future Directions
The current investigation had several limitations that should be
addressed in future research. Most importantly, in the interventions
presented in Studies 2 and 3, we relied upon self-reported, rather
than behavioral, measures of goal attainment. We did so in order
to allow students to set personally relevant and feasible academic
goals. As expected, these goals were extremely diverse: Some
students resolved to “finish all of [their] homework the day before
it is due,” others aimed to “study French for one hour each night
before [they] sleep, and still others hoped to “not go on Facebook
while completing [their] research paper.” Using self-reported outcomes made it possible to tailor our assessments to each participant’s goals. However, our reliance on self-reported outcomes
means that demand effects may have contributed to the superior
efficacy of the situation modification activity. We think this is
unlikely, given that Study 2 participants in the situation modification condition, at baseline, rated their activity as no different in
helpfulness than students in the other two conditions. (Unfortunately, no such manipulation check was administered in Study 3.)
Nonetheless, one important direction for future research is to
replicate and extend present findings using behavioral outcomes.
Relatedly, participants in Studies 2 and 3 reported on their goal
attainment during the prior week using single-item questions.
Measurement error on predictor variables inflates standard errors.
Thus, longer multi-item questionnaires of goal attainment, rather
than single-item measures thereof, might have provided more
precise estimates of the benefits of situation modification across
these two studies.
Future research is also needed to determine the durability of
situation modification interventions. We documented large-sized
effects on attainment of study goals one week later, but we did not
measure the effects of our manipulation beyond that time point.
Common sense suggests that an intervention lasting less than half
an hour would soon be forgotten or displaced by prior habits, but
recent research on “psychologically wise” interventions pinpointing theoretically precise targets has shown enduring effects of very
brief interventions on academic outcomes (Walton, 2014; Yeager
& Walton, 2011). Such interventions seem to work, at least in part,
by changing a recursive process (e.g., improving behavior, leading
to improvements in outcomes, thereby reinforcing motivation to
continue improving behavior). The mediation results in Study 3
give us some hope for just such a possibility. In particular, we

339

speculate that students who change their situations to their advantage experience less temptation as a result, which helps them
accomplish their study goals, leading to better academic performance, and reinforcing their motivation to continue modifying
their situations. Longitudinal experiments with a more extended
time frame are needed to test this possibility.
Finally, the random-assignment experiments in Studies 2 and 3
contrasted situation modification and response modulation as exemplar earlier versus later self-control strategies. A complete test
of the process model would ideally entail a simultaneous comparison of all five self-control strategies and a no-treatment control.
With adequate statistical power, such a study design could unambiguously establish the efficacy of strategies as a function of the
stage in process of impulse generation at which they are deployed.

Conclusion
The current investigation reveals high school and college students to have in their arsenals many more means of exercising
self-control than direct effortful inhibition of undesirable impulses.
Unfortunately, although they seem to recognize the utility of
choosing where and with whom to be, and subsequently modifying
these physical and social circumstances to advantage, they do not
always do so. Why not? Perhaps students lack the future orientation to spontaneously anticipate temptations far enough in advance
to take appropriate preemptive measures. Or perhaps they assume
that the inherently cognitive conflict between conflicting impulses
should be resolved with similarly cognitive tactics. In other words,
remedies that are qualitatively different from the problem itself
are, perhaps, less obvious, even if they are ultimately more effective. Given the importance of self-control to success in school and
beyond, the questions raised by our current findings bear special
urgency. Why don’t students capitalize on forward-looking, situational solutions to self-control dilemmas? What “psychologically
wise” interventions might equip them with these skills? How
might this broadened conception of what it means to exercise
self-control benefit “studenting” and other life responsibilities?
Answers to these questions promise both theoretical insights and
practical tools for managing the many self-control dilemmas that
characterize the human condition.

References
Achtziger, A., & Gollwitzer, P. M. (2008). Motivation and volition in the
course of action. In J. Heckhausen & H. Heckhausen (Eds.), Motivation
and action (pp. 273–295). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
Ariely, D., & Wertenbroch, K. (2002). Procrastination, deadlines, and
performance: Self-control by precommitment. Psychological Science,
13, 219 –224. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1467-9280.00441
Aristotle. (350 BCE/1999). Nicomachean ethics (T. Irwin, Trans.) (2nd
ed.). Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing Company.
Banys, P. (1988). The clinical use of disulfiram (Antabuse): A review.
Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 20, 243–261. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
02791072.1988.10472495
Baumeister, R. F. (2014). Self-regulation, ego depletion, and inhibition.
Neuropsychologia, 65, 313–319. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuro
psychologia.2014.08.012
Bonson, K. R., Grant, S. J., Contoreggi, C. S., Links, J. M., Metcalfe, J.,
Weyl, H. L., . . . London, E. D. (2002). Neural systems and cue-induced

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

340

DUCKWORTH, WHITE, MATTEUCCI, SHEARER, AND GROSS

cocaine craving. Neuropsychopharmacology, 26, 376 –386. http://dx.doi
.org/10.1016/S0893-133X(01)00371-2
Bullock, J. G., Green, D. P., & Ha, S. E. (2010). Yes, but what’s the
mechanism? (don’t expect an easy answer). Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 98, 550.
Carlson, S. M., & Beck, D. M. (2009). Symbols as tools in the development
of executive function. In A. Winsler, C. Fernyhough, & I. Montero
(Eds.), Private speech, executive functioning, and the development of
verbal self-regulation (pp. 163–175). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Carlson, S. M., Zelazo, P. D., & Faja, S. (2013). Executive function. In
P. D. Zelazo (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of developmental psychology:
Vol. 1. Body and mind (pp. 706 –742). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Corno, L., & Mandinach, E. B. (2004). What we have learned about student
engagement in the past twenty years. Big Theories Revisited, 4, 299 –
328.
Daly, M., Delaney, L., Egan, M., & Baumeister, R. F. (2015). Childhood
self-control and unemployment throughout the life span: Evidence from
two British cohort studies. Psychological Science, 26, 709 –723. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1177/0956797615569001
Doyle, T. J., Friedmann, P. D., & Zywiak, W. H. (2013). Management of
patients with alcohol dependence in recovery: Options for maintenance
and anticipating and managing relapse in primary care. In R. Saitz (Ed.),
Addressing unhealthy alcohol use in primary care (pp. 85–92). New
York, NY: Springer. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-4779-5_8
Duckworth, A. (2013, October 7). Facebook or homework? How to resist
distractions. Interview by H. Kotb & K. L. Gifford. The Today Show.
[Television broadcast]. New York: NBC.
Duckworth, A. L., & Carlson, S. M. (2013). Self-regulation and school
success. In B. W. Sokol, F. M. E. Grouzet, & U. Muller (Eds.), Selfregulation and autonomy: Social and developmental dimensions of
human conduct (pp. 208 –230). New York, NY: Cambridge University
Press. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139152198.015
Duckworth, A., Gendler, T. S., & Gross, J. J. (2014). Self-control in
school-age children. Educational Psychologist, 49, 199 –217. http://dx
.doi.org/10.1080/00461520.2014.926225
Duckworth, A. L., & Seligman, M. E. P. (2005). Self-discipline outdoes IQ
in predicting academic performance of adolescents. Psychological Science, 16, 939 –944. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2005.01641.x
Eisenberg, N., Duckworth, A. L., Spinrad, T. L., & Valiente, C. (2014).
Conscientiousness: Origins in childhood? Developmental Psychology,
50, 1331–1349. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0030977
Eisenberg, N., Hofer, C., Sulik, M. J., & Spinrad, T. L. (2014). Selfregulation, effortful control, and their socioemotional correlates. In J. J.
Gross (Ed.), Handbook of Emotion regulation (pp. 157–172). New York,
NY: Guilford Press.
Ent, M. R., Baumeister, R. F., & Tice, D. M. (2015). Trait self-control and
the avoidance of temptation. Personality and Individual Differences, 74,
12–15. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2014.09.031
Finkel, E. J., Slotter, E. B., Luchies, L. B., Walton, G. M., & Gross, J. J.
(2013). A brief intervention to promote conflict reappraisal preserves
marital quality over time. Psychological Science, 24, 1595–1601. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1177/0956797612474938
Freud, S. (1977). Introductory lectures on psychoanalysis (pp. 1916 –
1917). New York, NY: Norton.
Fujita, K. (2011). On conceptualizing self-control as more than the effortful
inhibition of impulses. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 15,
352–366. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1088868311411165
Fujita, K., Trope, Y., Liberman, N., & Levin-Sagi, M. (2006). Construal
levels and self-control. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
90, 351–367.
Galla, B. M., Duckworth, A. L., Rikoon, S. H., & Haimm, C. A. (2014).
Academic work is unpleasant but important: Reports of momentary

subjective experience in a national sample of adolescents. Manuscript in
preparation.
Goldstein, A. (1994). Addiction: From biology to drug policy. New York,
NY: Freeman/Times Books/Henry Holt & Co.
Gross, J. J. (2014). Emotion regulation: Conceptual and empirical foundations. In J. J. Gross (Ed.), Handbook of emotion regulation (2nd ed., pp.
3–20). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Gross, J. J., & Levenson, R. W. (1993). Emotional suppression: Physiology, self-report, and expressive behavior. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 64, 970 –986. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514
.64.6.970
Hayes, A. F., & Preacher, K. J. (2014). Statistical mediation analysis with
a multicategorical independent variable. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 67, 451– 470. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
bmsp.12028
Imhoff, R., Schmidt, A. F., & Gerstenberg, F. (2014). Exploring the
interplay of trait self-control and ego depletion: Empirical evidence for
ironic effects. European Journal of Personality, 28, 413– 424. http://dx
.doi.org/10.1002/per.1899
Inzlicht, M., Legault, L., & Teper, R. (2014). Exploring the mechanisms of
self-control improvement. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
23, 302–307. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0963721414534256
James, W. (1899). Talks to teachers on psychology and to students on some
of life’s ideals. New York, NY: Holt and Company. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1037/10814-000
Kelley, A. E. (2004). Memory and addiction: Shared neural circuitry and
molecular mechanisms. Neuron, 44, 161–179. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.neuron.2004.09.016
Kuhl, J. (1984). Volitional aspects of achievement motivation and learned
helplessness: Toward a comprehensive theory of action control. Progress In Experimental Personality Research, 13, 99 –171.
Kurzban, R., Duckworth, A., Kable, J. W., & Myers, J. (2013). An
opportunity cost model of subjective effort and task performance. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36, 661– 679. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/
S0140525X12003196
Marcus, M. (1988). Self-regulation in expository writing. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, Graduate School of the City University of New
York, New York, NY.
McGonigal, K. (2012, July 22). The willpower instinct. Interview by P.
Chattopadhyay. The Agenda with Steve Paikin. [Television broadcast].
Toronto, Canada: TVO.
Mischel, H. N., & Mischel, W. (1983). The development of children’s
knowledge of self-control strategies. Child Development, 54, 603– 619.
http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/1130047
Mischel, W. (2014). The marshmallow test: Mastering self-control. New
York, NY: Little, Brown, and Company.
Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., & Rodriguez, M. I. (1989). Delay of gratification
in children. Science, 244, 933–938. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science
.2658056
Moffitt, T. E., Arseneault, L., Belsky, D., Dickson, N., Hancox, R. J.,
Harrington, H., . . . Caspi, A. (2011). A gradient of childhood selfcontrol predicts health, wealth, and public safety. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 108,
2693–2698. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1010076108
Oaten, M., & Cheng, K. (2006). Longitudinal gains in self-regulation from
regular physical exercise. British Journal of Health Psychology, 11,
717–733. http://dx.doi.org/10.1348/135910706X96481
O’Brien, C. P. (1976). Experimental analysis of conditioning factors in
human narcotic addiction. Pharmacological Reviews, 27, 533–543.
Osgood, D. W., Wilson, J. K., O’Malley, P. M., Bachman, J. G., &
Johnston, L. D. (1996). Routine activities and individual deviant behavior. American Sociological Review, 61, 635– 655. http://dx.doi.org/
10.2307/2096397

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

STRATEGIC SELF-CONTROL
PBS. (2013, September 4). Cookie Monster learns a lesson from Tom
Hiddleston [Video file]. Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v⫽b_ubVVnWglk
Peake, P. K., Hebl, M., & Mischel, W. (2002). Strategic attention deployment for delay of gratification in working and waiting situations. Developmental Psychology, 38, 313–326. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/00121649.38.2.313
Poropat, A. E. (2009). A meta-analysis of the five-factor model of personality and academic performance. Psychological Bulletin, 135, 322–338.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0014996
Rothbart, M. K., & Rueda, M. R. (2005). The development of effortful
control. In U. Mayr, E. Awh, & S. W. Keele (Eds.), Developing individuality in the human brain (pp. 167–188). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Schelling, T. C. (1984). Choice and consequence: Perspectives of an
errant economist. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Schroeder, J. R., Latkin, C. A., Hoover, D. R., Curry, A. D., Knowlton,
A. R., & Celentano, D. D. (2001). Illicit drug use in one’s social network
and in one’s neighborhood predicts individual heroin and cocaine use.
Annals of Epidemiology, 11, 389 –394. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S10472797(01)00225-3
Sheppes, G., & Gross, J. J. (2011). Is timing everything? Temporal considerations in emotion regulation. Personality and Social Psychology
Review, 15, 319 –331. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1088868310395778
Steinberg, L. (2013). Adolescence. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Tsukayama, E., Duckworth, A. L., & Kim, B. E. (2012). Resisting everything except temptation: Evidence and an explanation for domainspecific impulsivity. European Journal of Personality, 26, 318 –334.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/per.841
Tsukayama, E., Duckworth, A. L., & Kim, B. (2013). Domain-specific
impulsivity in school-age children. Developmental Science, 16, 879 –
893.
Tsukayama, E., Toomey, S. L., Faith, M. S., & Duckworth, A. L. (2010).
Self-control as a protective factor against overweight status in the
transition from childhood to adolescence. Archives of Pediatrics &
Adolescent Medicine, 164, 631– 635. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
archpediatrics.2010.97
Ury, W. (2007). Getting past no: Negotiating in difficult situations. New
York, NY: Random House.
Véronneau, M.-H., Hiatt-Racer, K., Fosco, G. M., & Dishion, T. J. (2014).
The contribution of adolescent effortful control to early adult educational attainment. Journal of Educational Psychology, 106, 730 –743.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0035831

341

Walton, G. M. (2014). The new science of wise psychological interventions. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 23, 73– 82. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1177/0963721413512856
Wansink, B. (2004). Environmental factors that increase the food intake
and consumption volume of unknowing consumers. Annual Review of
Nutrition, 24, 455– 479. http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.nutr.24
.012003.132140
Wansink, B., Painter, J. E., & Lee, Y. K. (2006). The office candy dish:
Proximity’s influence on estimated and actual consumption. International Journal of Obesity, 30, 871– 875. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/sj.ijo
.0803217
Wansink, B., & Van Ittersum, K. (2003). Bottoms up! The influence of
elongation on pouring and consumption volume. Journal of Consumer
Research, 30, 455– 463. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/378621
Wansink, B., Van Ittersum, K., & Painter, J. E. (2006). Ice cream illusions
bowls, spoons, and self-served portion sizes. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 31, 240 –243. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2006
.04.003
Webb, T. L., Miles, E., & Sheeran, P. (2012). Dealing with feeling: A
meta-analysis of the effectiveness of strategies derived from the process
model of emotion regulation. Psychological Bulletin, 138, 775– 808.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0027600
Weiss, F. (2005). Neurobiology of craving, conditioned reward and relapse. Current Opinion in Pharmacology, 5, 9 –19. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.coph.2004.11.001
White, R. E., Kross, E., & Duckworth, A. L. (2015). Spontaneous selfdistancing and adaptive self-reflection across adolescence. Child Development. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/cdev.12370
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological interventions
in education: They’re not magic. Review of Educational Research, 81,
267–301. http://dx.doi.org/10.3102/0034654311405999
Zimmerman, B. J. (1989). A social cognitive view of self-regulated academic learning. Journal of Educational Psychology, 81, 329 –339. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.81.3.329
Zimmerman, B. J., & Martinez-Pons, M. (1990). Student differences in
self-regulated learning: Relating grade, sex, and giftedness to selfefficacy and strategy use. Journal of Educational Psychology, 82, 51–
59. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.82.1.51

Received January 27, 2015
Revision received May 15, 2015
Accepted May 26, 2015 䡲

E-Mail Notification of Your Latest Issue Online!
Would you like to know when the next issue of your favorite APA journal will be available
online? This service is now available to you. Sign up at http://notify.apa.org/ and you will be
notified by e-mail when issues of interest to you become available!

See	discussions,	stats,	and	author	profiles	for	this	publication	at:	https://www.researchgate.net/publication/276466956

Measurement	Matters:	Assessing	Personal
Qualities	Other	Than	Cognitive	Ability	for
Educational	Purposes
Article		in		Educational	Researcher	·	May	2015
DOI:	10.3102/0013189X15584327

CITATIONS

READS

96

1,166

2	authors:
Angela	Duckworth

David	S.	Yeager

University	of	Pennsylvania

University	of	Texas	at	Austin

74	PUBLICATIONS			6,265	CITATIONS			

41	PUBLICATIONS			1,483	CITATIONS			

SEE	PROFILE

SEE	PROFILE

Some	of	the	authors	of	this	publication	are	also	working	on	these	related	projects:

Online	panels	data	quality	View	project

All	content	following	this	page	was	uploaded	by	Angela	Duckworth	on	16	July	2015.

The	user	has	requested	enhancement	of	the	downloaded	file.

584327
research-article2015

EDRXXX10.3102/0013189X15584327Educational ResearcherMonth XXXX

Reviews/Essays

Measurement Matters: Assessing Personal Qualities
Other Than Cognitive Ability for Educational
Purposes
Angela L. Duckworth1 and David Scott Yeager2

There has been perennial interest in personal qualities other than cognitive ability that determine success, including selfcontrol, grit, growth mind-set, and many others. Attempts to measure such qualities for the purposes of educational
policy and practice, however, are more recent. In this article, we identify serious challenges to doing so. We first address
confusion over terminology, including the descriptor noncognitive. We conclude that debate over the optimal name for
this broad category of personal qualities obscures substantial agreement about the specific attributes worth measuring.
Next, we discuss advantages and limitations of different measures. In particular, we compare self-report questionnaires,
teacher-report questionnaires, and performance tasks, using self-control as an illustrative case study to make the general
point that each approach is imperfect in its own way. Finally, we discuss how each measure’s imperfections can affect its
suitability for program evaluation, accountability, individual diagnosis, and practice improvement. For example, we do
not believe any available measure is suitable for between-school accountability judgments. In addition to urging caution
among policymakers and practitioners, we highlight medium-term innovations that may make measures of these personal
qualities more suitable for educational purposes.

Keywords: accountability; assessment; character; improvement research; measurements; noncognitive; psychological
assessment; psychology

M

easurement matters. Although reason and imagination also advance knowledge (Kuhn, 1961), only measurement makes it possible to observe patterns and to
experiment—to put one’s guesses about what is and is not true
to the test (Kelvin, 1883). From a practical standpoint, intentionally changing something is dramatically easier when one can
quantify with precision how much or how little of it there is
(Drucker, 1974).
In recent years, scholars, practitioners, and the lay public
have grown increasingly interested in measuring and changing
attributes other than cognitive ability (Heckman & Kautz,
2014a; Levin, 2013; Naemi, Burrus, Kyllonen, & Roberts,
2012; Stecher & Hamilton, 2014; Tough, 2013; Willingham,
1985). These so-called noncognitive qualities are diverse and
collectively facilitate goal-directed effort (e.g., grit, self-control,
growth mind-set), healthy social relationships (e.g., gratitude,
emotional intelligence, social belonging), and sound judgment
and decision making (e.g., curiosity, open-mindedness).
Longitudinal research has confirmed such qualities powerfully

predict academic, economic, social, psychological, and physical
well-being (Almlund, Duckworth, Heckman, & Kautz, 2011;
Borghans, Duckworth, Heckman, & ter Weel, 2008; Farrington
et al., 2012; J. Jackson, Connolly, Garrison, Levin, & Connolly,
2015; Moffitt et al., 2011; Naemi et al., 2012; Yeager & Walton,
2011).
We share this more expansive view of student competence
and well-being, but we also believe that enthusiasm for these factors should be tempered with appreciation for the many
limitations of currently available measures. In this essay, our
claim is not that everything that counts can be counted or that
everything that can be counted counts. Rather, we argue that the
field urgently requires much greater clarity about how well, at
present, it is able to count some of the things that count.

1

University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX

2

Educational Researcher, Vol. 44 No. 4, pp. 237­–251
DOI: 10.3102/0013189X15584327
© 2015 AERA. http://er.aera.net
Downloaded from http://er.aera.net at UNIV OF PENNSYLVANIA on May 13, 2015

May 2015    237

A Rose by Any Other Name: Naming and
Defining the Category
Reliable and predictive performance tasks to assess academic
aptitude (i.e., the capacity to acquire new academic skills and
knowledge) and academic achievement (i.e., previously acquired
skills and knowledge) have been available for well over a century
(R. Roberts, Markham, Matthews, & Zeidner, 2005). The influence of such measures on contemporary educational policy and
practice is hard to overstate.
Yet parallel measures for human attributes other than cognitive ability have not followed suit. Notably, pioneers in the measurement of cognitive ability shared the intuition that these
other qualities were crucial to success both in and out of the
classroom. For instance, the creators of the first valid IQ test
wrote that success in school “admits of other things than intelligence; to succeed in his studies, one must have qualities which
depend especially on attention, will, and character” (Binet &
Simon, 1916, p. 254). The author of the widely used Weschler
tests of cognitive ability likewise observed that “in addition to
intellective there are also definite non-intellective factors which
determine intelligent behavior” (Weschler, 1943, p. 103). Our
guess is that the present asymmetry represents more of an engineering problem than a difference in importance: Attributes
other than cognitive ability are just as consequential but may be
harder to measure (Stecher & Hamilton, 2014).
Of the descriptor noncognitive, Easton (2013) has pointed
out, “Everybody hates this term but everyone knows roughly
what you mean when you use it.” Where did the term originate?
Messick (1979) explains: “Once the term cognitive is appropriated to refer to intellective abilities and subject-matter achievement in conventional school areas . . . the term noncognitive
comes to the fore by default to describe everything else” (p. 282).
The term is problematic. Arguably too broad to be useful, this
terminology also seems to imply that there are features of human
behavior that are devoid of cognition.1 On the contrary, every
facet of psychological functioning, from perception to personality, is inherently “cognitive” insofar as processing of information
is involved. For example, self-control, a canonical “noncognitive” attribute, depends crucially on how temptations are represented in the mind. Cognitive strategies that recast temptations
in less alluring terms (e.g., thinking about a marshmallow as a
fluffy white cloud instead of a sticky, sweet treat) dramatically
improve our ability to resist them (Fujita, 2011; Mischel et al.,
2011). And exercising self-control also relies on executive function, a suite of top-down cognitive processes, including working
memory (Blair & Raver, 2015; Diamond, 2013). Hence, from a
psychological perspective, the term is simply inaccurate.
Given such obvious deficiencies, several alternatives have
emerged. Without exception, these terms have both proponents
and critics. For example, some prefer—whereas others, with
equal fervor, detest—the terms character (Berkowitz, 2012;
Damon, 2010; Peterson & Seligman, 2004; Tough, 2013), character skills (Heckman & Kautz, 2014b), or virtue (Kristjánsson,
2013; for a review of moral character education, see Lapsley &
Yeager, 2012). To speak of character or virtue is, obviously, to
speak of admirable and beneficial qualities. This usefully ties contemporary efforts toward the cultivation of such positive qualities

to venerated thinkers of the past, from Plato and Aristotle to
Benjamin Franklin and Horace Mann to Martin Luther King Jr.,
who in 1947 declared, “Intelligence plus character—that is the
goal of true education.”
Many educators, however, prefer terminology without moral
connotations. Some have adopted the term social and emotional
learning [SEL] competencies, a phrase that highlights the relevance
of emotions and social relationships to any complete view of child
development (Durlak, Domitrovich, Weissberg, & Gullotta,
2015; Elias, 1997; Weissberg & Cascarino, 2013). SEL terminology has grown increasingly popular in education, and a search on
Google Ngram shows that mention of the phrase social and emotional learning has increased 19-fold in published books since its
introduction in 1994 (Merrell & Gueldner, 2010). The SEL
moniker may, however, inadvertently suggest a distinction from
academic priorities, even though the data show that children perform better in school when SEL competencies are developed
(Durlak, Weissberg, Dymnicki, Taylor, & Schellinger, 2011).
Psychologists who study individual differences among children might alternatively suggest the terms personality, dispositions, and temperament. But such “trait” terminology may
incorrectly suggest that these attributes cannot be changed by
people’s experiences, and the connotation of immutability is at
odds with both empirical evidence (Caspi, Roberts, & Shiner,
2005; B. Roberts & DelVecchio, 2000; B. Roberts, Walton, &
Viechtbauer, 2006) and pedagogical aims (Tough, 2011).
Indeed, widespread interest in personal qualities is fueled in large
part by the assumption that students can learn, practice, and
improve them.2
Next, the terms 21st century skills, 21st century competencies,
and new basic skills have made their timely appearance (Murnane
& Levy, 1996; Pellegrino & Hilton, 2012; Soland, Hamilton, &
Stecher, 2013). Likewise, some authors have used the terms soft
skills (Heckman & Kautz, 2012). Unlike trait terminology,
“skill” terminology usefully connotes malleability. However,
referring to skills may implicitly exclude beliefs (e.g., growth
mind-set), values (e.g., prosocial motivation), and other relational attitudes (e.g., trust). The narrowness of skill terminology
is obvious when considering attributes like gratitude, generosity,
and honesty. Yes, these behaviors can be practiced and improved,
but an authentic desire to be grateful, generous, and/or honest is
an essential aspect of these dispositions. As far as the descriptor
21st century or new is concerned, it seems fair to question
whether attributes like self-control and gratitude—of central
concern to every major philosophical and religious tradition
since ancient times—are of special relevance to modernity.
Indeed, these may be more timeless than timely.
Finally, all of these terms—virtues, traits, competencies, or
skills—have the disadvantage of implying that they are consistently demonstrated across all possible life situations. But they
are not (Fleeson & Noftle, 2008; Mischel, 1968; Ross, Lepper,
& Ward, 2010; Ross & Nisbett, 1991; Wagerman & Funder,
2009). For instance, self-control is undermined when people are
laboring under the burden of a negative stereotype (Inzlicht &
Kang, 2010) or when authority figures are perceived as unreliable (Kidd, Palmeri, & Aslin, 2013; Mischel, 1961). Learners are
grittier when they have been asked to reflect on their purpose in
life (Yeager et al., 2014), and organizations can create a fixed

238    EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER
Downloaded from http://er.aera.net at UNIV OF PENNSYLVANIA on May 13, 2015

Table 1
Serious Limitations of Questionnaires and Performance Tasks
Serious limitations of self-report and teacher report questionnaires
  Misinterpretation by participant: Student or teacher may read or interpret the item in a way that differs from researcher intent
 
Lack of insight or information: Student or teacher may not be astute or accurate reporters of behaviors or internal states (e.g., emotions, motivation) for a
  variety of reasons
  Insensitivity to short-term changes: Questionnaire scores may not reflect subtle changes over short periods of time
  Reference bias: The frame of reference (i.e., implicit standards) used when making judgments may differ across students or teachers
  Faking and social desirability bias: Students or teachers may provide answers that are desirable but not accurate
Serious limitations of performance tasks
  Misinterpretation by researcher: Researchers may make inaccurate assumptions about underlying reasons for student behavior
  Insensitivity to typical behavior: Tasks that optimize motivation to perform well (i.e., elicit maximal performance) may not reflect behavior in everyday situations
  Task impurity: Task performance may be influenced by irrelevant competencies (e.g., hand–eye coordination)
  Artificial situations: Performance tasks may foist students into situations (e.g., doing academic work with distracting video games in view) that they might
  proactively avoid in real life
  Practice effects: Scores on sequential administrations may be less accurate (e.g., because of increased familiarity with task or boredom)
 
Extraneous situational influences: Task performance may be influenced by aspects of environment in which task is performed or by physiological state (e.g.,
  time of day, noise in classroom, hunger, fatigue)
  Random error: Scores may be influenced by purely random error (e.g., respondent randomly marking the wrong answer)

mind-set climate that undermines employee motivation independently of employees’ own prior mind-set beliefs (Murphy &
Dweck, 2009).
We believe that all of the above terms refer to the same conceptual space, even if connotations (e.g., morality, mutability, or
consistency across settings) differ. Crucially, all of the attributes
of interest are (a) conceptually independent from cognitive ability, (b) generally accepted as beneficial to the student and to others in society, (c) relatively rank-order stable over time in the
absence of exogenous forces (e.g., intentional intervention, life
events, changes in social roles), (d) potentially responsive to
intervention, and (e) dependent on situational factors for their
expression.
From a scientific perspective, agreement about the optimal
terminology for the overarching category of interest may be less
important than consensus about the specific attributes in question and, in particular, their definition and measurement. Of
course, a community of practice (e.g., a school district, a reform
movement, a networked improvement community) benefits
from consensual terminology (Bryk, Gomez, Grunow, &
LeMahieu, 2015). Marching under the same flag, rather than
several different ones, would make more obvious the fact that
many researchers and educators are working to measure and
improve the same student attributes (Bryk et al., 2015; Langley
et al., 2009). However, because each community of practice has
its own previously established concerns and priorities, the choice
of a motivating umbrella term is perhaps best left to these groups
themselves and not to theoretical psychologists.
Our view is pragmatic, not ideological. We suggest that the
potentially interminable debate about what to call this category
of student attributes draws attention away from the very urgent
question of how to measure them. In this review, we refer to
personal qualities as shorthand for “positive personal qualities
other than cognitive ability that lead to student success” (see
Willingham, 1985). Of course, this terminology is provisional
because it, too, has flaws. For instance, attitudes and beliefs are
not quite satisfyingly described as “qualities” per se. In any case,

we expect that communities of research or practice will adopt
more descriptive terms as they see fit.
Advantages and Limitations of Common
Measures
No measure is perfect. We attempt here an incomplete sketch of
the limitations and advantages of three common approaches to
measuring this set of personal qualities other than cognitive ability: (a) self-report questionnaires administered to students, (b)
questionnaires administered to teachers about their students,
and (c) performance tasks. Throughout, we illustrate our points
with one important and well-studied personal quality—selfcontrol. Self-control refers to the regulation of attention, emotion,
and behavior when enduringly valued goals conflict with more
immediately pleasurable temptations. This is an informative
example because research on self-control is burgeoning (Carlson,
Zelazo, & Faja, 2013). Moreover, longitudinal research supports
earlier speculation (Freud, 1920) that self-control is essential to
success in just about every arena of life, including academic
achievement (de Ridder, Lensvelt-Mulders, Finkenauer, Stok, &
Baumeister, 2012; Duckworth & Carlson, 2013; Mischel, 2014;
Moffitt et al., 2011). Where appropriate, we draw on other
examples, such as grit or growth mind-set. With these few brushstrokes, summarized in Table 1 and discussed briefly below, we
hope to depict the contemporary landscape of measurement as
we see it.

Self-Report and Teacher-Report Questionnaires
For good reason, self-report and teacher-report questionnaires
are the most common approaches to assessing personal qualities
among both researchers and practitioners. Questionnaires are
cheap, quick, reliable, and in many cases, remarkably predictive
of objectively measured outcomes (Connelly & Ones, 2010;
Duckworth, Tsukayama, & May, 2010; Hightower et al., 1986;
J. Jackson et al., 2015; Lucas & Baird, 2006; B. Roberts, Kuncel,
May 2015    239

Downloaded from http://er.aera.net at UNIV OF PENNSYLVANIA on May 13, 2015

In the last month, how often
did this student “Come to
class prepared”?

Let’s see... I think he
didn’t have his
homework most days
last week. He keeps
making excuses. And
he almost never
brings a pencil!

OK, so overall, I would
say that he comes to class
prepared much less than
most fifth graders I’ve
taught.

“Rarely” or “Sometimes” makes sense.

Hmm... Nobody will
see this but
researchers. I’ll put
down “Rarely.”

Teacher-Report
Process

2

1
Understand
the question

Recall
relevant information

Let’s see... I think I
didn’t have my
homework a few
times last week. But
there were reasons
why I couldn’t get it
done.

Student-Report
Process

In the last month,
how often did I
“Come to class
prepared”?

4

5

Translate
judgement in to one of the
offered response options

“Edit”
the response for various
motives

3
Integrate
information into a
summary judgement

Ok, so overall, I guess I’m
pretty good at coming to
class prepared. Compared
to my friends, I’m pretty
good.

“Sometimes” or
“Often” makes sense.

Hmm... I guess it’s not
too embarrassing to
say “Sometimes.”

Figure 1. The process by which students and teachers respond to questionnaire items.
Shiner, Caspi, & Goldberg, 2007). Furthermore, a very large
literature in social and cognitive psychology confirms that people are relatively good at using questionnaires to communicate
their true opinions—provided that they in fact have answers for
the questions asked and feel comfortable reporting accurately on
them (see Krosnick,1999; Krosnick & Fabrigar, in press;
Schuman & Presser, 1981). Indeed, self-report questionnaires
are arguably better suited than any other measure for assessing
internal psychological states, like feelings of belonging.
Questionnaires typically ask individuals to integrate numerous observations of thoughts, feelings, or behavior over a specified period of time ranging from “at this moment” to “in
general.” For example, the Character Growth Card includes a
self-control item that reads, “During the past marking period, I
came to class prepared” and provides response options ranging
from almost never to almost always (Park, Tsukayama, Patrick, &
Duckworth, 2015).
The process by which students answer this question or any
other self-report item is depicted in Figure 1: (1) Students must
first read and understand the question, then (2) search their
memories for relevant information, (3) integrate whatever information comes to mind into a summary judgment, (4) translate
this judgment into one of the offered response options, and
finally, (5) “edit” their response if motivated to do so (Krosnick
& Presser, 2010; Schwarz & Oyserman, 2001; Tourangeau,
Rips, & Rasinski, 2000). Teacher-report questionnaires work the
same way, except that it is the teacher who integrates observations of the student over time and arrives at a judgment with
respect to his or her own standards. Individuals can carry out this
kind of self-judgment and other-judgment arithmetic with
admirable accuracy and precision (Funder, 2012).
A catalogue of threats to validity can be accomplished by considering potential failures at each stage. For (1) encoding the

meaning of the questionnaire items, literacy is an obvious concern, particularly for younger or lower-achieving students.
Beyond vocabulary, it cannot be assumed that students always
understand the pragmatic meaning—the intended idea—of
questionnaire items. For example, self-control questionnaires
aim to assess the self-initiated regulation of conflicting impulses
(e.g., wanting to get homework done because it is important
but, at the same time, wanting to play video games because they
are more fun). Yet students or teachers may instead interpret
items as asking about compliance with authority (e.g., following
directions simply because an adult asked).
After encoding the question itself, individuals must (2) search
their memories and (3) integrate recalled information into a
summary judgment. For both students and teachers, mentally
integrating across past observations can reduce sensitivity to how
behavior is now as compared to before (for a compelling empirical example of errors in these judgments, see Bowman, 2010).
Moreover, individuals tend to see themselves and others as holding consistent beliefs and attitudes over time, and this bias
toward consistency can affect what information is retrieved as
well as how it is evaluated (Mischel, 1968; Nisbett & Wilson,
1977; Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Lee, & Podsakoff, 2003; Ross &
Nisbett, 1991; Sabini, Siepmann, & Stein, 2001).
When (3) coming to a summary judgment, teachers have the
benefit of a non-egocentric perspective as well as experience with
many other same-age students over the course of their careers.
Nevertheless, end-of-year teacher reports may be colored by first
impressions and therefore underestimate change (see moderation results in Raudenbush, 1984). In addition, many teachers
see their students only in the classroom setting. Because behavior
can vary across contexts (Mischel, 1968; Ross & Nisbett, 1991;
Tsukayama, Duckworth, & Kim, 2013), teacher observations
may not agree with those made by parents, who may see their

240    EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER
Downloaded from http://er.aera.net at UNIV OF PENNSYLVANIA on May 13, 2015

child in every context except school. Not surprisingly, correlations between separate teacher ratings of student behavior tend
to be higher than between parents and teachers (Achenbach,
McConaughy, & Howell, 1987).
Another limitation of teacher-report questionnaires is the
potential for teachers to misinterpret student behavior. People’s
inferences about why others act the way they do are not always
accurate (e.g., Dodge, 1980). For instance, it might seem reasonable to conclude that students who reliably complete all of their
homework assignments on time are highly self-controlled.
Alternatively, it is possible that some assiduous students are so
intrinsically motivated to do schoolwork that they do not find
alternatives, like texting and video games, at all tempting. If so,
it is incorrect to infer that their conscientious academic behavior
represents self-control (Duckworth & Steinberg, 2015).
Teachers’ ratings of students’ specific qualities can also be colored by their top-down, global evaluations. For instance, teachers may think, “This is a good kid” and then conclude, “This
student must be good at delaying gratification” (see Abikoff,
Courtney, Pelham, & Koplewicz, 1993; Babad, Inbar, &
Rosenthal, 1982; Nisbett & Wilson, 1977).
Both students and teachers must use some frame of reference
to arrive at their judgments, and the problem of “reference bias”
refers to frames of reference that differ systematically across
respondents (Heine, Lehman, Peng, & Greenholtz, 2002). For
example, the more competent an individual is in a given domain,
the more stringently he or she tends to judge himself or herself
(Kruger & Dunning, 1999). Frames of reference are also influenced by the norms shared within—but not necessarily across—
cultures. Thus, reference bias is most readily evidenced in
paradoxical inconsistencies in cross-cultural research.
Reference bias is apparent in the PISA (Program for
International Student Assessment). Within-country analyses of
the PISA show the expected positive association between selfreported conscientiousness and academic performance, but
between-country analyses suggest that countries with higher
conscientiousness ratings actually perform worse on math and
reading tests (Kyllonen & Bertling, 2013). Norms for judging
behavior can also vary across schools within the same country:
Students attending middle schools with higher admissions standards and test scores rate themselves lower in self-control
(Goldman, 2006; M. West, personal communication, March
17, 2015). Likewise, KIPP charter school students report spending more time on homework each night than students at matched
control schools, and they earn higher standardized achievement
test scores—but score no higher on self-report questionnaire
items such as “Went to all of your classes prepared” (Tuttle et al.,
2013). Dobbie and Fryer (2013) report a similar finding for
graduates of the Harlem Children’s Zone charter school. There
can even be reference bias among students in different grade levels within the same school. Seniors in one study rated themselves
higher in grit than did juniors in the same high school, but the
exact opposite pattern was obtained in performance tasks of persistence (Egalite, Mills, & Greene, 2014).3
In the final stages of responding to questionnaire items, individuals must (4) translate their judgment into one of the offered
response options. Reference bias can be a problem here, too,
insofar as what one respondent considers “rarely” may be what

another respondent considers “often” (Pace & Friedlander,
1982).
Next, individuals may (5) amend their response in accordance with any of a number of motivations other than truth
telling. Potentially biasing reports is “acquiescence bias,” the
inclination, particularly among younger students, to agree with
statements regardless of their actual content (Saris, Revilla,
Krosnick, & Shaeffer, 2010; Soto, John, Gosling, & Potter,
2008). Individuals may also not tell the truth simply because
they would be embarrassed to admit it (Jones & Sigall, 1971).
Unfortunately, many methods thought to reduce social desirability response bias instead harm validity. For example, preemptive assurances of confidentiality can backfire if they imply that
questionnaires will be about sensitive and potentially embarrassing topics (Schwarz & Oyserman, 2001). Moreover, assuring
individuals of their anonymity can decrease response validity by
removing accountability to be honest (Lelkes, Krosnick, Marx,
Judd, & Park, 2012). And attempting to make adolescents feel
comfortable reporting undesirable attitudes or behaviors by suggesting that “some people do X; other people do Y” implies to
adolescents that the undesirable behavior is carried out by half of
their peers, and so it artificially inflates reports of that behavior
through conformity processes (Yeager & Krosnick, 2011).
Unfortunately, scales purporting to measure individual differences in social desirability bias do not fulfill their promise (Uziel,
2010).
Finally, there is the problem of faking. The extent to which
outright faking actually reduces the validity of questionnaires in
real-world situations is hotly debated (Ziegler, MacCann, &
Roberts, 2011), but the possibility of deliberately inflating or
deflating scores on questionnaires is incontrovertible (Sackett,
2011).

Performance Tasks
As an alternative to asking a student or teacher to report on
behavior, it is possible to observe behavior through performance
tasks. A performance task is essentially a situation that has been
carefully designed to elicit meaningful differences in behavior of
a certain kind. Observing students in the identical contrived
situation eliminates the possible confound of variation in the
base rates of certain types of situations. For example, it is problematic to use “time spent doing homework” as an indicator of
self-control if some students are assigned more homework than
others (for example, when comparing students whose teachers or
schools differ). But if all students are put in a situation where
they have the same opportunity to do academic work, with the
same opportunity to allocate their attention to entertaining
diversions, then differences in time spent on academic work can
be used to index self-control (Galla & Duckworth, 2015).
The most influential performance task in the large literature
on self-control is the preschool delay-of-gratification paradigm,
colloquially known as the “marshmallow test” (Mischel, 2014).
At the start of the task, children are presented with a variety of
treats and asked to pick their favorite. Some choose marshmallows, but others choose Oreos, chocolate candies, pretzels, and
so on. Next, the less preferred treats are taken away, and the
experimenter makes a smaller pile (e.g., one marshmallow) and a
May 2015    241

Downloaded from http://er.aera.net at UNIV OF PENNSYLVANIA on May 13, 2015

larger pile (e.g., two marshmallows). The experimenter asks the
child whether he or she would prefer to have the small pile right
away or, alternatively, to wait for the larger pile after the experimenter comes back from doing something unrelated in the hallway. The question is not which choice the child makes—in a
national study of approximately 1,000 preschool children, nearly
all chose the larger, delayed treat (National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, 1999)—but rather, once the
decision has been made, how long the wait to obtain the larger
treat can be endured. Wait time in this standardized situation
correlates positively with self-control ratings by parents and caregivers and, over a decade later, predicts higher report card grades
and standardized test scores, lower self-reported reckless behavior, and healthier body weight, among other outcomes (Mischel,
2014; Tsukayama et al., 2013).
An advantage of performance tasks is that they do not rely
upon the subjective judgments of students or teachers. This feature circumvents reference bias, social desirability bias, acquiescence bias, and faking. Relatedly, by assaying behavior at a
moment in time, task measures could be more sensitive than
questionnaires to subtle changes in behavior. Not surprisingly,
several major studies examining the effects of either self-control
interventions or age-related changes in self-control have used
performance tasks to do so (Bierman, Nix, Greenberg, Blair, &
Domitrovich, 2008; Blair & Raver, 2014; Diamond & Lee,
2011; Raver et al., 2011). Likewise, experiments that attempt to
manipulate self-control in the short term commonly measure
change using performance tasks rather than questionnaire measures (e.g., Baumeister, Bratslavsky, Muraven, & Tice, 1998;
Hagger, Wood, Stiff, & Chatzisarantis, 2010).
Of course, the advantages of performance tasks must be considered in tandem with their limitations. As is the case with
teacher-reported questionnaires, performance tasks require drawing inferences about the internal motivations, emotions, and
thoughts of students. For instance, is a child who refrains from
playing with toys when instructed to do so exerting autonomous
self-control, or does such behavior represent compliance with
adult authority (see Aronson & Carlsmith, 1963; Eisenberg et al.,
2004; Mischel & Liebert, 1967)? Although the task itself is
“objective,” interpreting performance is nevertheless “subjective”
in the sense that behavior must be interpreted by the researcher.
Relatedly, a one-time performance task may be appropriate for
assessing the capacity of a student to perform a certain behavior
when maximally motivated to do so but not particularly diagnostic
of their everyday behavior in typical life situations (Duckworth,
2009; Sackett, 2007). For many personal qualities (e.g., generosity,
kindness, honesty), what matters most is how a child usually
behaves, not how he or she could behave when trying his or her
hardest. In these cases, performance tasks that assess behavior under
optimally motivating circumstances miss the mark. Of course, for
some personal qualities, assessing capacity may be appropriate,
because the construct itself specifies an ability that may or may not
be expressed in daily life. For example, performance task measures
of emotional intelligence appropriately assess the ability—not the
propensity—to perceive, understand, and manage emotions
(Brackett & Geher, 2006; Brackett & Mayer, 2003).
Another limitation of performance tasks is their sensitivity to
factors irrelevant to the attribute of interest. Miyake and

Friedman (2012) call this the “task-impurity problem” (p. 8) and
use as an example the Stroop task of executive function.
Completing the Stroop task entails looking at the names of colors printed in variously colored ink. When the name of the color
is different from the ink in which it is printed (e.g., the word
green printed in red), then naming the ink color requires executive function. But executive function is not all that is required.
Quick and accurate performance also requires color processing,
verbal articulation, motivation to pay attention, and so on. Task
impurity is thought to be one reason why performance tasks
assessing executive function are only weakly correlated with
questionnaire measures of self-control (Duckworth & Kern,
2011; Sharma, Markon, & Clark, 2014).
In addition, performance tasks may thrust individuals into
situations they might have avoided if left to their own devices
(Diener, Larson, & Emmons, 1984). Consider, for example,
children faced with the dilemma of one treat now or two treats
later in the delay-of-gratification task. In the test situation, children are not allowed to get up from their chair, occupy themselves with toys or books, or cover the treats with a plate or
napkin. Outside of this constrained laboratory situation, any of
these tactics might be employed in order to make waiting easier.
In fact, more self-controlled adults say they very deliberately
avoid temptations in everyday life (Ent, Baumeister, & Tice,
2015; Imhoff, Schmidt, & Gerstenberg, 2013) and as a consequence experience fewer urges to do things they will later regret
(Hofmann, Baumeister, Förster, & Vohs, 2012). Thus, performance tasks foist individuals into identical circumstances so that
one may assess their ability to navigate such situations, but this
comes at the expense of knowing the extent to which they might
have the judgment to proactively avoid or modify situations of
that kind on their own (Duckworth, Gendler, & Gross, 2014).
To some extent, all performance tasks suffer from practice
effects (or test-retest effects), defined broadly as the effect of
repeated exposure to the same task. This is true even for the most
“pure” measures of general cognitive ability (Hausknecht, Halpert,
Di Paolo, & Moriarty Gerrard, 2007; Reeve & Lam, 2005).
Familiarity with the procedures of a task can undermine score
validity when the task is intended to represent an ambiguous or
novel situation (Burgess, 1997; Müller, Kerns, & Konkin, 2012).
For example, a first-time experience with the delay-of-gratification
task is not identical to a second-time encounter because expectations of when the experimenter will return to the room are altered
(McGuire & Kable, 2013). Experience with a task may also lead
to boredom or increased fluency with task procedures irrelevant to
the target attribute. At present, almost nothing is known about the
feasibility of developing parallel forms of performance tasks assessing personal qualities for repeated administration.
Because performance tasks are standardized situations in
which to observe student behavior, they must be administered
under carefully controlled conditions. For example, children in
the delay-of-gratification task wait longer if they trust that the
experimenter is actually going to deliver on the promise of two
marshmallows later (Kidd et al., 2013). Likewise, performance
on self-control tasks can suffer when performed in sequence after
other effortful tasks (Hagger et al., 2010). Error increases, and
precision decreases, the more these situational influences differ
across students.

242    EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER
Downloaded from http://er.aera.net at UNIV OF PENNSYLVANIA on May 13, 2015

Moreover, situational influences on task performance that
vary systematically across groups create bias and potentially misleading conclusions about group differences. For example, a task
that assesses diligence on academic work cannot be properly
interpreted if administered in a school setting characterized by
frequent noisy intrusions (e.g., students walking in and out of the
testing room) or especially crowded conditions (e.g., students sitting so closely that they are distracted by each other) (Galla et al.,
2014). Although questionnaire responses, too, can be influenced
by transient situational influences, these effects may be small (see
Lucas & Lawless, 2013). In our experience, performance tasks are
especially sensitive to differences in administration, such as time
of day or presence of ambient distractions.
Even when administered under optimally controlled conditions, performance tasks generate random error—the white
noise produced by stochastic influences on behavior. This is
especially problematic for performance tasks because most yield
a single score (e.g., in the marshmallow test, the number of seconds a child can wait). Questionnaires, in contrast, usually
include several different items designed to assess the same latent
construct. Using multiple items exploits the principle of aggregation, which states that uncorrelated errors across items cancel
out, thus reducing noise and increasing reliability (Clark &
Watson, 1995; Rushton, Brainerd, & Pressley, 1983).
An obvious solution is to create a suite of different performance tasks to assess the same construct and then to aggregate
results into a composite score. There are only a handful of precedents for this multitask approach to assessing self-control
(Hartshorne & May, 1929; White et al., 1994). The rarity of
these studies suggests that the time, expense, and effort entailed
in administering a battery of performance tasks to the same children is at present prohibitive in most applied settings. A single
performance task could take as many as 20 minutes to administer by a trained experimenter; doing so several times across separate sessions (to avoid fatigue) would likely require hours and
hours of testing time.
Valid for What?
As the above exposition demonstrates, perfectly unbiased, unfakeable, and error-free measures are an ideal, not a reality. Instead,
researchers and practitioners have at their disposal an array of measures that have distinct advantages and limitations. Accordingly,
measurement experts have emphasized that validity is not an
inherent feature of a measure itself but rather a characteristic of a
measure with respect to a particular end use (American Educational
Research Association, American Psychological Association, &
National Council on Measurement in Education, 1999, 2014).
Thus, different measures, with their unique advantages and limitations, are differentially valid depending not only on their psychometric properties but also on their intended application.
One important end use is basic research, and indeed, this is
the purpose for which most of the measures reviewed here were
developed. Given the litany of limitations noted above, it is
notable that measures of personal qualities have been shown in
basic research studies to be predictive of consequential life outcomes months, years, or decades later (Almlund et al., 2011;
Borghans et al., 2008; Farrington et al., 2012; Moffitt et al.,

2011; Naemi et al., 2012; B. Roberts et al., 2007). Of course,
these research studies have sought to reject the null hypothesis of
no relation between personal qualities and later life outcomes,
under testing conditions where incentives to distort responses
were minimal—a very different project than the applied uses we
consider in this final section.
We attempt to explain how the problems with extant measures of these personal qualities can create threats to validity for
more applied uses. Four common examples are program evaluation, accountability, individual diagnosis, and practice improvement. We make specific recommendations regarding each.

Program Evaluation
Many educational programs, including charter schools, in-school
programming, and after-school activities, aim to cultivate selfcontrol, grit, emotional intelligence, and other personal qualities.
Yet the above review makes it clear that in many cases, self-report
questionnaires have serious limitations for such evaluations.
Reference bias may even produce results opposite of the truth
when evaluating within-person program effects (i.e., a change
from pretest to posttest) or assessing between-program differences (i.e., mean-level differences among schools or programs), as
noted above (e.g., Tuttle et al., 2013; West et al., 2015).
Teacher-report measures of personal qualities may be valid
when program evaluation is occurring within schools (i.e., comparing classes in the same school, where the standard for a given
characteristic is presumably held constant). However, when conducting between-school program evaluation—as is common—it
seems likely that self-report and teacher-report questionnaires
could be biased by a nonshared frame of reference. For example,
teachers at schools with more rigorous standards of behavior
may rate their students more stringently.
How then should between-school program evaluations be
conducted? Performance tasks may be helpful (Blair & Diamond,
2008; Greenberg, 2010). However, they have the limitations
noted above, including but not limited to dependence on carefully controlled settings for proper administration, the need to
tailor the task parameters to the age group, practice effects, and
respondent burden. At the same time, performance tasks have
perhaps the most important quality for program evaluation:
objective, quantifiable behaviors that do not suffer from reference bias over time and across sites.
A potentially solvable engineering problem, in the medium
term, is to create a suite of brief, scalable, age-specific performance tasks designed for group administration. This possibility
was foreseen as prohibitively expensive by pioneers in the assessment of personal qualities (Hartshorne & May, 1929), but they
could not have predicted the proliferation of computers and
wireless technology in schools. Imagine, for example, a set of
web-based tasks of academic self-control accompanied by easyto-follow protocols and checklists for administering them (e.g.,
Galla et al., 2014). Assuming that practice effects (i.e., test-retest
effects) could be minimized, such task batteries might allow for
meaningful, apples-to-apples comparisons across schools, among
individuals within schools, or within individuals over time.
In sum, scalable batteries of performance tasks to assess various personal qualities would be of great value for program
May 2015    243

Downloaded from http://er.aera.net at UNIV OF PENNSYLVANIA on May 13, 2015

evaluation, especially as schools and districts seek to allocate limited funds wisely.

Accountability
Reference bias in questionnaire measures has a pernicious implication for accountability. Current data and theory suggest schools
that promote personal qualities most ably—and raise the standards
by which students and teachers at that school make comparative
judgments—may show the lowest scores and be punished, whereas
schools that are least effective may receive the highest scores and be
rewarded for ineffectiveness (Dobbie & Fryer, 2013; O’Brien,
Yeager, Galla, D’Mello, & Duckworth, 2015; West et al., 2015).
Even when accountability does not carry high stakes—for instance,
when between-school measures are simply used to pair high- and
low-scoring schools to learn from one another—reference bias
undermines school improvement: It would lead the practices from
the worst schools to be spread to the best schools. Unfortunately,
our experience suggests that rewriting items does not seem to eliminate this type of reference bias.
The reference bias problem alone suggests that questionnaires,
as they currently exist, should not be used for between-school
accountability. Yet accountability adds at least two additional
concerns. First, it is not clear that aggregated student reports can
reasonably distinguish among schools throughout the majority of
the distribution. Indeed, even value-added measures based on
standardized achievement test scores (which do not suffer from
reference bias) fail to distinguish more effective from less effective
teachers outside of the very high or very low ends of the distribution (Goldhaber & Loeb, 2013; Raudenbush & Jean, 2012).
One exception may be assessing personal qualities for the
purpose of comparing teachers within schools. For example, the
Tripod measure allows for students’ ratings of different teachers
in the same school; ratings of one teacher can be “anchored”
using ratings of others in the same school, and these anchored
ratings have been shown to correlate with differences in valueadded measures among teachers within schools (Ferguson, 2012;
Ferguson & Danielson, 2014; Kane & Cantrell, 2013). These
measures would be excellent for identifying “positive outlier”
teachers within schools—for instance, those who reduce achievement gaps and maintain a strong sense of belonging in students—
and then encouraging peer teachers in the same schools to learn
from their practices. Unfortunately, these measures, like many
others, are not very effective when comparing between schools.
This mirrors analyses of state test scores, which have found that
value-added measures are better at distinguishing among different teachers in the same schools than among different teachers in
different schools (Raudenbush, 2013).
There is a second, perhaps more problematic, issue with using
measures for the sake of accountability: the potential for faking or
unfairly manipulating data. Campbell (1976) observed, “The
more any quantitative social indicator is used for social decisionmaking, the more subject it will be to corruption pressures and
the more apt it will be to distort and corrupt the social processes
it is intended to monitor” (p. 49). Campbell was making a very
general point about how good intentions can lead to unintended
perverse outcomes. But this may be especially germane to selfreport and teacher-report questionnaire measures, because

students can easily be taught to mark the “right answer,” and
teachers can likewise rate their students more favorably than they
really perceive them to be. Even when faking does not occur,
accountability pressures for qualities such as growth mind-set can
lead to superficial parroting of growth mind-set ideas, so as to
increase self-reports rather than reflect true, deep, mind-set
changes in students. We should note that accountability pressures
can also affect performance tasks insofar as schools could be
incentivized to alter testing situations to optimize student performance (for examples from achievement tests, see commentaries
by Hollingworth, Dude, & Shepherd, 2010; Ravitch, 2012).
In sum, we have a simple scientific recommendation regarding the use of currently available personal quality measures for
most forms of accountability: not yet.

Individual Diagnosis
Schools may wish to diagnose students’ personal qualities to use
in tracking or remediation decisions. This type of measurement
involves decisions about the resources given to a child and raises
two major concerns: reliability at the level of the individual person and context dependency. First, existing questionnaire measures are likely not sufficiently reliable for making diagnoses.
Indeed, even more well-established clinical protocols for assessing factors such as depression rely on extensive self-report questionnaires only as a screening tool, and these have only modest
sensitivity and specificity for determining whether a person is
clinically depressed (Kovacs, 1992). Such measures require clinical follow-ups. Without highly reliable, multimethod, multiinformant measurement batteries whose validity has been
demonstrated for diagnosis, it will be difficult for a practitioner
to justify the individual diagnosis of children’s personal qualities,
such as self-control, grit, or growth mind-set.
Our second concern is the context dependency of some measures. Take the example of self-control. Research finds that individuals have a harder time regulating themselves when they are
under stereotype threat, but they show greater self-control when
they do not feel under threat (Carr & Steele, 2009; Inzlicht &
Kang, 2010; Inzlicht, McKay, & Aronson, 2006). Hence, cues
that signal the potential to be stereotyped might impair a stigmatized student’s self-control, inappropriately supporting conclusions about the child’s ability rather than about the bias in the
context. This may lead to unintended effects, such as victim
blaming, rather than systemic reform.
In sum, a handful of self-report or teacher-report questions
cannot (currently) diagnose an individual child’s self-control,
growth mind-set, grit, purpose, and so on. And even if more
extensive protocols were available, it would be essential to consider the possibility of situational and group-specific biases.

Practice Improvement
The ultimate goal of much education research is to systematically
improve personal qualities across contexts—that is, to promote the
improvement of practice (Bryk et al., 2015). Here, too, existing measures have important limitations, but they also have great potential.
As has been argued elsewhere (Bryk et al., 2015; Langley
et al., 2009; Yeager & Bryk, 2014), the improvement of practice

244    EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER
Downloaded from http://er.aera.net at UNIV OF PENNSYLVANIA on May 13, 2015

Table 2
Summary for Practitioners and Policymakers
Conclusions
•  There is a scientific consensus in the behavioral sciences that success in school and beyond depends critically on many attributes other than cognitive ability.
•  As shown in Table 1, measures created for basic theory development have various advantages and limitations.
•  These limitations often undermine validity for applied uses.
• Self-report and teacher-report questionnaire measures may potentially produce the opposite finding of the truth if used for between-school or within-school
over-time comparisons, as in program evaluation and school accountability.
•  Existing questionnaire and performance task measures are rarely sufficiently reliable to use for diagnosis and may produce group biases.
•  Both questionnaire and performance tasks may be useful for practice improvement under some circumstances.
Recommendations
•  A consensual umbrella term for this heterogeneous set of competencies may be less important than clarity about the individual constructs.
•  A high priority for research is to improve the suite of performance tasks available for program evaluation and practice improvement.
•  A second priority is to develop novel and innovative measures, capitalizing on advances in theory and technology.

requires “practical measurement.” Practical measures are not measures for theory development or accountability. Instead, they are
administrable in the web of daily instruction, they can be quickly
reported on and communicated to practitioners, and they have direct
relation to causes of student underperformance that are the explicit
target of improvement efforts. They allow people to learn rapidly
from practice. This means that the measures should be brief, easily
collected, and also contextually appropriate. Practical measures
should be sensitive to short-term changes and provide short-term
feedback on progress that has or has not been made in improving
personal qualities (Bryk et al., 2015; Yeager & Bryk, 2014).
Existing questionnaires demonstrate very few of these features.
First, questionnaires can be quite long (Atkins-Burnett, Fernandez,
Akers, Jacobson, & Smither-Wulsin, 2012). For instance, some
measures of self-efficacy—a construct that could in theory be
assessed with a single item—are 60 items long (Marat, 2005).
Next, questionnaire measures are rarely if ever customized for different settings, and therefore their data may not be as relevant to a
given teacher working in a given school. That is, issues of language
and literacy, cultural norms, or even colloquialisms could compromise a practical measure. A practical measure is useful only if it
helps improve practice in a given setting, not if it has reliability
and validity on average in different settings. Third, conventional
questionnaire measures are often not designed to be sensitive to
change over time. For example, a teacher who wants to know
whether classroom activities encouraged self-control during the
prior week may not learn much by asking students to repeatedly
respond to very general questions, such as “People say that I have
iron self-discipline.” At the same time, it may be possible to write
optimized questions—ones that use construct-specific verbal
labels to avoid acquiescence bias, use the optimal number of
response options, balance bipolar choices, and so on (Gehlbach &
Brinkworth, 2011; Krosnick, 1999; Schuman & Presser, 1981;
Schwarz & Oyserman, 2001)—and many fewer of them to solve
this latter problem (Yeager & Bryk, 2014).
We believe performance tasks can also support practice
improvement. For instance, tasks can document within-person
changes over the short-term. To the extent that performance
tasks can be embedded online, then they may be used to produce
efficient web-based reports, facilitating teachers’ improvement
efforts. At the same time, as noted, performance tasks still require

that procedures be optimized to reduce systematic and random
error. This can make them logistically difficult to embed in the
web of daily practice. Still, this may be a solvable engineering
problem in the medium term.
In sum, a promising area for future research is to increase
knowledge of the conditions under which questionnaires and
performance tasks can support the continuous improvement of
educational practice.
Final Recommendations
The major conclusions of this article are summarized in Table 2.
We have argued that all measures have limitations as well as
advantages. Furthermore, we have observed that the applied uses
of assessments are diverse, and design features that make a measurement approach helpful for one use may render it less appropriate for another. As a consequence, it is impossible to
hierarchically rank measures from best to worst in any absolute
sense. Rather than seek out the “most valid measure,” therefore,
we advise practitioners and researchers to seek out the “most valid
measure for their intended purpose.” While doing so, policymakers
and practitioners in particular should keep in mind that most
existing measures were developed for basic scientific research. We
urge heightened vigilance regarding the use-specific limitations of
any measure, regardless of prior “evidence of validity.”
Whenever possible, we recommend using a plurality of measurement approaches. Although time and money are never as
ample as would be ideal, a multimethod approach to measurement can dramatically increase reliability and validity (Eid &
Diener, 2006; Rushton, Brainerd, & Pressley, 1983). As just one
example, Duckworth and Seligman (2005) aggregated multiple
measures of self-control, including a delay-of-gratification task
and self-report, teacher-report, and parent-report questionnaires, finding that a composite score for self-control in the fall
predicted final report card grades better than a standard measure
of cognitive ability. We also encourage further innovation in
measurement development. An incomplete list of promising
approaches includes opportunistically mining students’ online
learning behavior or written communication in real time (e.g.,
Twitter feeds, Kahn Academy databases) for meaningful patterns
of behavior (D’Mello, Duckworth, & Dieterle, 2014; Ireland &
May 2015    245

Downloaded from http://er.aera.net at UNIV OF PENNSYLVANIA on May 13, 2015

Pennebaker, 2010; Kern et al., 2014), the aperture method of
administering random subsets of questionnaire items to respondents so as to minimize administration time while maximizing
content validity (Revelle, Wilt, & Rosenthal, 2010), recording
and later coding 30-second audio snippets during everyday life
(Mehl, Vazire, Holleran, & Clark, 2010), presenting hypothetical situations in narrative form and asking students what they
would do in that circumstance (Oswald, Schmitt, Kim, Ramsay,
& Gillespie, 2004; Ployhart & MacKenzie, 2011), asking students to make observations of their peers (Wagerman & Funder,
2007), indirectly assessing personal qualities through innovative
application of factor analysis to conventionally collected data
(e.g., grade point average, attendance, achievement test scores;
C. Jackson, 2012; Kautz & Zanoni, 2014), and contacting students throughout the day to assess their momentary actions,
thoughts, and feelings (Wong & Csikszentmihalyi, 1991; Zirkel,
Garcia, & Murphy, 2015). In general, efforts to advance measurement of personal qualities would greatly benefit from crossfertilization with similar efforts in personality psychology,
industrial and organizational psychology, neuroscience, and economics (Heckman & Kautz, 2014a; Pickering & Gray, 1999;
Roberts, Jackson, Duckworth, & Von Culin, 2011; Schmidt,
2013; Schmidt & Hunter, 1998).
Relatedly, it has recently been suggested that supplementing
questionnaires with anchoring vignettes may help reduce reference bias (King, Murray, Salomon, & Tandon, 2004; Kyllonen
& Bertling, 2013). Anchoring vignettes are brief descriptions of
hypothetical persons that serve as anchors for calibrating questionnaire responses. Respondents rate each vignette and then
their own behavior on the same rating scale. Adjusting scores of
self-report questionnaires using anchoring vignettes has been
shown to resolve paradoxical findings attributed to reference
bias. However, adding vignettes to questionnaires can dramatically increase respondent burden. Moreover, at present it has
been impossible to verify the extent to which vignettes fully correct for reference bias (Kyllonen & Bertling, 2013).
Finally, measuring personal qualities, although difficult, is only
the first step. Scientific inquiry and organizational improvement
begin with data collection, but those data must be used to inform
action. Too little is known about the question of how to act on data
regarding the personal qualities of students in various classrooms or
schools (Bryk et al., 2015). If a classroom is low in grit, what should
one do? If a student is known to have a fixed mind-set, how can one
intervene without stigmatizing the child (and should one intervene
at all)? How can multidimensional data on personal qualities be
visualized and fed to decision makers more clearly? The wise use of
data in educational practice is another topic that will be increasingly important—and likely just as fraught with difficulty—as the
collection of that data (Bryk et al., 2015).
Interest in the “other” side of the report card is not at all new.
What is new is the expectation that one can measure, with precision and accuracy, the many positive personal qualities other
than cognitive ability that contribute to student well-being and
achievement. Quantifying, even imperfectly, the extent to which
young people express self-control, gratitude, purpose, growth
mind-set, collaboration, emotional intelligence, and other beneficial personal qualities has dramatically advanced scientific
understanding of their development, impact on life outcomes,

and underlying mechanisms. It is no surprise that policymakers
and practitioners have grown increasingly interested in using
such measures for diverse purposes other than theory development. Given the advantages, limitations, and medium-term
potential of such measures, our hope is that the broader educational community proceeds forward with both alacrity and caution, and with equal parts optimism and humility.
Notes

This research was made possible by grants to the first author
from the National Institute on Aging (Grants K01-AG033182-02 and
R24-AG048081-01), the Character Lab, the Gates Foundation, the
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation the Spencer Foundation, and the
Templeton Foundation as well as grants to the second author from the
Raikes Foundation and the William T. Grant Foundation and a fellowship from the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences.
The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not
necessarily represent the ofﬁcial views of the funding agencies.
1
Interestingly, although the notion of cognitive skills has garnered
much more adherence than the term noncognitive skills, both are difficult to define with precision, often misinterpreted because of lack of
consensual definitions, hard to measure without influence of the other,
and representative of heterogeneous rather than homogenous categories (Duckworth, Quinn, Lynam, Loeber, & Stouthamer-Loeber, 2011;
Gardner, 2004; Heckman & Kautz, 2014a; Sternberg, 2008).
2
We hasten to point out that cognitive ability is also mutable
(Nisbett, 2009; Nisbett et al., 2012).
3
Some have argued that comparisons to peers of higher or lower
achievement are not merely a source of systematic measurement error
but, in addition, can lead to durable changes in self-concept, motivation, and performance (Huguet et al., 2009).
References

Abikoff, H., Courtney, M., Pelham, W. E., Jr., & Koplewicz, H. S.
(1993). Teachers’ ratings of disruptive behaviors: The influence of
halo effects. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 21(5), 519–533.
Achenbach, T. M., McConaughy, S. H., & Howell, C. T. (1987). Child/
adolescent behavioral and emotional problems: Implications of
cross-informant correlations for situational specificity. Psychological
Bulletin, 101(2), 213–232.
Almlund, M., Duckworth, A. L., Heckman, J. J., & Kautz, T. D.
(2011). Personality psychology and economics (No. w16822). NBER
Working Paper Series. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
Economic Research.
American Educational Research Association, American Psychological
Association, & National Council on Measurement in Education.
(1999). Standards for educational and psychological testing.
Washington, DC: American Educational Research Association.
American Educational Research Association, American Psychological
Association, & National Council on Measurement in Education.
(2014). Standards for educational and psychological testing (Rev. ed.).
Washington, DC: American Educational Research Association.
Aronson, E., & Carlsmith, J. M. (1963). Effect of the severity of threat
on the devaluation of forbidden behavior. Journal of Abnormal and
Social Psychology, 66(6), 584–588.
Atkins-Burnett, S., Fernandez, C., Akers, L., Jacobson, J., & SmitherWulsin, C. (2012). Landscape analysis of non-cognitive measures.
Princeton, NJ: Mathematica Policy Research.
Babad, E. Y., Inbar, J., & Rosenthal, R. (1982). Teachers’ judgment of students’ potential as a function of teachers’ susceptibility to biasing information. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 42(3), 541–547.

246    EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER
Downloaded from http://er.aera.net at UNIV OF PENNSYLVANIA on May 13, 2015

Baumeister, R. F., Bratslavsky, E., Muraven, M., & Tice, D. M.
(1998). Ego depletion: Is the active self a limited resource? Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 74(5), 1252–1265.
Berkowitz, M. W. (2012). Moral and character education. In K. R.
Harris, S. Graham, T. Urdan, J. M. Royer, & M. Zeidner (Eds.),
APA educational psychology handbook: Vol. 2. Individual differences
and cultural and contextual factors (pp. 247–264). Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association.
Bierman, K. L., Nix, R. L., Greenberg, M. T., Blair, C., & Domitrovich,
C. E. (2008). Executive functions and school readiness intervention: Impact, moderation, and mediation in the Head Start REDI
program. Development and Psychopathology, 20, 821–843.
Binet, A., & Simon, T. (1916). The development of intelligence in children
(The Binet-Simon Scale). Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins Co.
Blair, C., & Diamond, A. (2008). Biological processes in prevention
and intervention: The promotion of self-regulation as a means of
preventing school failure. Development and Psychopathology, 20(3),
899–911.
Blair, C., & Raver, C. C. (2014). Closing the achievement gap through
modification of neurocognitive and neuroendocrine function:
Results from a cluster randomized controlled trial of an innovative
approach to the education of children in kindergarten. PLoS ONE,
9(11), e112393.
Blair, C., & Raver, C. C. (2015). School readiness and self-regulation:
A developmental psychobiological approach. Annual Review of
Psychology, 66(1), 711–731.
Borghans, L., Duckworth, A. L., Heckman, J. J., & ter Weel, B. (2008).
The economics and psychology of personality traits. Journal of
Human Resources, 43(4), 972–1059.
Bowman, N. A. (2010). Can 1st-year college students accurately report
their learning and development? American Educational Research
Journal, 47(2), 466–496.
Brackett, M. A., & Geher, G. (2006). Measuring emotional intelligence: Paradigmatic diversity and common ground. In J. Ciarrochi,
J. Forgas, & J. D. Mayer (Eds.), Emotional intelligence in everyday
life (2nd ed., pp. 27–50). New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Brackett, M. A., & Mayer, J. D. (2003). Convergent, discriminant, and
incremental validity of competing measures of emotional intelligence. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29(9), 1147–1158.
Bryk, A. S., Gomez, L. M., Grunow, A., & LeMahieu, P. G. (2015).
Learning to improve: How America’s schools can get better at getting
better. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press.
Burgess, P. W. (1997). Theory and methodology in executive function
research. In P. Rabbitt (Ed.), Methodology of frontal and executive
function (pp. 91–116). East Sussex, UK: Psychology Press.
Campbell, D. T. (1976). Assessing the impact of planned social change.
Paper presented at the Conference on Social Psychology, Visegrad,
Hungary.
Carlson, S. M., Zelazo, P. D., & Faja, S. (2013). Executive function. In
P. D. Zelazo (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of developmental psychology: Vol. 1. Body and mind (pp. 706–742). New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Carr, P. B., & Steele, C.M. (2009). Stereotype threat and inflexible
perseverence in problem solving. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 45, 853–859.
Caspi, A., Roberts, B. W., & Shiner, R. L. (2005). Personality development: Stability and change. Annual Review of Psychology, 56,
453–484.
Clark, L. A., & Watson, D. (1995). Constructing validity: Basic issues in
objective scale development. Psychological Assessment, 7(3), 309–319.
Connelly, B. S., & Ones, D. S. (2010). An other perspective on personality: Meta-analytic integration of observers’ accuracy and predictive validity. Psychological Bulletin, 136(6), 1092–1122.

Damon, W. (2010). The bridge to character: To help students become
ethical, responsible citizens, schools need to cultivate students’
natural moral sense. Education Leadership, 67(5), 36–41.
de Ridder, D. T. D., Lensvelt-Mulders, G., Finkenauer, C., Stok, F. M.,
& Baumeister, R. F. (2012). Taking stock of self-control: A metaanalysis of how trait self-control relates to a wide range of behaviors. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 16(1), 76–99.
Diamond, A. (2013). Executive functions. Annual Review of Psychology,
64, 135–168.
Diamond, A., & Lee, K. (2011). Interventions shown to aid executive function development in children 4 to 12 years old. Science,
333(6045), 959–964.
Diener, E., Larsen, J. E., & Emmons, R. A. (1984). Person × Situation
interactions: Choice of situations and congruence response models.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 47(3), 580–592.
D’Mello, S., Duckworth, A., & Dieterle, E. (2014). Advanced, analytic,
automated measures of state engagement during learning. Manuscript
under review.
Dobbie, W., & Fryer, R. G., Jr. (2013). The medium-term impacts of
high-achieving charter schools on non-test score outcomes. NBER
Working Paper Series. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Dodge, K. A. (1980). Social cognition and children’s aggressive behavior. Child Development, 51, 162–170.
Drucker, P. F. (1974). Management: Tasks, responsibilities, practices.
New York, NY: Routledge.
Duckworth, A., Gendler, T., & Gross, J. (2014). Situational strategies
for self-control. Manuscript under review.
Duckworth, A. L. (2009). (Over and) beyond high-stakes testing.
American Psychologist, 64(4), 279–280.
Duckworth, A. L., & Carlson, S. M. (2013). Self-regulation and school
success. In B. W. Sokol, F. M. E. Grouzet, & U. Muller (Eds.),
Self-regulation and autonomy: Social and developmental dimensions
of human conduct (pp. 208–230). New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
Duckworth, A. L., & Kern, M. L. (2011). A meta-analysis of the convergent validity of self-control measures. Journal of Research in
Personality, 45(3), 259–268.
Duckworth, A. L., Quinn, P. D., Lynam, D. R., Loeber, R., &
Stouthamer-Loeber, M. (2011). Role of test motivation in intelligence testing. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
108(19), 7716–7720.
Duckworth, A. L., & Seligman, M. E. P. (2005). Self-discipline outdoes IQ in predicting academic performance of adolescents.
Psychological Science, 16(12), 939–944.
Duckworth, A. L., & Steinberg, L. (2015). Unpacking self-control.
Child Development Perspectives, 9(1), 32–37.
Duckworth, A. L., Tsukayama, E., & May, H. (2010). Establishing causality using longitudinal hierarchical linear modeling: An illustration predicting achievement from self-control. Social Psychological
and Personality Science, 1(4), 311–317.
Durlak, J. A., Domitrovich, C. E., Weissberg, R. P., & Gullotta, T. P.
(Eds.). (2015). Handbook of social and emotional learning: Research
and practice. New York, NY: Guilford.
Durlak, J. A., Weissberg, R. P., Dymnicki, A. B., Taylor, R. D., &
Schellinger, K. B. (2011). The impact of enhancing students’ social
and emotional learning: A meta-analysis of school-based universal
interventions. Child Development, 82(1), 405–432.
Easton, J. (2013). Using measurement as leverage between developmental research and educational practice. Paper presented at the
Center for Advanced Study of Teaching and Learning Meeting,
Charlottesville, VA. Retrieved from http://ies.ed.gov/director/pdf/
Easton062013.pdf
May 2015    247

Downloaded from http://er.aera.net at UNIV OF PENNSYLVANIA on May 13, 2015

Egalite, A. J., Mills, J. N., & Greene, J. P. (2014). The softer side of learning: Measuring students’ non-cognitive skills (EDRE Working Paper
No. 2014-03). Fayetteville: University of Arkansas Education
Reform.
Eid, M., & Diener, E. (2006). Handbook of multimethod measurement
in psychology (Vol. 553). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Eisenberg, N., Spinrad, T. L., Fabes, R. A., Reiser, M., Cumberland,
A., Shepard, S. A., . . . Thompson, M. (2004). The relations of
effortful control and impulsivity to children’s resiliency and adjustment. Child Development, 75(1), 25–46.
Elias, M. J. (Ed.). (1997). Promoting social and emotional learning:
Guidelines for educators. Chicago, IL: Association for Supervision
and Curriculum Development.
Ent, M. R., Baumeister, R. F., & Tice, D. M. (2015). Trait selfcontrol and the avoidance of temptation. Personality and Individual
Differences, 74, 12–15.
Farrington, C. A., Roderick, M., Allensworth, E., Nagaoka, J., Keyes,
T. S., Johnson, D. W., & Beechum, N. O. (2012). Teaching adolescents to become learners: The role of noncognitive factors in shaping school performance. A critical literature review. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Consortium on Chicago School Research.
Ferguson, R. F. (2012). Can student surveys measure teaching quality?
Phi Delta Kappan, 94(3), 24–28.
Ferguson, R. F., & Danielson, C. (2014). How framework for teaching and tripod 7Cs evidence distinguish key components of effective teaching. In T. J. Kane, K. A. Kerr, & R. C. Pianta (Eds.),
Designing teacher evaluation systems: New guidance from the measures
of effective teaching project (pp. 98–143). Hoboken, NJ: Jossey-Bass.
Fleeson, W., & Noftle, E. E. (2008). The end of the person-situation
debate: An emerging synthesis in the answer to the consistency
question. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 2(4), 1667–
1684.
Freud, S. (1920). Introductory lectures on psychoanalysis. New York, NY:
Norton.
Fujita, K. (2011). On conceptualizing self-control as more than the
effortful inhibition of impulses. Personality and Social Psychology
Review, 15(4), 352–366.
Funder, D. C. (2012). Accurate personality judgment. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 21(3), 177–182.
Galla, B. M., & Duckworth, A. L. (2015). More than resisting temptation: Beneficial habits mediate the relationship between selfcontrol and positive life outcomes. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology. Advance online publication. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
pspp0000026
Galla, B. M., Plummer, B. D., White, R., Meketon, D., D’Mello, S. K.,
& Duckworth, A. L. (2014). Development and validation of the
Academic Diligence Task. Contemporary Educational Psychology,
39(4), 314–325.
Gardner, H. (2004). Frames of mind: The theory of multiple intelligences.
New York, NY: Basic Books.
Gehlbach, H., & Brinkworth, M. E. (2011). Measure twice, cut down
error: A process for enhancing the validity of survey scales. Review
of General Psychology, 15(4), 380–387.
Goldhaber, D., & Loeb, S. (2013). What do we know about the tradeoffs associated with teacher misclassificationin high stakes personnel
decisions? Retrieved from http://www.carnegieknowledgenetwork.
org/briefs/value-added/teacher-misclassifications/
Goldman, S. (2006). Self-discipline predicts academic performance
among low-achieving adolescents. Res: A Journal of Undergraduate
Research, 2(1), 84–97.
Greenberg, M. T. (2010). School-based prevention: Current status and
future challenges. Effective Education, 2(1), 27–52.

Hagger, M. S., Wood, C., Stiff, C., & Chatzisarantis, N. L. D. (2010).
Ego depletion and the strength model of self-control: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 136(4), 495–525.
Hartshorne, H., & May, M. A. (1929). Studies in the nature of character:
Studies in self-control (Vol. 2). New York, NY: McMillan.
Hausknecht, J. P., Halpert, J. A., Di Paolo, N. T., & Moriarty Gerrard,
M. O. (2007). Retesting in selection: A meta-analysis of coaching
and practice effects for tests of cognitive ability. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 92(2), 373–385.
Heckman, J. J., & Kautz, T.D. (2012). Hard evidence on soft skills.
Labour Economics, 19(4), 451–464.
Heckman, J. J., & Kautz, T. D. (2014a). Achievement tests and the role
of character in American life. In J. J. Heckman, J. E. Humphries,
& T. Kautz (Eds.), The myth of achievement tests: The GED and the
role of character in American life (pp. 1–71). Chicago, IL: University
of Chicago Press.
Heckman, J. J., & Kautz, T. D. (2014b). The myth of achievement
tests: The GED and the role of character in american. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Heine, S. J., Lehman, D. R., Peng, K., & Greenholtz, J. (2002).
What’s wrong with cross-cultural comparisons of subjective likert
scales? The reference-group effect. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 82(6), 903–918.
Hightower, A. D., Work, W. C., Cowen, E. L., Lotyczewski, B.,
Spinell, A., Guare, J., & Rohrbeck, C. (1986). The Teacher-Child
Rating Scale: A brief objective measure of elementary children’s
school problem behaviors and competencies. School Psychology
Review, 15(3), 393–409.
Hofmann, W., Baumeister, R. F., Förster, G., & Vohs, K. D. (2012).
Everyday temptations: An experience sampling study of desire, conflict, and self-control. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
102(6), 1318.
Hollingworth, L., Dude, D. J., & Shepherd, J. K. (2010). Pizza parties,
pep rallies, and practice tests: Strategies used by high school principals to raise percent proficient. Leadership and Policy in Schools,
9(4), 462–478.
Huguet, P., Dumas, F., Marsh, H., Régner, I., Wheeler, L., Suls, J., . . .
Nezlek, J. (2009). Clarifying the role of social comparison in the
big-fish–little-pond effect (BFLPE): An integrative study. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 97(1), 156–170.
Imhoff, R., Schmidt, A. F., & Gerstenberg, F. (2013). Exploring the
interplay of trait self-control and ego depletion: Empirical evidence
for ironic effects. European Journal of Personality, 28(5), 413–424.
Inzlicht, M., & Kang, S. K. (2010). Stereotype threat spillover: How
coping with threats to social identity affects aggression, eating,
decision making, and attention. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 99(3), 467–481.
Inzlicht, M., McKay, L., & Aronson, J. (2006). Stigma as ego depletion:
How being the target of prejudice affects self-control. Psychological
Science, 17(3), 262–269.
Ireland, M. E., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2010). Language style matching in writing: Synchrony in essays, correspondence, and poetry.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 99(3), 549–571.
Jackson, C. K. (2012). Non-cognitive ability, test scores, and teacher
quality: Evidence from 9th grade teachers in North Carolina. NBER
Working Paper Series. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Jackson, J. J., Connolly, J. J., Garrison, M., Levine, M., & Connolly, S.
L. (2015). Your friends know how long you will live: A 75 year study
of peer-rated personality traits. Psychological Science, 26(3), 335–340.
Jones, E., & Sigall, H. (1971). The bogus pipeline: A new paradigm
for measuring affect and attitude. Psychological Bulletin, 76(5),
349–364.

248    EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER
Downloaded from http://er.aera.net at UNIV OF PENNSYLVANIA on May 13, 2015

Kane, T. J., & Cantrell, S. (2013). Ensuring fair and reliable measures
of effective teaching: Culminating findings from the MET Project’s
three-year study. Seattle, WA: Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.
Kautz, T. D., & Zanoni, W. (2014). Measuring and fostering noncognitive skills in adolescence: Evidence from Chicago Public Schools
and the OneGoal Program. Unpublished manuscript, Department
of Economics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.
Kelvin, W. T. (1883). Popular lectures and addresses (Vol. 1). London,
UK: MacMillan.
Kern, M. L., Eichstaedt, J. C., Schwartz, H. A., Park, G., Ungar, L.
H., Stillwell, D. J., . . . Seligman, M. E. P. (2014). From “Sooo
excited!!!” to “So proud”: Using language to study development.
Developmental Psychology, 50(1), 178–188.
Kidd, C., Palmeri, H., & Aslin, R. N. (2013). Rational snacking:
Young children’s decision-making on the marshmallow task is
moderated by beliefs about environmental reliability. Cognition,
126(1), 109–114.
King, G., Murray, C. J. L., Salomon, J. A., & Tandon, A. (2004).
Enhancing the validity and cross-cultural comparability of measurement in survey research. American Political Science Review,
98(1), 191–207.
King, M. L., Jr. (1947, January/February). The purpose of education.
Maroon Tiger.
Kovacs, M. K. (1992). Children’s Depression Inventory–Short Form
(CDI). New York, NY: Multi-Health Systems.
Kristjánsson, K. (2013). Ten myths about character, virtue and virtue
education—plus three well-founded misgivings. British Journal of
Educational Studies, 61(3), 269–287.
Krosnick, J. A. (1999). Survey research. Annual Review of Psychology,
50, 537–567.
Krosnick, J. A., & Fabrigar, L. R. (in press). The handbook of questionnaire design. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Krosnick, J. A., & Presser, S. (2010). Question and questionnaire
design. In P. V. Marsden & J. D. Wright (Eds.), Handbook of survey research (pp. 263–314). Bingley, UK: Emerald Group.
Kruger, J., & Dunning, D. (1999). Unskilled and unaware of it: How
difficulties in recognizing one’s own incompetence lead to inflated
self-assessments. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77(6),
1121–1134.
Kuhn, T. S. (1961). The function of measurement in modern physical
science. Isis, 52(2), 161–193.
Kyllonen, P. C., & Bertling, J. (Eds.). (2013). Innovative questionnaire
assessment methods to increase cross-country comparability. In
L. Rutkowski, M. von Davier, & D. Rutkowski (Eds.), A handbook
of international large-scale assessment data analysis: Background, technical issues, and methods of data analysis (pp. 277–286). London,
UK: Chapman Hall/CRC Press.
Langley, G. J., Moen, R., Nolan, K. M., Nolan, T. W., Norman, C.
L., & Provost, L. P. (2009). The improvement guide: A practical
approach to enhancing organizational performance. San Francisco,
CA: Jossey-Bass.
Lapsley, D. K., & Yeager, D. S. (2012). Moral-character education. In
I. B. Weiner, W. M. Reynolds, & G. E. Miller (Eds.), Handbook of
psychology: Vol. 7. Educational psychology (2nd ed., pp. 289–348).
New York, NY: Wiley.
Lelkes, Y., Krosnick, J. A., Marx, D. M., Judd, C. M., & Park, B.
(2012). Complete anonymity compromises the accuracy of selfreports. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48(6), 1291–
1299.
Levin, H. M. (2013). The utility and need for incorporating noncognitive skills into large-scale educational assessments. In M. von
Davier, E. Gonzalez, I. Kirsch, & K. Yamamoto (Eds.), The role
of international large-scale assessments: Perspectives from technology,

economy, and educational research (pp. 67–86). New York, NY:
Springer Netherlands.
Lucas, R. E., & Baird, B. M. (2006). Global self-assessment. In
M. Eid & E. Diener (Eds.), Handbook of multimethod measurement in psychology (pp. 29–42). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Lucas, R. E., & Lawless, N. M. (2013). Does life seem better on a sunny
day? Examining the association between daily weather conditions
and life satisfaction judgments. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 104(5), 872–884.
Marat, D. (2005). Assessing mathematics self-efficacy of diverse students from secondary schools in Auckland: Implications for academic achievement. Issues in Educational Research, 15(1), 37–68.
McGuire, J. T., & Kable, J. W. (2013). Rational temporal predictions
can underlie apparent failures to delay gratification. Psychological
Review, 120(2), 395–410.
Mehl, M. R., Vazire, S., Holleran, S. E., & Clark, C. S. (2010).
Eavesdropping on happiness: Well-being is related to having
less small talk and more substantive conversations. Psychological
Science, 21(4), 539–541.
Merrell, K. W., & Gueldner, B. A. (2010). Social and emotional learning
in the classroom: Promoting mental health and academic success. New
York, NY: Guilford Press.
Messick, S. (1979). Potential uses of noncognitive measurement in education. Journal of Educational Psychology, 71(3), 281.
Mischel, W. (1961). Father-absence and delay of gratification. Journal
of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 63(1), 116–124.
Mischel, W. (1968). Personality and assessment. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Mischel, W. (2014). The Marshmallow Test: Mastering self-control. New
York, NY: Little, Brown.
Mischel, W., Ayduk, O., Berman, M. G., Casey, B. J., Gotlib, I. H.,
Jonides, J., . . . Zayas, V. (2011). ‘Willpower’ over the life span:
Decomposing self-regulation. Social Cognitive and Affective
Neuroscience, 6(2), 252–256.
Mischel, W., & Liebert, R. M. (1967). The role of power in the
adoption of self-reward patterns. Child Development, 38(3),
673–683.
Miyake, A., & Friedman, N. P. (2012). The nature and organization of
individual differences in executive functions: Four general conclusions. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 21(1), 8–14.
Moffitt, T. E., Arseneault, L., Belsky, D., Dickson, N., Hancox, R. J.,
Harrington, H. L., . . . Caspi, A. (2011). A gradient of childhood
self-control predicts health, wealth, and public safety. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(7), 2693–2698.
Müller, U., Kerns, K. A., & Konkin, K. (2012). Test–retest reliability
and practice effects of executive function tasks in preschool children. Clinical Neuropsychologist, 26(2), 271–287.
Murnane, R. J., & Levy, F. (1996). Teaching the new basic skills:
Principles for educating children to thrive in a changing economy.
New York, NY: Free Press.
Murphy, M. C., & Dweck, C. S. (2009). A culture of genius: How
an organization’s lay theory shapes people’s cognition, affect, and
behavior. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 36(3), 282–
296.
Naemi, B., Burrus, J., Kyllonen, P. C., & Roberts, R. D. (2012,
December). Building a case to develop noncognitive assessment products and services targeting workforce readiness at ETS. Princeton, NJ:
Educational Testing Service.
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. (1999).
Child’s self-regulation fifty-four month delay of gratification test.
Research Triangle Park, NC: Author.
Nisbett, R. E. (2009). Intelligence and how to get it: Why schools and
cultures count. New York, NY: Norton.
May 2015    249

Downloaded from http://er.aera.net at UNIV OF PENNSYLVANIA on May 13, 2015

Nisbett, R. E., Aronson, J., Blair, C., Dickens, W., Flynn, J., Halpern,
D. F., & Turkheimer, E. (2012). Intelligence: New findings and
theoretical developments. American Psychologist, 67(2), 130–159.
Nisbett, R. E., & Wilson, T. D. (1977). Telling more than we can
know: Verbal reports on mental processes. Psychological Review,
84(3), 231–259.
O’Brien, J., Yeager, D. S., Galla, B., D’Mello, S., & Duckworth, A. L.
(2015). Between-school comparisons in non-cognitive factors: Evidence
of reference bias in self-reports and advantages of performance tasks.
Manuscript in preparation.
Oswald, F. L., Schmitt, N., Kim, B. H., Ramsay, L. J., & Gillespie, M. A.
(2004). Developing a biodata measure and situational judgment
inventory as predictors of college student performance. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 89(2), 187–207.
Pace, C. R., & Friedlander, J. (1982). The meaning of response categories: How often is “occasionally,” “often,” and “very often”?
Research in Higher Education, 17(3), 267–281.
Park, A., Tsukayama, E., Patrick, S., & Duckworth, A. L. (2015). A
tripartite taxonomy of character. Manuscript in preparation.
Pellegrino, J. W., & Hilton, M. L. (2012). Education for life and work:
Developing transferable knowledge and skills in the 21st century.
Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences.
Peterson, C., & Seligman, M. E. P. (2004). Character strengths and
virtues: A handbook and classification. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Pickering, A. D., & Gray, J. A. (1999). The neuroscience of personality.
In L. A. Pervin & O. P. John (Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory
and research (2nd ed., pp. 277–299). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Ployhart, R. E., & MacKenzie, W. I., Jr. (2011). Situational judgment
tests: A critical review and agenda for the future. In S. Zedeck
(Ed.), APA handbook of industrial and organizational psychology:
Vol. 2. Selecting and developing members for the organization (pp.
237–252). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Lee, J. Y., & Podsakoff, N. P.
(2003). Common method biases in behavioral research: A critical review of the literature and recommended remedies. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 88(5), 879–903.
Raudenbush, S. W. (1984). Magnitude of teacher expectancy effects on
pupil IQ as a function of the credibility of expectancy induction: A
synthesis of findings from 18 experiments. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 76(1), 85–97.
Raudenbush, S. W. (2013). What do we know about using value-added
to compare teachers who work in different schools? Stanford, CA:
Carnegie Knowledge Network. Retrieved from http://www.carne
gieknowledgenetwork.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/CKN_
Raudenbush-Comparing-Teachers_FINAL_08-19-13.pdf
Raudenbush, S. W., & Jean, M. (2012). How should educators interpret
value-added scores? Stanford, CA: Carnegie Knowledge Network.
Retrieved from http://www.carnegieknowledgenetwork.org/briefs/
value-added/interpreting-value-added/
Raver, C. C., Jones, S. M., Li-Grining, C. P., Zhai, F., Bub, K., &
Pressler, E. (2011). CSRP’s impact on low-income preschoolers’
preacademic skills: Self-regulation as a mediating mechanism.
Child Development, 82(1), 362–378.
Ravitch, D. (2012). What is Campbell’s law? Retrieved from http://
dianeravitch.net/2012/05/25/what-is-campbells-law/
Reeve, C. L., & Lam, H. (2005). The psychometric paradox of practice
effects due to retesting: Measurement invariance and stable ability
estimates in the face of observed score changes. Intelligence, 33(5),
535–549.
Revelle, W., Wilt, J., & Rosenthal, A. (2010). Individual differences in
cognition: New methods for examining the personality-cognition link.
New York, NY: Springer Science.

Roberts, B. W., & DelVecchio, W. F. (2000). The rank-order consistency of personality traits from childhood to old age: A quantitative
review of longitudinal studies. Psychological Bulletin, 126(1), 3–25.
Roberts, B. W., Jackson, J. J., Duckworth, A. L., & Von Culin, K.
(2011). Personality measurement and assessment in large panel
surveys. Forum for Health Economics and Policy, 14(3), 1–32.
Roberts, B. W., Kuncel, N. R., Shiner, R., Caspi, A., & Goldberg, L. R.
(2007). The power of personality: The comparative validity of
personality traits, socioeconomic status, and cognitive ability for
predicting important life outcomes. Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 2(4), 313–345.
Roberts, B. W., Walton, K. E., & Viechtbauer, W. (2006). Patterns of
mean-level change in personality traits across the life course: A metaanalysis of longitudinal studies. Psychological Bulletin, 132(1), 1–25.
Roberts, R. D., Markham, P. M., Matthews, G., & Zeidner, M. (2005).
Assessing intelligence: Past, present, and future. In O. Wilhelm
& R. W. Engle (Eds.), Handbook of understanding and measuring
intelligence (pp. 333–360). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Ross, L., Lepper, M., & Ward, A. (2010). History of social psychology:
Insights, challenges, and contributions to theory and application. In
S. T. Fiske, D. T. Gilbert, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of social
psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 3–50). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Ross, L., & Nisbett, R. E. (1991). The person and the situation:
Perspectives of social psychology. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Rushton, J. P., Brainerd, C. J., & Pressley, M. (1983). Behavioral
development and construct validity: The principle of aggregation.
Psychological Bulletin, 94(1), 18–38.
Sabini, J., Siepmann, M., & Stein, J. (2001). The really fundamental attribution error in social psychological research. Psychological
Inquiry, 12(1), 1–15.
Sackett, P. R. (2007). Revisiting the origins of the typical-maximum
performance distinction. Human Performance, 20(3), 179–185.
Sackett, P. R. (2011). Faking in personality assessment: Where do
we stand? In M. Ziegler, C. MacCann, & R. D. Roberts (Eds.),
New perspectives on faking in personality assessment (pp. 330–344).
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Saris, W., Revilla, M., Krosnick, J. A., & Shaeffer, E. (2010).
Comparing questions with agree/disagree response options to
questions with item-specific response options. Survey Research
Methods, 4(1), 61–79.
Schmidt, F. L. (April, 2013). The validity and utility of selection methods in
personnel psychology: Practical and theoretical implications of 100 years
of research. Paper presented at the University of Iowa, Iowa City.
Schmidt, F. L., & Hunter, J. E. (1998). The validity and utility of selection methods in personnel psychology: Practical and theoretical
implications of 85 years of research findings. Psychological Bulletin,
124(2), 262–274.
Schuman, H., & Presser, S. (1981). Questions and answers in attitude
surveys: Experiments on question form, wording, and context. New
York, NY: Academic Press.
Schwarz, N., & Oyserman, D. (2001). Asking questions about behavior: Cognition, communication, and questionnaire construction.
American Journal of Evaluation, 22(2), 127–160.
Sharma, L., Markon, K. E., & Clark, L. A. (2014). Toward a theory of
distinct types of “impulsive” behaviors: A meta-analysis of self-report
and behavioral measures. Psychological Bulletin, 140(2), 374–408.
Soland, J., Hamilton, L. S., & Stecher, B. M. (2013) Measuring 21st
century competencies: Guidance for educators. Santa Monica, CA:
RAND Corporation.
Soto, C. J., John, O. P., Gosling, S. D., & Potter, J. (2008). The developmental psychometrics of big five self-reports: Acquiescence, factor structure, coherence, and differentiation from ages 10 to 20.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 94(4), 718.

250    EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER
Downloaded from http://er.aera.net at UNIV OF PENNSYLVANIA on May 13, 2015

Stecher, B. M., & Hamilton, L. S. (2014). Measuring hard-tomeasure student competencies: A research and development plan.
Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation.
Sternberg, R. J. (2008). Using cognitive theory to reconceptualize college admissions testing. In M. A. Gluck, J. R. Anderson, & S. M.
Kosslyn (Eds.), Memory and mind: A festschrift for Gordon H. Bower
(pp. 159–175). New York, NY: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Tough, P. (2011, September 14). What if the secret to success is failure?
New York Times Magazine, pp. 1–14.
Tough, P. (2013). How children succeed: Grit, curiosity, and the hidden
power of character. New York, NY: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
Tourangeau, R., Rips, L. J., & Rasinski, K. (2000). The psychology of
survey response. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Tsukayama, E., Duckworth, A. L., & Kim, B. E. (2013). Domainspecific impulsivity in school-age children. Developmental Science,
16(6), 879–893.
Tuttle, C. C., Gill, B., Gleason, P., Knechtel, V., Nichols-Barrer, I., &
Resch, A. (2013). KIPP middle schools: Impacts on achievement and
other outcomes. Washington, DC: Mathematica Policy Research.
Uziel, L. (2010). Rethinking social desirability scales: From impression
management to interpersonally oriented self-control. Perspectives
on Psychological Science, 5(3), 243–262.
Wagerman, S. A., & Funder, D. C. (2007). Acquaintance reports of
personality and academic achievement: A case for conscientiousness. Journal of Research in Personality, 41(1), 221–229.
Wagerman, S. A., & Funder, D. C. (2009). Personality psychology of
situations. In P. J. Corr & G. Matthews (Eds.), The Cambridge
handbook of personality psychology (pp. 27–42). Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Weissberg, R. P., & Cascarino, J. (2013). Academic learning + socialemotional learning = national priority. Phi Delta Kappan, 95(2),
8–13.
Weschler, D. (1943). Non-intellective factors in general intelligence.
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 38(1), 101–103.
West, M. R., Kraft, M. A., Finn, A. S., Martin, R. E., Duckworth, A.
L., Gabrieli, C. F. O., & Gabrieli, J. D. E. (2015). Promise and
paradox: Measuring students’ non-cognitive skills and the impact of
schooling. Manuscript under review.
White, J. L., Moffitt, T. E., Caspi, A., Bartusch, D. J., Needles, D. J.,
& Stouthamer-Loeber, M. (1994). Measuring impulsivity and
examining its relationship to delinquency. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 103(2), 192–205.
Willingham, W. W. (1985). Success in college: The role of personal
qualities and academic ability. New York, NY: College Entrance
Examination Board.

Wong, M. M., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1991). Affiliation motivation
and daily experience: Some issues on gender differences. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 60(1), 154–164.
Yeager, D. S., & Bryk, A. S. (2014). Practical measurement. Unpublished
manuscript, Department of Psychology, University of Texas at
Austin, Austin.
Yeager, D. S., Henderson, M., Paunesku, D., Walton, G. M., D’Mello,
S., Spitzer, B. J., & Duckworth, A. L. (2014). Boring but important: A self-transcendent purpose for learning fosters academic
self-regulation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 107(4),
559–580.
Yeager, D. S., & Krosnick, J. (2011). Does mentioning “some people”
and “other people” in a survey question increase the accuracy of adolescents’ self-reports? Developmental Psychology, 47(6),1674–1679.
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological interventions in education: They’re not magic. Review of Educational
Research, 81(2), 267–301.
Ziegler, M., MacCann, C., & Roberts, R. (Eds.). (2011). New perspectives on faking in personality assessment. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Zirkel, S., Garcia, J. A., & Murphy, M. C. (2015). Experience-sampling
research methods and their potential for education research.
Educational Researcher, 44, 7–16. doi: 10.3102/0013189x14566879
Authors

ANGELA L. DUCKWORTH, PhD, is an associate professor of psychology at the University of Pennsylvania, 3701 Market St., Suite 215,
Philadelphia, PA 19104; duckwort@psych.upenn.edu. Her research
focuses on non-IQ competencies, including self-control and grit, which
predict success both academically and professionally.
DAVID SCOTT YEAGER, PhD, is an assistant professor of psychology at the University of Texas at Austin, 108 E. Dean Keeton Stop
A8000, Austin, TX, 78712-1043, and a fellow at the Carnegie
Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching; dyeager@utexas.edu. His
research focuses on adolescent development, psychological intervention, and psychological measurement.

Manuscript received June 10, 2014
Revisions received January 7, 2015, and March 19, 2015
Accepted March 23, 2015

May 2015    251
Downloaded from http://er.aera.net at UNIV OF PENNSYLVANIA on May 13, 2015

View publication stats

See	discussions,	stats,	and	author	profiles	for	this	publication	at:	https://www.researchgate.net/publication/317554274

Assessing	interpretations	of	experienced	ease
and	difficulty	as	motivational	constructs.
Article	·	June	2017
DOI:	10.1037/mot0000055

CITATIONS

READS

2

119

2	authors:
Oliver	Fisher

Daphna	Oyserman

University	of	Southern	California

University	of	Southern	California

5	PUBLICATIONS			3	CITATIONS			

217	PUBLICATIONS			11,582	CITATIONS			

SEE	PROFILE

SEE	PROFILE

Some	of	the	authors	of	this	publication	are	also	working	on	these	related	projects:

Identity-based	motivation	View	project

Social	Issues	and	Policy	Review	View	project

All	content	following	this	page	was	uploaded	by	Daphna	Oyserman	on	18	June	2017.
The	user	has	requested	enhancement	of	the	downloaded	file.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 1
Assessing Interpretations of Experienced Ease and Difficulty as Motivational Constructs
Oliver Fisher and Daphna Oyserman
University of Southern California

UNCORRECTED MS for: Fisher, O. & Oyserman, D. (2017). Assessing
interpretations of experienced ease and difficulty as motivational
constructs. Motivational Science, 3(2), 133-163. DOI 10.1037/mot0000055

Author note: Corresponding author email: oyserman@usc.edu, mailing address: University of
Southern California, Dornsife Mind and Society Center, 635 Downey Way
Verna & Peter Dauterive Hall, Suite 205, Los Angeles, CA 90089-3333. We thank the IBM lab
for all their helpful comments, Stephen Read and Norbert Schwarz for their comments on earlier
drafts, the University of Southern California, Mind and Society Center for funding, and all our
research participants without whom no study is possible.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 2
Abstract
Are people motivated by ease and sapped by difficulty, or the reverse, does ease undermine
motivation while difficulty bolsters it? Following identity-based motivation theory, whether ease
or difficulty bolsters or undermines motivation depends on which lay theory of ease or difficulty
is accessible in the moment. Experienced ease can imply that something is "possible for me" in
part because the odds of success are high, or that something is "not worth my time" in part
because the task is of low value. Experienced difficulty can imply that something is "important
for me" the task is valued, or that something is "impossible for me" as odds of success are low
for "me" or "us". We developed ease-as-possibility, ease-as-triviality, difficulty-as-importance,
and difficulty-as-impossibility measures to assess individual differences in endorsement of these
lay theories (N=963). We tested (N=200) convergent and discriminant validity with other
measures of motivation: self-efficacy, locus of control, growth, grit, mental toughness,
prevention and promotion regulatory focus, and construal level. We documented predictive
validity by showing that performance on a cognitive reasoning task correlates with ease-aspossibility, ease-as-triviality, and difficulty-as-impossibility (N=183). Ease-as-possibility, easeas-triviality, difficulty-as-importance, and difficulty-as-impossibility supplement other measures
of motivation, yielding new insight into motivational processes. These measures can be used in
addition to other tools, including priming and implicit assessment.
Word count = 211
Key words: Identity-based motivation, motivation, regulatory focus, grit, growth mindset,
cognitive reflective task, self-efficacy, locus of control, mental toughness

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 3
Assessing Interpretations of Experienced Ease and Difficulty as Motivational Constructs
Everyday life, indeed, almost anything a person does, can feel easy or difficult; people may or
may not infer something from these feelings, but often do. At the same time, since life’s course is
uncertain and people cannot fully know their capacities at each juncture along the way, what a
particular experience of ease or difficulty implies for who one is now and for who one might
become in the future is not certain. Experienced ease might signify that succeeding at a task is
likely and possible, a “me” thing to do, or that though possible, it is trivial and hence “not worth
my time, not for me.” Experienced difficulty might signify low odds of success, that succeeding
at a task is impossible for “me” and hence “just not worth my time” or that no matter the odds,
the task is an important and valued one, “no pain, no gain” and hence a “me” thing to do.
Identity-based motivation theory predicts that people’s attributions about what experienced ease
and difficulty imply are a function of which identities come to mind and what these identities
seem to imply in context for action and meaning-making (Oyserman, 2007, 2009). Task-related
motivation could be bolstered or undermined as a consequence of either ease or difficulty
depending on whether an odds (possible for me, impossible for me) or a value (important for me,
trivial for me) attribution is brought to bear in making sense of one’s experience. Yet, without
measures of these attributions of ease (ease-as-possibility, ease-as-triviality) and difficulty
(difficulty-as-importance, difficulty-as-impossibility), it is not possible to know how these lay
theories relate to other measures of motivation.
In the current studies, we address this gap in three steps. First, we develop measures of lay
theories of what experienced ease and difficulty imply. Then we demonstrate convergent and
discriminant validity with other measures of motivation and finally we turn to predictive validity.
We show that how much each lay theory of ease and difficulty is endorsed significantly

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 4
correlates with performance on a cognitive task requiring noticing that rule-based, systematic
reasoning is required.
Metacognition and Identity-based Motivation
A lay theories formulation implies that thinking involves both content (what is on one’s
mind) and interpretation of metacognitive experience (the meaning attributed to experienced ease
and difficulty while thinking). A large body of work demonstrates that people make inferences
based on their metacognitive experiences unless given reason not to, even if they could draw on
otherwise relevant content (for reviews, Oppenheimer, 2008; Schwarz, 2015). The lay theories
that people hold, whether chronically or momentarily activated by situational cues, influence
how metacognitive experience is interpreted (Oppenheimer, 2008; Reber & Schwarz, 1999;
Reber, Winkielman, & Schwarz, 1998; Rhodes, 2006; Schwarz, 2015). These lay theories often
do not feel like theories at all, but rather like spontaneous natural observations of reality itself
(sometimes termed naïve realism, Griffin & Ross, 1991). Identity-based motivation theory
provides a theoretical framework for how this works in the domain of identity, predicting that
people are motivated to act and interpret their experiences in ways that feel congruent with their
identities (Oyserman, 2007). At the same time, which identities come to mind and what these
identities are taken to mean and imply for behavior and interpretation of experience is
dynamically constructed in the moment (Oyserman, 2015).
Experienced difficulty can imply that one’s odds of success are low, with experienced
difficulty implying impossibility: “I don’t know this (or cannot learn it), this is not for me.” This
lay theory seems common. For example, presumably because they cannot shake their lay theory
of experienced difficulty as implying “not for me,” people are not motivated to use learning
strategies they experience as difficult even when shown that these difficult strategies are more

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 5
effective for learning (Karpicke, Butler, & Roediger, 2009; Kornell & Bjork, 2008; Yan, Bjork,
& Bjork, 2016). Experienced difficulty can also imply that one values the task, with experienced
difficulty implying importance: “I really care about this, ‘no pain, no gain,’ this is for me.” This
interpretation is less common, as shown in an analysis of word usage in the English-language
(Yan & Oyserman, 2017). However, students can be easily guided to adopt this lay theory,
reporting more centrality of academics in their current self-concept (Smith & Oyserman, 2015)
and their future possible selves (Aelenei, Lewis, & Oyserman, 2017) after being led to consider
that difficulty means importance. The opposite is also true: guiding students to imagine their
academic future selves increases their endorsement of a difficulty-as-importance lay theory
(Oyserman, Destin, & Novin, 2015).
It is not just one’s interpretation of experienced difficulty that matters; interpretation of
experienced ease matters as well. Experienced ease can imply something about one’s high odds
of success, with experienced ease implying possibility: “I know this (or can know it), I am (or
can become) good at this”. Indeed, the large body of work on judgments of learning suggests that
when people experience ease, they typically infer that they know the material or are doing well
on a test or exam (for a review Bjork, Dunlosky, & Kornell, 2013). At the same time,
experienced ease can also imply something about value, easy tasks may be of low value and
interpreted as trivial, just not worth one’s time, even if one is likely to be successful at them: “I
should not waste my time on this stuff, it is beneath me”. For example, gifted students are at risk
of disengaging and underperforming if they interpret their experienced ease in learning as
implying that schoolwork is so easy as to be trivial and not worth their time (Kanevsky &
Keighley, 2003).

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 6
However, the evidence that lay theories of what ease and difficulty imply for oneself
matter for motivation is mostly indirect because lay theories themselves are not directly assessed.
Instead, researchers have used two indirect routes. One route is to induce an experience of ease
or difficulty on an unrelated task and show that this carries over to judgments about identity
(e.g., Oyserman, Fryberg, Yoder, 2007; Oyserman, 2007). The other route is to make a specific
lay theory of what ease or difficulty implies momentarily accessible and document change in
identity and task-related motivation (e.g., Elmore, Oyserman, Smith, & Novin, 2016; Lewis &
Earl, in press; Smith & Oyserman, 2015).
Consider first studies that induce an unrelated experience of ease or difficulty and test
downstream consequences for identity. For example, in one study, adults rated themselves as
more invested in politics after being given easy-to-answer rather than difficult-to-answer
political knowledge questions (Schwarz & Schuman, 1997). In another study, participants rated
healthy living strategies as more likely to improve their own longevity after being given an easyto-answer rather than a difficult-to-answer unrelated question about their racial-ethnic group
(Oyserman et al., 2007). Those induced to experience difficulty on the preceding unrelated
question rated strategies for healthy living as less effective than those who were not induced to
experience difficulty. This main effect was moderated by beliefs about in-group identity. Though
all participants in the difficult condition rated the question as difficult, subsequent judgment of
the effectiveness of strategies for healthy living for one’s own longevity was only undermined
among participants who believed that their in-group did not engage in healthy habits (Oyserman
et al., 2007). The results of these studies suggest that participants take their experience of ease or
difficulty in answering a prior unrelated question and use their interpretation of their ease or
difficulty (based on the lay theory they apply) in making subsequent judgments about

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 7
themselves. Though which lay theory is being used is not assessed, results imply that accessible
lay theories link task to identity. The problem here is that the author is making an inference about
the lay theory participants are using and whether or not the inference is correct is not testable.
This particular limitation is addressed in the other indirect route linking identity and lay
theory of ease and difficulty, which is making a specific lay theory accessible and documenting
its consequences for identity and motivation (e.g., Elmore et al., 2016; Lewis & Earl, in press;
Smith & Oyserman, 2015). This is done by having participants read and rate their agreement or
disagreement with a biased scale, one that presents only the notion that experienced difficulty
implies impossibility or only the notion that experienced difficulty implies task importance. The
effect of bringing the lay theory to mind on subsequent identity and task-related motivation is
tested by comparing identity, motivation and performance across participants randomized to be
exposed to one or another of the lay theories. For example, in one set of studies, compared to
college students guided to use a lay theory that difficulty implies impossibility, college students
guided to use a lay theory that difficulty implies importance were significantly more likely to
describe academics as central to their current identity and performed better on a standardized
intelligence test (Smith & Oyserman, 2015). This effect on performance was replicated with
middle school students (Elmore et al., 2016). Similarly, Lewis and Earl (in press) showed that
dieters guided to use a lay theory that difficulty implies importance felt significantly less tempted
to continue snacking compared to dieters guided to use a lay theory that difficulty implies
impossibility. Though clear as to which lay theory is on the mind, these studies do not address
the question of how much each is endorsed or how they relate to one another.
However, in spite of these limitations, the results of these studies show the consequences
of lay theories. These results are important because they demonstrate that an upstream

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 8
experience of ease or difficulty can have downstream consequences on ostensibly separate
downstream judgments. Moreover, results show that it is not the ease or difficulty itself, but what
that ease or difficulty is taken to mean that matters. Some lay theories yield an estimate of the
odds of success, other lay theories yield an estimate of the value of success difficulty-asimportance.
As detailed next, there are a number of ways in which our lay theories focus is distinct
from the focus of expectancy-value theory (e.g., Atkinson, 1964; Wigfield & Eccles, 2000).
First, expectancy-value theory focuses on how objective features of task difficulty translate into
an expectation of success (Atkinson, 1964; Brehm & Self, 1989). In contrast, our lay theories
framework focuses instead on interpretation of subjective experience. Results of studies such as
the ones we summarize above show that sometimes task-related motivation is based on
interpretation of a metacognitive experience of ease or difficulty that is not related to the task but
is carried over and used as input as to the value or odds of the task itself. Second, expectancyvalue theory operationalizes motivation as a product of expectancy and value with highest
motivation when odds (expectations of success) and value are high (Atkinson, 1964; Wigfield &
Eccles, 2000). In contrast, our lay theories framework focuses on the impact of odds and value
separately with the implication that motivation is not always a result of the product of
expectancy x value. Our lay theories framework also predicts that motivation (high or low) is
based on (high or low) odds sometimes and at other times on (high or low) value. Thus: Ease-aspossibility focuses on odds, difficulty-as-importance focuses on values, yet both are motivating
lay theories. At the same time: Ease-as-triviality focuses on value and difficulty-as-impossibility
focuses on odds and both are demotivating. Hence motivation can be the result of productive
(motivating) or unproductive (demotivating) lay theories of what experienced ease and difficulty

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 9
implies. Motivational consequences do not require that ease and difficulty be objective features
of the task or that a product of expectancy and value be obtained1.

Motivation, Motivational Style and Identity-based Motivation
A few studies directly measure endorsement of the lay theory that experienced difficulty
signals task importance and the lay theory that experienced difficulty signals task impossibility
(Aelenei et al., 2017; Oyserman, Novin, Elmore, & Smith, 2017). In these studies, how much
people endorse one lay theory is not very correlated with how much they endorse another,
implying that each is a separate lay theory rather than be two sides of a single theory. Moreover,
these studies find that on average, people agree with the difficulty-as-importance lay theory and
disagree with the difficulty-as-impossibility lay theory. There is also some indication that low
place in social hierarchy (e.g., minority status, low education) is associated with less
endorsement of the difficulty-as-importance lay theory that experienced difficulty implies task
importance (Aelenei et al., 2017).
However, the broader question of how lay theories relate to other measures of motivation
and motivational style and whether assessed lay theories yield the same pattern of effects as
priming studies has not yet been addressed. To make the task more manageable, in the current
study we parsed measures of motivation and motivational style to three groups, which we termed

1

For different reasons, Brehms’ Motivational Intensity (e.g., Brehm & Self, 1989) and Higgins’
Regulatory Focus (e.g., Higgins & Cornwell, 2016) also make this point. Brehms’ Motivational
Intensity Theory predicts and shows that lowering odds of success, as operationalized by
increasing difficulty, increases rather than decreases motivation up to the point that the task
becomes impossible or that effort is no longer justified (e.g., Brehm & Self, 1989; Richter, et al.,
2016). Higgins’ Regulatory Focus Theory predicts and shows that sometimes low odds are
irrelevant to motivation --when one is obligated to act (ought self-focus) or is focused on
preventing failures (prevention focus), then motivation is not undermined by low odds of success
(e.g., Higgins & Cornwell, 2016; Scholer, et al., 2010).

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 10
measures of ‘motivation as experienced control’, measures of ‘motivation as resilient character’,
and measures of ‘motivation as goal formulation’. Below we articulate our predictions about the
relationship between measures in each group and lay theories of experienced ease and difficulty.
For clarity, we first describe the measures we clustered in each group and prior research showing
predictive, convergent and discriminant validity (inter-correlations) of measures of each group.
To interpret correlations, we used three rules-of-thumb: Cohen’s (1988) correlational size ruleof-thumb (.1=small, .3=moderate, .5=large); Campbell and Fiske’s (1959) convergent validity
rule-of-thumb (correlations significantly different from zero); and Kline’s (2011) discriminant
validity rule-of-thumb (correlations below .85). In each case, cut off refers to absolute value of a
correlation (e.g., it could be positive or negative). For ease of recall, we also briefly summarize
the predicted strength and direction of relationship between of our four lay theories of experience
and each of the other measures of motivation in Table 1.
Measures of motivation as experienced control (self-efficacy and locus of control).
Implicit in the idea of motivation is the notion that one could succeed if one tries enough
and in that sense, that desired outcomes are within one’s control – that if one tries, then one can
succeed. This idea is central to the concepts of self-efficacy (Bandura, 2006; 2012) and internal
locus of control (Rotter, 1966). Empirically, efficacy and locus of control are distinct but highly
associated (in meta-analyses, r=.56; Judge, Erez, Bono, & Thoresen, 2002). Theoretically, both
should be associated with more persistent task engagement since both focus on the likelihood of
success given engagement. Evidence supports this prediction in the domains of work and school;
work self-efficacy (Alessandri, Borgogni, Schaufeli, Caprara, & Consiglio, 2015), school selfefficacy (Bouffard-Bouchard, Parent, & Larivee, 1991; Komarraju & Nadler, 2013), and locus of
control (Judge & Bono, 2001) are each associated with better outcomes.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 11
We draw on the definition of efficacy and locus of control as one’s belief that one has
what it takes to attain an outcome (Bandura, 2006; Rotter, 1966), to make the following
straightforward predictions about the relationship with lay theories of ease and difficulty. We
predict that efficacy and locus of control will be positively associated with motivation-increasing
lay theory scores (difficulty-as-importance, ease-as-possibility) and negatively associated with
motivation-undermining lay theories scores (difficulty-as-impossibility, ease-as-triviality). In
terms of the strength of these associations, we predict weak associations with difficulty-asimportance and ease-as-triviality and moderate associations with difficulty-as-impossibility and
ease-as-possibility lay. Our rationale is that efficacy and locus of control do not necessarily
imply anything about the value of a task, and would therefore be weakly related to these lay
theories (difficulty-as-importance, ease-as-triviality). However, lay theories that emphasize the
odds of success (difficulty-as-impossibility, ease-as-possibility) would be moderately related to
belief that if one tries one could succeed, as this implies high odds of success.
Motivation as resilient character (grit, mental toughness, growth).
Just as self-efficacy and internal locus of control focus on one’s ability to change one’s
outcomes if one tries, growth mindset focuses on the belief that abilities can change as a result of
effort (e.g., Chiu, Hong, & Dweck, 1997; Dweck, 2000; Dweck, Chiu, & Hong, 1995; Job,
Dweck, & Walton, 2010). While grit (Crede, Tynan, & Harms, 2016; Duckworth, Peterson,
Matthews, & Kelly, 2007) and mental toughness (Andrews & Chen, 2014; Gucciardi, Hanton,
Gordon, Mallett, & Temby, 2015; Mahoney, Gucciardi, Ntoumanis, & Mallet, 2014) focus on
ability to stick with a goal. Theoretically as well as empirically, grit, mental toughness, and
growth mindset are associated but distinct constructs. Grit and mental toughness are moderately
positively correlated, r=.46 (Crede et al., 2016); correlations between grit and growth vary from

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 12
small to medium sized (r=.18, West et al., 2016; r=.16, Yeager et al., 2016; r=.35, Myers, Wang,
Black, Bugescu & Hoeft, 2016). Each is associated with better goal-focused attainment (e.g.,
Grit: Duckworth & Gross, 2014; Eskries-Winkler, Schulman, Beal, & Duckworth, 2014; Mental
Toughness: Nicholls, Polman, Levy, & Blackhouse, 2008; Gucciardi et al., 2015; Growth
mindset: Burnette, O’Boyle, VanEpps, Pollack, & Finkel, 2013; Dweck, 2000; Job et al., 2010).
We draw on the definition of growth mindsets as belief that one is able to change
(Dweck, 2000) to make the following straightforward predictions about the relationships with lay
theories of ease and difficulty. We predict that growth mindsets will be positively associated
with motivation-increasing lay theory scores (difficulty-as-importance, ease-as-possibility) and
negatively associated with motivation-undermining lay theory scores (difficulty-as-impossibility,
ease-as-triviality). As regards to strength of associations, we predict weak associations with
difficulty-as-importance, ease-as-possibility, and ease-as-triviality and a moderate association
with difficulty-as-impossibility. Our rationale is that growth mindset does not address ease or
difficulty explicitly, therefore most associations will be weak with the exception of a moderate
predicted relationship between growth and difficulty-as-impossibility scores. We predict a
moderate correlation in this case because difficulty-as-impossibility implies that one should
disengage in response to difficulty, which is incongruent with the growth mindset belief that one
can change and overcome difficulty.
We draw on the definition of grit and mental toughness as valuing stick-to-it-ness and
sustained effort towards goals (Duckworth et al., 2007; Gucciardi et al., 2015) to make the
following straightforward predictions about the relationships with lay theories of ease and
difficulty. We predict that grit and mental toughness will be weakly positively associated with
motivation-bolstering lay theory scores (difficulty-as-importance, ease-as-possibility) and

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 13
moderately negatively associated with motivation-undermining lay theories scores (difficulty-asimpossibility, ease-as-triviality). Regarding strength of associations, our rationale for predicting
a weak association is that grit and mental toughness focus on stick-to-it-ness, which does not
necessarily mean that difficulty would imply importance or that ease would imply possibility.
Our rationale for predicting that any association no matter if weak will be positive is that higher
scores on each of these constructs are associated with positive outcomes. Hence, any relationship
that is found would likely be positive. With regard to our prediction of a moderate association
between difficulty-as-impossibility, ease-as-triviality lay theories and measures of grit or mental
toughness, the latter scores operationalize valuing stick-to-it-ness, which implies that one should
persevere towards goals, even when they feel difficult or are trivial. This is incongruent with
difficulty-as-impossibility and ease-as-triviality lay theories and would therefore suggest a
moderate negative relationship.
Motivation as goal formulation (regulatory focus and construal level).
Rather than focus on ability to make change and sustain effort, regulatory focus (Higgins,
1998) and construal-level (Trope & Liberman, 2010) theories examine the relationship between
motivation and how goals are formulated. Regulatory focus includes promotion-focus -motivation to move eagerly toward successes, and prevention-focus -- motivation to vigilantly
avoid failures (Frietas, Liberman, Salovey, & Higgins, 2002; Lanaj, Change, & Johnson, 2012).
Which regulatory focus works better depends on the situation; prevention-focused participants
start taking action sooner and are better able to attain goals if avoiding temptations is necessary
(Freitas et al., 2002). In contrast, promotion-focused participants are better able to attain goals if
distractions are not present (Freitas, Salovey, & Liberman, 2001). Construal level theory
distinguishes behaviors instantiated abstractly in terms of the value of the outcome (e.g.,

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 14
studying as learning the material) from behaviors instantiated concretely in terms of the specific
steps (e.g., studying as taking notes) involved to attain an outcome (Trope & Lieberman, 2003).
Research has shown that both abstract and concrete construal can improve motivation and
performance; a concrete construal is more effective for simpler tasks and an abstract construal is
more effective for more complex tasks or those that involve task switching (Freund & Hennecke,
2015; Schmeichel, Vohs, & Duke, 2011). Empirically regulatory focus and construal level are
linked; motivation increases when abstract construal is paired with promotion-framing and when
concrete construal is paired with prevention-framing (Lee, Keller, & Sternthal, 2010; White,
MacDonnel, & Dahl, 2011). In terms of measures, we did not find published studies correlating
construal level and regulatory focus scores, and the extent that promotion and prevention scores
correlate depends on the actual measures used (Haws, Dholakia, & Bearden, 2010; meta-analytic
r=.08; Lanaj, Chang, & Johnson, 2012).
We draw on the definition of promotion focus as eager focus on successfully attaining
means (Higgins, 1998) to make the following straightforward predictions about the relationships
with lay theories of ease and difficulty. We predict that promotion focus will be positively
associated with motivation-increasing lay theory scores (difficulty-as-importance, ease-aspossibility) and negatively associated with motivation-undermining lay theories scores
(difficulty-as-impossibility, ease-as-triviality). With regard to strength of association, we predict
weak associations with lay theories of difficulty and moderate association with lay theories of
ease. Our rationale is that promotion focus does not address experienced difficulty, hence we
predict weak associations with lay theories of experienced difficulty. We expect moderate
associations between promotion focus and lay theories of experienced ease as detailed next. We
predict a positive association between promotion focus and ease-as-possibility since eagerness to

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 15
attain success (promotion) and increased engagement after experiencing ease (ease-aspossibility) both should encourage engagement. We predict a negative association between
promotion focus and ease-as-triviality since eagerness to attain success (promotion) should
increase engagement and devaluing ease (ease-as-triviality) should decrease engagement after
experiencing ease, respectively.
We draw on the definition of prevention focus as vigilant guarding from failures
(Higgins, 1998) to make the following straightforward predictions. Prevention focus will be
positively associated with motivation-increasing lay theory scores (difficulty-as-importance,
ease-as-possibility) and negatively associated with motivation-undermining lay theories scores
(difficulty-as-impossibility, ease-as-triviality). We predict a weak association with difficulty-asimportance and ease-as-possibility and a moderate association with difficulty-as-impossibility
and ease-as-triviality. Our rationale is that prevention focus is about vigilance, which is
necessary no matter the odds of success and hence prevention focus should be associated with
rejecting those lay theories implying that engagement might not be worthwhile (difficulty-asimpossibility, ease-as-triviality). In contrast, prevention is less associated with concerns about
value and self-relevance (difficulty-as-importance, ease-as-possibility) since vigilance is not
contingent. Our predictions are in line with research showing that prevention focused individuals
prefer vigilant means to goal pursuit (Idson & Higgins, 2000; for a review Higgins & Cornwell,
2016), though we have no direct measure of this match and found none in the literature.
We draw on the definition of construal level as a focus on essential goals or on peripheral
means (Trope & Liberman, 2010) to make the following straightforward predictions. An abstract
construal will be moderately associated with difficulty-as-importance and with ease-as-triviality
scores, while a concrete construal will be moderately associated with difficulty-as-impossibility

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 16
and ease-as-possibility scores. We make these predictions because abstract construal focuses on
the essence and value of a task, therefore an abstract construal is likely to be associated with lay
theories that emphasize value (i.e. difficulty-as-importance; ease-as-triviality). In contrast,
concrete construal is concerned with the means needed to attain an outcome and would therefore
be associated with lay theories that emphasize odds of success (difficulty-as-impossibility, easeas-possibility).
CURRENT STUDIES
Reliable measures of lay theories of experienced ease and difficulty have not been
developed; as a consequence, convergent and discriminant validity with measures of motivation
and motivational style have not been assessed. Hence, in the current studies, we had three goals:
First, to develop reliable measures (Studies 1 to 5). Second, to examine convergent and
discriminant validity of these measures with other measures of motivation (Study 4). Third, to
place our lay theory measures in context by providing initial evidence of predictive validity. To
do so, we used a measure of cognitive style (Study 5) to bridge between our lay theory measures
and prior evidence from studies documenting indirectly that interpretation of experience matters
for cognitive performance (e.g., Elmore, et al., 2016; Smith & Oyserman, 2015).
As a first step, we revised existing lay theories of experienced difficulty measures
(Aelenei et al, 2017; Elmore et al., 2016; Oyserman, et al., 2015) to develop a set of items for lay
theories of experienced ease and difficulty. From this base, we developed 6-item measures (see
Table 2), verified factor structure and reliability, developed short form (4-item) measures,
verified reliability, and used the short form measures to assess convergent and discriminant
validity. We detail sample, procedure, and analyses plan next.
Samples

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 17
Sample information for Studies 1 to 5 is presented in Table 3. We chose our planned
sample size (N=200) for each study using the rule of thumb for factor analytic studies; that is that
there should be at least 10 times the number of subjects as the number of items (Everitt, 1975).
We maintained this sample size goal for our convergent, discriminant, and predictive validity
studies. We met our sample size goal (Study1 N=244, Study 2 N=204, Study 3 N=178, Study 4
N=200, Study 5 N=183) except when our subject pool allotment was somewhat under our goal
of 200 (Study 3 and 5). Participants from Amazon Mechanical Turk (mTurk) Workers were
compensated $0.45 (Studies 1, 2) or $1.20 (Study 4, due to longer time request). Participants
from subject pool were undergraduates and compensated with half an hour of participation credit
(Studies 3 and 5).
Procedure
Studies were programmed in Qualtrics. Participants were welcomed to “Answer a short
survey (~15 minutes) about how you interpret your daily experiences,” informed of the voluntary
and anonymous nature of the study, provided consent, rated their endorsement of statements, and
gave demographic information.
Lay theory of experienced ease and difficulty In Studies 1, 2, and 4 items were
presented first in two randomized blocks --one block included difficulty-as-importance and easeas-triviality items and the other block included difficulty-as-impossibility and ease-as-possibility
items. Items were randomized within blocks. To reduce rote responding, in Studies 1, 2, and 4
the two blocks were separated by a filler that included four unrelated statements about the future.
Filler items and a correlation matrix of all items are presented in the Supplemental Materials,
Table S1 and S2.2 In Studies 3 and 5, participants were in the subject pool so we did not add the

2

Fillers were not intended to correlate with experienced ease and difficulty and do not.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 18
interleaved filler blocks and instead randomized items across all four lay theories. In Study 5, the
predictive validity measure (performance task) preceded the lay theory items as detailed below.
Demographics were age, gender, race, education, and income (in that order). There were
two exceptions. First, in Study 1 a handling error meant that no demographics were collected.
Second, in Studies 3 and 5, participants were undergraduates –so we omitted questions about
their own education level (which would be invariant) and income (which would be meaningless).
Hence, we could explore demographics associates of responses to lay theories in Studies 2 and 4.
We combined the data from both studies in our descriptive analyses presented in Supplemental
Materials, Table S3.
Other measures of motivation (Study 4) were presented in randomized blocks after the
lay theory items, following the same method of randomizing items within blocks. Response
scales followed the original measures. Measures of motivation as experienced control were
Bandura’s work self-efficacy (8 items α= .93, Bandura, 2006) and Rotter’s locus of control (10
items α= .82, Rotter, 1966). Measures of motivation as resilient character were Duckworth’s
short-form grit (8 items, α= .89, Duckworth & Quinn, 2009), Gucciardi’s mental toughness (8
items, α= .89, Gucciardi et al., 2015), and Dweck’s growth mindset (8 items, α= .94, Dweck,
2000). Measures of motivation as goal formulation measures were: Lockwood, Jordan, and
Kunda’s (2002) operationalization of Higgins’ regulatory focus, promotion (6 items α= .75) and
prevention (6 items α= .92), and Vallacher and Wegner’s (1989) concrete vs. abstract construal
of goals (25 item Behavioral Identification Form α= .93).
Predictive validity was assessed through a performance task presented prior to the lay
theories of ease and difficulty measures. Prior studies showed effects of primed lay theory of
difficulty on various measures of academic performance (Elmore et al., 2016; Horowitz,

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 19
Sorensen, Yoder, & Oyserman, 2017; Oyserman et al., 2017; Smith & Oyserman; 2015) and
various measures of identity (Aelenei et al., 2017 et al., 2017; Oyserman et al., 2017; Smith &
Oyserman; 2015). Therefore, we assessed association with a general measure of sensitivity to
rule-based reasoning. We used a 12-item version of the Cognitive Reflective Task (Ackerman,
2014; Beaman, 2002; Frederick, 2005; Primi, Morsani, Ciesi, & Donati, 2015; Thompson &
Oppenheimer, 2016). The full set of items (percentage correct M=44.89, SD=22.88, α= .74) used
can be found in Table S4 the supplemental materials.
Analysis Plan
Measure development. We used exploratory (Study 1) and then confirmatory (Studies 25) factor analyses to address our first goal of developing brief measures of lay theories of
experienced ease and difficulty. Before conducting exploratory factor analysis, we tested for
factorability using the Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin Measure of Sampling Adequacy and Bartlett’s Test
of Sphericity (Bartlett, 1950; Kaiser, 1970). In Study 1 we chose maximum likelihood with an
oblique rotation (direct oblimin) as our exploratory factor analytic model (Fabrigar, Wegener,
MacCallum, & Strahan, 1999). This method allowed any factor structure to emerge and allowed
for correlations among factors. In Studies 2 to 5 we chose confirmatory factor analyses to test the
four-factor result of Study 1, using fixed factor scaling, setting the variance of each factor to 1,
and testing the extent each item loaded onto its respective factor. We contrasted a four-factor
solution (difficulty-as-importance, difficulty-as-impossibility, ease-as-triviality, ease-aspossibility) to the fit of a two-factor solution (likelihood –ease-as-possibility and difficulty-asimpossibility, and value –ease-as-triviality and difficulty-as-importance).
After establishing factor structure, we created lay theory scores and examined these
scores as follows. First, we examined whether each lay theory was measured with adequate

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 20
reliability, using George and Mallery’s (2003) rule of thumb that scale reliability is adequate at
Cronbach’s alpha >.70. Second, we examined whether each lay theory was endorsed (mean score
was significantly above the neutral point) or rejected (mean score was significantly below the
neutral point) on average, using single sample t-tests comparing response to neutral point. Third,
we examined the correlations among our lay theories of experienced ease and difficulty,
conducting a mini-meta analysis combining data across the five studies and using as a rule of
thumb Cohen’s (1988) cut offs. Finally, although our samples were not designed to provide a full
test of demographic associates, we conducted exploratory multiple regression analyses of
potential demographic associates of each lay theory score (presented in the Supplemental
Materials).
Convergent and discriminant validity. We used correlational analyses to address our
second goal of verifying convergent and discriminant validity (Campbell & Fiske, 1959; Kline,
2011). Convergent validity involves finding overlap in theoretically linked measures,
operationalized as a correlation significantly different from zero (Campbell & Fiske, 1959).
Discriminant validity involves finding that theoretically novel measures are distinct from related
ones, operationalized as correlations below .85 in absolute magnitude (Kline, 2011). We
followed recent construct development work (‘Grit’ Duckworth et al., 2007; ‘Internal-External
Motivation to Avoid Prejudice’, Major, Sawyer, & Kunstman, 2013) to set up our analyses. At
step one we calculated two mean absolute correlations, tested for the difference between these
correlations by examining their confidence intervals, and compared them using the above rules
of thumb for size of effect, convergent and discriminant validity. The first mean absolute
correlation was among the measures of motivation (i.e. self-efficacy, locus of control, grit,
mental toughness, growth mindset, regulatory focus, and construal level) and the second was

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 21
between our lay theory of experience measures and each of the measures of motivation. Having
completed this initial test, we replicated this comparison within each of the three groups of
measures of motivation and motivational style (‘motivation as experienced control’, ‘motivation
as resilient character’, and ‘motivational as goal formulation’). Step one analyses address the
core question of validity, which focuses on the absolute magnitude of correlation.
At step two, we shifted attention to distinctness of lay theories, addressed by examining
the relative magnitude of correlation. These analyses examine the distinctness of lay theories
from other measures of motivation by asking if the size of correlation between lay theories and
other measures of motivation differs from the size of correlation of measures of motivation with
one another. To address this question, we used Fisher’s r-to-z transformation with Steiger’s
(1980) correction for correlations coming from the same sample.
Predictive validity. We used correlational analyses to address our third goal of providing
initial evidence of predictive validity. Predictive validity involves finding a significant
correlation between predictor and proposed outcome variables (Cronbach & Meehl, 1955).
According to Cronbach and Meel (1955), predictive validity “is adequately described by the
coefficient, and a statement of the experimental and sampling conditions” (p. 283). We chose
academic performance (cognitive reflexive task) so that our correlational analyses would be
interpretable in light of prior experimental results using indirect assessment of the lay theory
measures being validated (e.g., Ravens Progressive Matrices, Smith & Oyserman, 2015).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Scale Development
Exploratory factor analyses Sampling adequacy score of .886 (above .5 suggests
factorability) and significant Sphericity score at p < .000 showed that data were factorable

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 22
(Bartlett, 1950; Kaiser, 1970). Kaiser’s Guttman retention criteria (Kaiser, 1960) and Cattell’s
scree plot test (Cattell, 1966) revealed a four-factor solution explaining 66% of total variance
(see Table 2). Each factor included items from one lay theory of experienced ease or difficulty
and item loading (partial regression coefficient) was always above .66. No items from one lay
theory factor loaded onto another lay theory factor (cross-loading was never above .20).
Exploratory Factor results support the use of four lay theory measures.
Confirmatory factor analyses In Studies 2 to 5 we replicated Study 1’s four-factor
solution (for factor loadings see Table 5 and for fit indices see Table 6). The four-factor solution
was a good fit across recommended indices of fit; Root Mean Square Error of Approximation
(RMSEA good fit is < .05), the Comparative Fit Index (CFI good fit is > .95), and the TuckerLewis Index (TLI good fit is > .95; Jackson, Gillaspy, & Purc-Stephenson, 2009; Hu & Bentler,
1999). As shown in Table 6, the two-factor solution was not an adequate fit to the data; none of
the fit indices reached criterion. Hence, results support the notion that people have four lay
theories relating to difficulty-as-importance, difficulty-as-impossibility, ease-as-triviality, and
ease-as-possibility. We allowed for but did not find alternative factor structures, for example we
did not find a lay theory about likelihood (ease-as-possibility and difficulty-as-impossibility) and
a lay theory about value (ease-as-triviality and difficulty-as-importance).
Scale reliability, means, and patterns of endorsement Scale reliabilities ranged from
0.76 to 0.95, above George and Mallery’s (2003) threshold for adequate reliability (Table 7 for
full descriptive information). We compared participant responses to a neutral score of 3.5.
Participants agreed that experienced difficulty implies importance (composite Study 1 to 5
M=4.10, SD=0.94; t(962)=19.73, p<0.000, 95% CI of difference [0.54, 0.66]) and that
experienced ease implies possibility (composite Study 1 to 5 M=4.93, SD=0.77; t(962)=57.46,

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 23
p<0.000, 95% CI of difference [1.37, 1.47]). They disagreed that experienced difficulty implies
impossibility (composite Study 1 to 5 M=2.59, SD=1.07; t(962)=-26.25, p<0.000, 95% CI of
difference [-0.98, -0.84]) and that experienced ease implies triviality (composite Study 1 to 5
M=2.61, SD=.95; t(962)=-29.06, p<0.000, 95% CI of difference [-0.95, -0.83]).
Scale correlations In addition to factor analyses, as summarized in Table 8, we
examined the correlation among the four lay theories of ease and difficulty and conducted a fixed
effects mini meta-analysis, using Comprehensive Meta-Analysis version 3 (Biostat) to examine
the pattern of correlations. Correlations are not necessarily significant in each study (Table 8 left
panel), but synthesized across studies (Table 8 right panel) are significant (ps< .000) and small in
size, except for the moderate-sized correlation between the lay theory that experienced ease
means triviality and the lay theory that experienced difficulty means impossibility. Correlations
are graphically displayed (Figure 1) as diamonds whose edges represent the lower and upper
bounds (95% confidence interval) and center represents the mean correlation. Results suggest
that each lay theory can be separately assessed and yields a distinct measure. The moderate sized
correlation between ease-as-triviality lay theory and difficulty-as-impossibility lay theory
suggests a possible unproductive interpretation pair in which both ease and difficulty is
demotivating.
Convergent and Discriminant Validity: Using Rules of Thumb
Across measures of motivation and motivational style We examined the absolute
mean correlation among self-efficacy, locus of control, grit, mental toughness, growth mindset,
promotion focus, prevention focus, and construal level (r(200)=0.39, 95% CI [0.27, 0.55]) and
the absolute mean correlation between these measures of motivation and the four lay theories
measures (r(200)=0.21, 95% CI [0.07, 0.35]). In each case, the lower bound of the confidence

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 24
interval provides evidence for convergent (> 0) validity and the upper bound of the confidence
interval provides evidence for discriminant (< .85) validity. Moreover, the confidence intervals
overlap, implying that the correlations among measures of motivation and between these
measures of motivation and lay theory measures are of the same magnitude. Hence, lay theories
of experienced ease and difficulty measures can be considered additions to other measures of
motivation rather than redundant with them – since these measures are not considered redundant
with one another.
Correlations across measures of motivation as experienced control Next we turned to
the correlations among the measures of motivation as experienced control, finding a medium-tolarge sized correlation between work self-efficacy and locus of control, r(200)=0.49, p<0.01,
95% CI [0.40, 0.68]. As presented in Table 9, all correlations between these measures and our
lay theory measures met criteria for discriminant and convergent validity, with two exceptions.
Locus of control is distinct from both difficulty-as-importance (r(200)=-0.01, p>0.05, 95% CI [0.15, 0.13]) and ease-as-possibility (r(200)=0.08, p>0.05, 95% CI [-0.06, 0.22]). In each case,
confidence intervals include 0 hence the criteria of r > 0 is not met, implying that difficulty-asimportance and ease-as-possibility lay theories do not have a common link with locus of control.
Correlations across measures of motivation as resilient character With regard to
correlations among measures of motivation as resilient character, we found a large-sized
correlation between grit and mental toughness (r(200)=0.68, p<0.01, 95% CI [0.60, 0.75]), and a
small-to-moderate-sized correlation between grit and growth mindset (r(200)=0.27, p<0.01, 95%
CI [0.14, 0.39]), and between mental toughness and growth mindset (r(200)=0.31, p<0.01, 95%
CI [0.18, 0.43]). As presented in Table 10, all correlations between these measures and our lay
theory measures met criteria for discriminant and convergent validity, with two exceptions.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 25
Growth mindset is distinct from difficulty-as-importance (r(200)=0.07, p>0.05, 95% CI [-0.07,
0.21]). Grit is distinct from ease-as-possibility (r(200)=0.09, p>0.05, 95% CI [-0.05, 0.22]). In
each case, confidence intervals include 0 hence the criteria of r > 0 is not met, implying that
difficulty-as-importance lay theory does not have a common link with growth mindset and that
ease-as-possibility lay theory does not have a common link with grit as measures of motivation.
Correlations across measures of motivation as goal formulation We examined
correlations among measures of motivation as goal formulation, finding a small-sized correlation
between prevention focus and construal level (r(200) = -0.13, p > 0.05, 95% CI [=-0.26, -0.01]),
and medium-sized correlations between promotion focus and construal level (r(200) = 0.36, p <
0.01, 95% CI [0.23, 0.48]), and between promotion and prevention focus (r(200) = -0.33, p <
0.01, 95% CI [-0.45, -0.20]). As presented in Table 11, correlations between these measures and
our lay theory measures met criteria for discriminant and convergent validity, with five
exceptions. Promotion focus is distinct from ease-as-triviality (r(200)=-0.08, p>0.05, 95% CI [0.22, 0.06]). Prevention focus is distinct from difficulty-as-importance (r(200)=0.03, p>0.05,
95% CI [-0.11, 0.17]) and ease-as-possibility (r(200)=0.00, p>0.05, 95% CI [-0.14, 0.14]).
Construal level is distinct from ease-as-possibility (r(200)=0.11, p>0.05, 95% CI [-0.03, 0.24])
and ease-as-triviality (r(200)=0.01, p>0.05, 95% CI [-0.13, 0.15]). In each case, confidence
intervals include 0 hence the criteria of r > 0 is not met, implying that ease-as-triviality lay
theory does not have a common link with promotion focus; difficulty-as-importance and ease-aspossibility lay theories do not have a common link with prevention focus, that ease-as-possibility
and ease-as-triviality lay theories do not have a common with construal level.
Convergent and Discriminant Validity: Differences in Magnitude of Correlations

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 26
Motivation as experienced control Results are presented graphically in the top panels of
Figures 2 and 3, and detailed in Table S5 in the Supplemental Materials. As can be seen, each of
the four lay theories of experienced ease and difficulty were each significantly less or as
correlated with efficacy and with locus of control than efficacy and locus of control were with
each other. This means that lay theories of ease-as-possibility, ease-as-triviality, difficulty-asimportance and difficulty-as-impossibility are both theoretically and likely also empirically
distinct from locus of control and efficacy, adding meaningfully to variance explained over and
above efficacy or locus of control.
Motivation as resilient character As presented graphically in the middle panels of
Figures 2 and 3, and detailed in Table S6 in the Supplemental Materials, ease-as-triviality, easeas-possibility and difficulty-as-importance were each significantly less or as correlated with
measures of motivation as resilient character as they were with each other. Findings differed
somewhat with regard to difficulty-as-impossibility. Difficulty-as-impossibility was significantly
more correlated with grit (r(200)=-0.54, p<0.01, 95% CI [-0.63, -0.43]) and with mental
toughness (r(200)=-0.47, p<0.01, 95% CI [-0.57, -0.36]) than growth mindset was with grit
(Z=2.16, p<0.01) or with mental toughness (Z=3.78, p<0.01).
This means that lay theories of ease-as-possibility, ease-as-triviality, and difficulty-asimportance are not only theoretically distinct but likely are also empirically distinct from grit,
growth, and mental toughness, adding meaningfully to variance explained over and above
growth, grit, and mental toughness. Difficulty-as-impossibility is both theoretically distinct and
also empirically distinct from growth mindset. While meeting criteria for discriminant validity, it
is less empirically distinct from lack of grit or lack of mental toughness.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 27
Motivation as goal formulation As presented graphically in the bottom panels of
Figures 2 and 3, and detailed in Table S7 in the Supplemental Materials, ease-as-triviality, easeas-possibility and difficulty-as-importance were each significantly less or as correlated with
measures of motivation as goal formulation as they were with each other. Findings differed
somewhat with regard to difficulty-as-impossibility. Here the correlation with prevention focus
(r(200)=0.49, p < 0.01, 95% CI [0.38, 0.59]) was greater in magnitude than the correlation
between prevention and promotion focus (Z = 2.22, p <0.05) and the correlation between
prevention focus and construal level (Z=4.40, p < 0.01).
This means that lay theories of ease-as-possibility, ease-as-triviality, and difficulty-asimportance are not only theoretically distinct but likely are also empirically distinct from
regulatory focus and construal level, adding meaningfully to variance explained over and above
these measures of goal formulation. While meeting criteria for discriminant validity, difficultyas-impossibility is less empirically distinct prevention focus than it is from promotion focus and
construal level.
Predictive Validity: Patterns of Correlation
Lastly we examined the predictive validity of our lay theories of ease and difficulty
measures by examining patterns of correlation with a performance on a cognitive reflexive task
and mean endorsement of ease-as-possibility, ease-as-triviality, difficulty-as-importance, and
difficulty-as-impossibility lay theories. Better performance on the cognitive-reflective task was
associated with higher ease-as-possibility (r(183)=0.20, p<0.01, 95% CI [0.06, 0.36]), lower
difficulty-as-impossibility (r(183)=-0.29, p<0.01, 95% CI [-0.49, -0.15]), and lower ease-astriviality (r(183)=-0.26, p<0.01, 95% CI [-0.39, -0.12]) lay theory endorsement. Cognitive

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 28
reflective task scores were not associated with endorsement of difficulty-as-importance (r(183)=-0.03, p>0.05, 95% CI [-0.17, 0.12]).
GENERAL DISCUSSION
Almost anything a person does can feel easy or difficult; people may or may not infer
something from these feelings, but they often do. To date, research has documented effects of the
lay theories people hold about what ease and difficulty imply indirectly by creating an
experience of ease or difficulty or by guiding participants to use a particular lay theory. To test
the effects of lay theories of what ease and difficulty imply directly requires a way to measure
lay theory endorsement. In the current studies, we developed short reliable measures of lay
theories of ease and difficulty and showed that each is a separate indicator. People separately
experience ease as implying possibility and as implying triviality; they separately experience
difficulty as implying importance and as implying impossibility. A meta-analysis across the five
studies showed that the correlations among the lay theories were of small size except for a
moderate correlation between difficulty-as-impossibility and ease-as-triviality lay theories,
implying that in some conditions, both ease and difficulty can undermine motivation.
We compared the correlation between each lay theory and other measures of motivation
and motivational style using rules of thumb for convergent and discriminant validity. We also
looked at the relative size of the correlation between each lay theory and measures of motivation
within three domains, which we labeled motivation as experienced control, motivation as
resilient character, and motivation as goal formulation. These analyses showed that lay theories
of ease and difficulty can be used in addition to other measures of motivation, adding to variance
explained. Two lay theories stood out as particularly distinct from other measures of motivation
– ease-as-possibility and difficulty-as-importance.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 29
We explored demographic associates of endorsing lay theories of ease and difficulty
finding three: age, social status, and race. Older and younger participants showed the same
pattern of endorsing lay theories of ease-as-possibility and difficulty-as-importance and rejecting
lay theories of ease-as-triviality and difficulty-as-impossibility. However, older participants
agreed more with the ease-as-possibility lay theory and less with difficulty-as-importance,
difficulty-as-impossibility and difficulty-as-triviality lay theories. In addition, lower social status
was associated with more endorsement of difficulty-as-impossibility and stigmatized minority
racial-ethnic group membership was associated with higher endorsement of difficulty as
importance and ease as triviality.
To begin to establish predictive validity, we examined the correlations between our lay
theory measures and a measure academic performance. We picked academic performance
because effects found in studies that guided students to consider difficulty-as-importance or
difficulty-as-impossibility (e.g., Smith & Oyserman, 2015). We generally found the predicted
associations; endorsing ease-as-possibility and rejecting difficulty-as-impossibility and ease-astriviality were associated with better performance on the cognitive reflective task, a task
requiring noticing that a rule is required to solve a problem and correctly applying it. Since prior
studies did not include priming of ease lay theories, our current results provide important initial
evidence that interpreting ease matters for academic performance. However, prior studies
showed a positive effect of priming difficulty-as-importance on cognitive performance and
centrality of academics in identity (e.g., Smith & Oyserman, 2015). Yet when measured in the
current studies, we found no correlation between endorsing difficulty-as-importance and
performance. One possibility is that these differences are due to differences in the specific
performance and identity measures we used in this study compared to the prior studies.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 30
Implications and Connections
Each lay theory (ease-as-possibility, ease-as-triviality, difficulty-as-importance,
difficulty-as-impossibility) measure met criteria for discriminant validity and was less or no
more correlated with measures of motivation than these measures were with each other. Thus,
lay theories of experienced ease and difficulty add to research on efficacy, locus of control,
growth, grit, mental toughness, prevention focus, promotion focus, and construal level. This is
the case even for difficulty-as-impossibility, which, though meeting criteria for discriminant
validity, had relatively higher correlations with lack of grit, lack of mental toughness, and with
higher prevention focus. The implication is that one way in which lack of grit and lack of mental
toughness matter is via a difficulty-as-impossibility lay theory, if something is impossible, there
is no point persisting after all. With regard to prevention focus, the implication is that one way
that vigilant guarding against failure might be attained is by being sensitive to the possibility that
difficulty implies impossibility. Beyond value from fit explanations (Higgins, 2005; Mann,
Sherman, & Updegraff, 2004), the association of prevention focus with difficulty-asimpossibility beliefs might explain why prevention focus has been found to be helpful in risky
contexts (e.g., Scholer, Stroessner, & Higgins, 2008; Scholer et al., 2010; for a review Scholer &
Higgins, 2013). Risky contexts may be failure-likely settings, knowing when to switch attention
to something else could be useful in these settings – for example when the cost of switching is
low and the cost of staying on task is high.
By developing and validating short reliable measures of ease-as-possibility, ease-astriviality, difficulty-as-importance, and difficulty-as-impossibility, we set the stage for research
examining when experiences of ease and difficulty are motivating and when they are
demotivating. Having brief measures is likely to be helpful in understanding seemingly

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 31
conflicting findings about experienced ease and difficulty. For example, having measures of
ease-as-possibility and ease-as-triviality allows for studies to understand why experienced ease is
associated both with feelings of mastery (Koriat, Ma’ayan, & Nussinson, 2006) and with feelings
of boredom and disengagement from schoolwork (Kanevsky & Keighley, 2003). Similarly,
having brief measures is likely to be helpful in understanding parallel effects of experienced
difficulty as implying both importance and impossibility. The small negative correlation between
the measures implies that on average, people hold both lay theories in mind. This is consistent
with evidence that people can focus on one lay theory or the other depending on contextual cues
(Aelenei et al., 2017; Elmore et al., 2016; Smith & Oyserman, 2015). Moreover, having
measures adds to the research toolkit, complementing priming methods and implicit association
methods (O’Donnell & Oyserman, 2017). For some purposes, explicit endorsement may be
useful, for other purposes, salient lay theory may matter, separate from its endorsement (e.g.,
Oyserman et al., 2017).
Our results are important for research on the motivational consequences of lay theories of
experienced ease and difficulty for learning, judgment and identity-based motivation. With
regard to learning and judgment, previous research has focused on creating conditions in which
ease or difficulty while thinking is likely to be experienced and inferred from results what the
likely inferences might have been (Bjork et al. 2013; Schwarz, 2015). In the context of research
on judgments of learning for example, people often use experienced ease and difficulty to infer
the likelihood of remembering some information that has been studied for a future test (for a
review Bjork et al., 2013). Following an ease-as-possibility lay theory, ease is often incorrectly
interpreted as meaning that one has already learned or mastered the work (Koriat et al., 2006;
Bjork et al., 2013). Following a difficulty-as-impossibility lay theory, students often reject

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 32
attempts to teach them to use more difficult but more effective study strategies (Yan et al., 2016).
By adding measures of ease-as-triviality and difficulty-as-importance, learning researchers can
expand their focus.
More generally, by providing measures of lay theories of experienced ease and difficulty,
our work provides tools to test the circumstances in which experienced ease and difficulty are
likely to lead to better task-related motivation and outcomes. Research to date highlights two
possible venues for future research. The first venue focuses on difference in the structure of
tasks. Thus, rule-based tasks such as many tasks in academic contexts are likely to benefit from
not interpreting experienced difficulty as impossibility but instead as importance and hence
increasing effort in the form of more time on task, when the task feels difficult. In contrast,
insight-based tasks such as creativity tasks or associative reasoning task may not benefit from
spending more time and may be more efficiently handled when experienced difficulty is
understood as meaning impossibility and attention shifted to something else (for relevant
research, see Ackerman, 2014). The second venue focuses on lifespan and other forces
influencing the relative benefits of sticking to a self-relevant goal vs. changing course. While
researchers typically focus on the ability to stick to a goal, age, physical and mental health,
among other factors may make letting go of a self-relevant goal a necessity (e.g., King & Raspin,
2004; Pizzolato, 2007). By freeing one’s energy to develop a new goal, a difficulty-asimpossibility lay theory may be productive in situations in which goals are actually impossible or
unattainable (for a review Wrosch, 2010).
Limitations and Future Directions
We developed brief reliable measures of lay theories of what ease and difficulty imply
and examined their convergent and discriminant validity, showing that people hold four lay

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 33
theories which seem distinct from one another. Our participants were the groups commonly used
in psychological research using measures of motivation -- MTurk and college students. This was
a reasonable place to start. That said, understanding how our lay theories of ease and difficulty
measures function across a broader range of age, economic status, and cultural backgrounds is an
important next step. More research involving economically and socially diverse groups and other
measures of social status (e.g. Piff, Kraus, Cote, Cheng, & Keltner, 2010) is needed to obtain a
better estimate of the relationship between chronic endorsement of motivating (ease-aspossibility, difficulty-as-importance) and demotivating (ease-as-triviality, difficulty-asimpossibility) lay theories of experienced ease and difficulty and socio-economic status.
Similarly, we used one set of common theories of motivation and one set of measures to
operationalize each; future research could test links to other motivating frames and could use
other measures of the theories we currently used since each might be limited (e.g. Haws et al.,
2010 on our measures of regulatory focus).
Rather than a single lay theory of ease versus difficulty or a set of lay theories of value
and of expectancy, we found evidence that people hold four distinct lay theories, ease-aspossibility, ease-as-triviality, difficulty-as-importance, and difficulty-as-impossibility.
Endorsement of one lay theory had only small overlap with endorsement of another (correlations
were small in magnitude), with the exception of a moderate-sized correlation between endorsing
difficulty-as-impossibility and ease-as-triviality lay theories. There are a number of implications
of the finding that people hold four separate lay theories about their experienced ease and
difficulty and each is worthy of future research. The first implication of finding four separate lay
theories is that at least in some circumstances, both ease and difficulty can be demotivating, just
as both can be motivating. That difficulty can be motivating is consistent with Motivation

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 34
Intensity Theory, which states that increased difficulty leads to increased motivation until the
difficulty becomes overwhelming or the value of engagement is no longer worth the effort (for
reviews Brehm & Self, 1989; Richter et al., 2016). Indeed, as summarized by Richter and
colleagues, difficulty does show this pattern, when motivation is assessed as cardiovascular
physiological arousal, but not always when motivation is measured by performance or behavior
(for a review Richter et al., 2016). Our lay theory framework suggests that this variability is due
to (unassessed) differences in what experienced difficulty is taken to mean, performance effects
may be due to endorsing difficulty-as-importance or to rejecting difficulty-as-impossibility (e.g.,
Elmore et al., 2016; Horowitz et al., 2017). Cardiovascular arousal may also be compatible with
rejecting difficulty-as-importance or accepting difficulty-as-impossibility cues, resulting in no
necessarily consistent link from behavior to arousal. Which lay theory comes to mind in the
moment may be driving whether difficulty bolsters performance and not just arousal, but lay
theories are not assessed in these studies so it is hard to know.
The second implication of finding four separate lay theories of ease and difficulty is that
when one lay theory of experienced ease or difficulty is reinforced by experience, other lay
theories are unlikely to be influenced. Hence, even if a person is routinely reinforced for
interpreting difficulty as importance, that will not make them invulnerable to cues that difficulty
means impossibility. Reinforcement that ease means possibility does not make one invulnerable
to cues that ease means triviality. Indeed, identity-based motivation theory predicts a
bidirectional relationship between salient identities and salient lay theories of ease and difficulty
and assumes that what a salient identity implies is dynamically constructed in context
(Oyserman, 2015).

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 35
A third implication of finding four separate lay theories of ease and difficulty is that
whether a productive or unproductive interpretation of ease or of difficulty comes to mind is
likely to be function of the fit between accessible lay theory and experience. Just as fit between
how means and ends are framed matters within a regulatory focus frame (e.g. Higgins, 2005),
some form of fit may matter for whether experienced ease and difficulty are motivating or
demotivating. Strong adherence to the Protestant Ethic (Mirels & Garrett, 1971) might make it
more likely that ease will be dismissed as triviality for example, so that if difficulty is valued as
character building, people may be demotivated by ease, even when it could help them attain their
goals. Our correlational finding that performance is associated with endorsing ease-as-possibility
and rejecting ease-as-triviality is interesting, but in the moment, an easy task may or may not
evoke both lay theories.
A fourth implication of finding four separate lay theories of ease and difficulty is that
they can be added to other measures of motivation to better understand underlying processes. For
example, given the literature on the positive consequences of efficacy (Bandura, 2006), it would
be useful to examine the relative explanatory power of lay theories of ease and difficulty and
other measures of motivation, including grit and growth mindset on feelings of efficacy. Other
mediational analyses also are possible given our lay theory measures. For example, interventions
using growth mindset highlight that believing that ability can change influences outcomes
(Yeager & Dweck, 2012). While not yet tested, it is possible that positive effects of such
interventions are mediated by change in lay theories of experienced difficulty away from the
difficulty-as-impossibility lay theory (for detailed development of this idea, see Lewis &
Oyserman, in press; Oyserman & Lewis, 2017; Oyserman & Fisher, in press).

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 36
A final implication comes from our initial test of predictive validity. We found some
evidence that performance is associated with a particular pattern of endorsement of lay theories
of ease and difficulty: that ease means possibility (so one should “get going”) and not triviality
(“too easy to care”) and that difficulty does not mean impossibility (“do not quit”). We did not
find evidence that performance is associated with endorsing difficulty-as-importance in spite of
prior priming studies suggesting that guiding people to use this lay theory promotes performance
on difficult academic tasks (Aelenei et al., 2017; Elmore et al., 2016; Oyserman et al, 2017;
Smith & Oyserman, 2015). Perhaps our current task was not difficult enough for difficulty-asimportance to matter, or perhaps because people’s implicit and explicit beliefs about what
difficulty implies are not related (O’Donnell & Oyserman, 2017), theory on the mind matters.
This is a future venue of research deserving of further attention. Because a difficulty-asimportance lay theory has little overlap with other measures of motivation, focusing on this lay
theory can be of both theoretical and applied significance.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 37
References
Ackerman, R. (2014). The diminishing criterion model for metacognitive regulation of time
investment. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 143(3), 1349-1368.
Aelenei, C., Lewis, N. A., Jr., & Oyserman, D. (2017). No pain, no gain? Social demographic
correlates and identity consequences of interpreting experienced difficulty as
importance. Contemporary Educational Psychology.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cedpsych.2016.08.004
Alessandri, G., Borgogni, L., Schaufeli, W. B., Caprara, G. V., & Consiglio, C. (2015). From
positive orientation to job performance: The role of work engagement and self-efficacy
beliefs. Journal of Happiness Studies, 16, 767-788.
Andrews, P., & Chen, M. A. (2014). Gender differences in mental toughness and coping with
injury in runners. Journal of Athletic Enhancement 3, 1-5.
Atkinson, J. W. (1964). An introduction to motivation. Princeton, NJ: D. Van Nostrand.
Bandura, A. (2006). Guide for constructing self-efficacy scales. In F. Pajares & T. Urdan (Eds.),
Self-Efficacy Beliefs of Adolescents (pp. 307-337). Greenwich, CT: Information Age
Publishing.
Bandura, A. (2012). On the functional properties of perceived self-efficacy revisited. Journal of
Management, 38, 9-44.
Bartlett, M. S. (1950). Tests of significance in factor analysis. British Journal of Statistical
Psychology, 3, 77-85.
Beaman, C. P. (2002). Why are we good at detecting cheaters? A reply to Fodor. Cognition,
83(2), 215-220.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 38
Bjork, R. A., Dunlosky, J., & Kornell, N. (2013). Self-regulated learning: Beliefs, techniques,
and illusions. Annual Review of Psychology, 64, 417-444.
Bouffard-Bouchard, T., Parent, S., & Larivee, S. (1991). Influence of self-efficacy on selfregulation and performance among junior and senior high-school age students.
International Journal of Behavioral Development, 14, 153-164.
Brehm, J. W., & Self, E. A. (1989). The intensity of motivation. Annual Review of Psychology,
40, 109-131.
Burnette, J. L., O'Boyle, E. H., VanEpps, E. M., Pollack, J. M., & Finkel, E. J. (2013). Mind-sets
matter: A meta-analytic review of implicit theories and self-regulation. Psychological
Bulletin, 139, 655-701.
Campbell, D. T. & Fiske, D. W. (1959). Convergent and discriminant validation by the
multitrait-multimethod matrix. Psychological Bulletin, 56, 81-105.
Cattell, R. B. (1966). The scree test for the number of factors. Multivariate Behavioral Research,
1, 245-276.
Chiu, C., Hong, Y., & Dweck, C. S. (1997). Lay dispositionism and implicit theories of
personality. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 19-30.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Comprehensive Meta-Analysis (Version 3) [Computer software]. Englewood, NJ: Biostat.
Crede, M., Tynan, M. C., & Harms, D. (2016). Much ado about grit: A meta-analytic synthesis
of the grit literature. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/pspp0000102

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 39
Cronbach, L. J., & Meehl, P. E. (1995). Construct validity for psychological tests. Psychological
Bulletin, 52, 281-302.
Duckworth, A., & Gross, J. J. (2014). Self-control and grit related but separable determinants of
success. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 23(5), 319-325.
Duckworth, A. L., Peterson, C., Matthews, M. D., & Kelly, D. R. (2007). Grit: Perseverance and
passion for long-term goals. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 97, 10871101.
Duckworth, A. L. & Quinn, P. D. (2009). Development and validation of the short grit scale
(Grit-S). Journal of Personality Assessment,91(2), 166-174.
Dweck, C. S. (2000). Self-theories: Their Role in Motivation, Personality, and Development.
Edward Brothers: Lillington, NC.
Dweck, C. S., Chiu, C., & Hong, Y. (1995). Implicit theories and their role in judgments and
reactions: A word from two perspectives. Psychological Inquiry, 6, 267-285.
Elmore, K., Oyserman, D., Smith, G., & Novin., S. (2016). When the going gets tough:
Implications of reactance for interpretations of experienced difficulty in the classroom.
American Education Research Association Open. doi: 10.1177/2332858416664714
Eskreis-Winkler, L., Shulman, E. P., Beal, S. A., & Duckworth, A. L. (2014). The grit effect:
Predicting retention in the military, the workplace, school and marriage. Frontiers in
Psychology, 5, 1-12.
Everitt, S. (1975). Multivariate analysis: The need for data, and other problems. British Journal
of Psychiatry, 126, 237-240.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 40
Fabrigar, L. R., Wegener, D. T., MacCallum, R. C., & Strahan, E. J. (1999). Evaluating the use
of exploratory factor analysis in psychological research. Psychological Methods, 4, 272299.
Frederick, S. (2005). Cognitive reflection and decision making. Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 19(4), 25-42.
Freitas, A. L., Liberman, N., Salovey, P., & Higgins, E. T. (2002). When to begin? Regulatory
focus on initiating goal pursuit. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 121-130.
Freitas, A. L., Salovey, P., & Liberman, N. (2001). Abstract and concrete self-evaluative goals.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 410-412.
Freund, A. M., & Hennecke, M. (2015). On means and ends: The role of goal focus in successful
goal pursuit. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 24, 149-153.
George, D., & Mallery, P. (2003). SPSS for Windows Step by Step: A Simple Guide and
Reference. 11.0 update (4th ed.). Boston, MD: Allyn & Bacon.
Griffin, D. W., & Ross, L. (1991). Subjective construal, social inference, and human
misunderstanding. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 24, 319-359.
Gucciardi, D. F., Hanton, S., Gordon, S., Mallett, C. J., & Temby, P. (2015). The concept of
mental toughness: Tests of dimensionality, nomological network and traitness. Journal of
Personality, 83, 26-44.
Haws, K. L., Dholakia, U. M., & Bearden, W. O. (2010). An assessment of chronic regulatory
focus measures. Journal of Marketing Research, 47, 967-982.
Higgins, E. T. (1998). Promotion and prevention: Regulatory focus as a motivational principle.
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 30, 1-46.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 41
Higgins, E. T. (2005). Value from regulatory fit. Current Directions In Psychological
Science, 14(4), 209-213.
Higgins, E. T., & Cornwell, J. F. M. (2016). Securing foundations and advancing frontiers:
Prevention and promotion effects on judgment and decision making. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 136, 56-67.
Horowitz, E., Sorensen, N., Yoder, N., & Oyserman, D. (2017). Creating a pathway to success:
teachers can change their students’ identity-based motivation. Manuscript under editorial
review.
Hu, L.-T. & Bentler, P. M. (1999). Cutoff criteria for fit indexes in covariance structure analysis:
Conventional criteria versus new alternatives. Structural Equation Modeling, 6, 1-55.
Idson, L. C., & Higgins, E. T. (2000). How current feedback and chronic effectiveness influence
motivation: Everything to gain versus everything to lose. European Journal of Social
Psychology, 30, 583-592.
Jackson, D. L., Gillaspy, J. A., & Purc-Stephenson, R. (2009). Reporting practices in
confirmatory factor analysis: An overview and some recommendations. Psychological
Methods, 14, 6-23.
Job, V., Dweck, C. S., & Walton, G. M. (2010). Ego-depletion- Is it all in your head? Implicit
theories about willpower affect self-regulation. Psychological Science, 21, 1686-1693.
Judge, T. A., & Bono, J. E. (2001). Relationship of core self-evaluations traits—self-esteem,
generalized self-efficacy, locus of control, and emotional stability—with job satisfaction
and job performance: A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86, 80-92.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 42
Judge, T.A., Erez, A., Bono, J. E., & Thoresen, C. J. (2002). Are measures of self-esteem,
neuroticism, locus of control, and generalized self-efficacy indicators of a common core
construct? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 693-710.
Kaiser, H. F. (1960). The application of electronic computers to factor analysis. Educational and
Psychological Measurement, 20, 141-151.
Kaiser, H. F. (1970). A second generation little jiffy. Psychometrika, 35, 401-415.
Kanevsky, L. & Keighley, T. (2003). To produce or not to produce? Understanding boredom and
the honor in underachievement. Roeper Review, 26, 20-28.
Karpicke, J. D., Butler, A. C., & Roediger, H. (2009). Metacognitive strategies in student
learning: Do students practice retrieval when they study on their own? Memory, 17, 471479.
King, L. A., & Raspin, C. (2004). Lost and found possible selves, subjective well-being, and ego
development in divorced women. Journal of Personality, 72(3), 603-632.
Kline, R. B. (2011). Principles and Practice of Structural Equation Modeling. New York, NY:
Guilford Press.
Komarraju, M., & Nadler, D. (2013). Self-efficacy and academic achievement: Why do implicit
beliefs, goals, and effort regulation matter? Learning and Individual Differences, 25, 6772.
Koriat, A., Ma’ayn, H., & Nussinson, R. (2006). The intricate relationship between monitoring
and control in metacognition: Lessons for the cause-and-effect relation between
subjective experience and behavior. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 135,
36-69.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 43
Kornell, N., & Bjork, R. A. (2008). Learning concepts and categories: Is spacing the “enemy of
induction”? Psychological Science, 19, 585-592.
Lanaj, K., Chang, C.-H. “D.”, & Johnson, R. E. (2012). Regulatory focus and work-related
outcomes: A review and meta analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 5, 998-1034.
Lee, A. Y., Keller, P. A., & Sternthal, B. (2010). Value from regulatory construal fit: The
persuasive impact of fit between consumer goals and message concreteness. Journal of
Consumer Research, 36, 735-747.
Lewis Jr., N. & Oyserman, D. (in press). Using identity-based motivation to reduce health gaps
and disparities. Behavioral Science & Policy
Lewis, N. A., Jr., & Earl, A. (in press). Seeing more and eating less: effects of information
granularity on the perception and regulation of food consumption. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology.
Lockwood, P., Jordan, C. H., & Kunda, Z. (2002). Motivation by positive or negative role
models: Regulatory focus determines who will best inspire us. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 83, 854-864.
Mahoney, J. W., Gucciardi, D. F., Ntoumanis, N., & Mallet, C. J. (2014). Mental toughness in
sport: Motivational antecedents and associations with performance and psychological
health. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 36, 281-292.
Major, B., Sawyer, P. J., & Kunstman, J. W. (2013). Minority perceptions of whites’ motives for
responding without prejudice: The perceived internal and external motivation to avoid
prejudice scales. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 39, 401-414.
Mann, T., Sherman, D., & Updegraff, J. (2004). Dispositional motivations and message framing:
A test of the congruency hypothesis in college students. Health Psychology, 23, 330-334.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 44
Mirels, H. L., & Garrett, J. B. (1971). The Protestant ethic as a personality variable. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 36, 40-44.
Myers, C. A., Wang, C., Black, J. M., Bugescu, N., & Hoeft, F. (2016). The matter of
motivation: Striatal resting-state connectivity is dissociable between grit and growth
mindset. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 11, 1521-1527.
Nicholls, A. R., Polman, R. C., Levy, A. R., & Backhouse, S.H. (2008). Mental toughness,
optimism, pessimism, and coping among athletes. Personality and Individual
Differences, 644, 1182-1192.
Oppenheimer, D. M. (2008). The secret life of fluency. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12, 237241.
O’Donnell, S. C. & Oyserman, D. (2017). Assessing interpretations of experienced ease and
difficulty as motivational constructs: An Implicit Measure. Manuscript in preparation.
Oyserman, D. (2007). Social identity and self-regulation. In A. W. Kruglanski & E. T. Higgins
(Eds.), Social Psychology: Handbook of Basic Principles (pp. 432-453). New York, NY:
Guilford.
Oyserman, D. (2009). Identity-based motivation: Implications for action-readiness, proceduralreadiness, and consumer behavior. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 19, 250-260.
Oyserman, D. (2015). Pathways to Success through Identity-Based Motivation. New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.
Oyserman, D., Destin, M., & Novin, S. (2015). The context-sensitive future self: Possible selves
motivate in context, not otherwise, Self and Identity, 14(2), 173-188.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 45
Oyserman, D. & Fisher, O. (in press). Identity-based motivation and health: An identity-based
motivation and social stigma approach. In B. Major, J. F. Dovidio, and B. G. Link. The
Oxford Handbook of Discrimination, Stigma and Health, NY: Oxford University Press.
Oyserman, D., Fryberg, S. A., & Yoder, N. (2007). Identity-based motivation and health.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 93, 1011-1027.
Oyserman, D. & Lewis, N. (2017). Seeing the destination and the path: using identity-based
motivation to understand and reduce racial disparities in academic achievement. Social
Issues and Policy Review, 11, 159-194.
Oyserman, D., Novin, S., Elmore, K., & Smith, G. C. (2017). Interpretation of experienced
difficulty shapes identity, motivation, and performance. Manuscript under editorial
review.
Piff, P. K., Kraus, M. W., Cote, S., Cheng, B. H., & Keltner, D. (2010). Having less, giving
more: The influence of social class on prosocial behavior. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 99, 771-784.
Pizzolato, J. E. (2007). Impossible selves investigating students’ persistence decisions when their
career-possible selves border on impossible. Journal of Career Development, 33, 201223.
Primi, C., Morsanyi, K., Ciesi, F., Donati, M. A., & Hamilton, J. (2015). The development and
testing of a new version of the cognitive reflection test applying item response theory
(IRT). Journal of Behavioral Decision Making.
Reber, R., & Schwarz, N. (1999). Effects of perceptual fluency on judgments of truth.
Consciousness and Cognition, 8, 338-342.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 46
Reber, R., Winkielman, P., & Schwarz, N. (1998). Effects of perceptual fluency on affective
judgments. Psychological Science, 9, 45-48.
Rhodes, G. (2006). The evolution of facial attractiveness. Annual Review of Psychology, 57, 199226.
Richter, M., Gendolla, G. H. E., & Wright, R. A. (2016). Three decades of research on
motivational intensity theory: What we have learned about effort and what we still don’t
know. In A. J. Elliot (Ed.), Advances in Motivation Science, 149-186.
Rotter, J. B. (1966). Generalized expectances for internal versus external control of
reinforcement. Psychological Monographs, 80, 1-28.
Schmeichel, B. J., Vohs, K. D., & Duke, S. C. (2010). Self-control at high and low levels of
mental construal, Social Psychology and Personality Science, 2, 182-189.
Scholer, A. A., & Higgins, E. T. (2013). Dodging monsters and dancing with dreams: Success
and failure at different levels of approach and avoidance. Emotion Review, 5, 254-258.
Scholer, A. A., Stroessner, S. J., & Higgins, E. T. (2008). Responding to negativity: How a risky
tactic can serve a vigilant strategy. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 44, 767–
774.
Scholer, A. A., Zou, X., Fujita, K., Stroessner, S. J., & Higgins, E. T. (2010). When risk seeking
becomes a motivational necessity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 99,
215–231.
Schwarz, N. (2015). Metacognition. In M. Mikulincer & P.R. Shaver, (Eds.) APA Handbook of
Personality and Social Psychology: Attitudes and Social Cognition (Vol.1, pp. 203-229).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 47
Schwarz, N. & Schuman, H. (1997). Political knowledge, attribution, and inferred interest in
politics: The operation of buffer items. International Journal of Public Opinion
Research, 9, 191-195.
Smith, G. C. & Oyserman, D. (2015). Just not worth my time? Experienced difficulty and time
investment. Social Cognition, 33, 1-18.
Song, H., & Schwarz, N. (2008). If it’s hard to read, it’s hard to do: Processing fluency affects
effort prediction and motivation. Psychological Science, 19, 986-988.
Steiger, J. H. (1980). Tests for comparing elements of a correlation matrix. Psychological
Bulletin, 87, 245-251.
Thompson, K. S. & Oppenheimer, D. M. (2016). Investigating an alternate form of the cognitive
reflection test, Judgment and Decision Making, 11(1), 99-113.
Trope, Y. & Liberman, N. (2003). Temporal construal. Psychological Review, 110, 403-421.
Trope, Y. & Liberman, N. (2010). Construal-level theory of psychological distance.
Psychological Review, 117, 440-463.
West, M. R., Kraft, M. A., Finn, A. S., Martin, R. E., Duckworth, A. L., Gabrieli, C. F. O., &
Gabrieli, J. D. E. (2016). Promise and paradox: Measuring students’ non-cognitive skills
and the impact of schooling. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 38, 148-170.
Wigfield, A. & Eccles, J. S. (2000). Expectancy-value theory of motivation. Contemporary
Educational Psychology, 25, 68-81.
White, K., Macdonnell, R., & Dahl, D. W. (2011). It’s the mind-set that matters: The role of
construal level and message framing in influencing consumer efficacy and conservation
behaviors. Journal of Marketing Research, 11, 472-485.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 48
Wrosch, C. (2010). The self-regulation of unattainable goals and pathways to quality of life. In S.
Folkman (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Stress, Health, and Coping (pp. 319-333). New
York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Vallacher, R. R., & Wegner, D. M. (1989). Levels of personal agency: Individual variation in
action identification. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57, 660-671.
Yan, V. X., Bjork, E. L., & Bjork, R. A. (2016). On the difficulty of mending metacognitive
illusions: A priori theories, fluency effects, and misattributions of interleaving benefit.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 145, 918-933.
Yan, V. X. & Oyserman, D. (2017). Linking mindsets with toolsets: interpretations of
experienced difficulty matter for knowing how to learn. Manuscript under editorial
review.
Yeager, D. S., & Dweck, C. S. (2012). Mindsets that promote resilience: When students believe
that personal characteristics can be developed. Educational Psychologist, 47(4), 302-314.
Yeager, D. S., Romero, C., Paunesku, D., Hulleman, C. S., Schneider, B., Hinojosa, C., …
Dweck, C. S. (2016). Using design thinking to improve psychological interventions: The
case of the growth mindset during the transition to high school. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 108, 374-391.

Interpretation of Experienced Ease and Difficulty 49
Tables
Table 1.
Predicted Associations Between Lay Theories of Experience and Other Motivational Constructs
Difficulty-asEase-asMotivational Construct
Importance Impossibility Possibility Triviality
Efficacy, Locus of Control
+
+
Growth Mindset
+
+
Grit, Mental Toughness

+

-

+

Promotion Focus

+

-

+

Prevention Focus

+

-

+

a

Construal Level

+

-

+

Note: Direction of association is represented by a plus sign ‘+’ for positive and a minus sign ‘-’
for negative associations. Magnitude of association is represented by the size and color of the
plus ‘+’ or minus ‘-’ sign. Small size and grey color for small predicted magnitude; moderate
size and black color for moderate predicted magnitude We use Cohen’s (1988) rules of thumb

+,-

quantify predicted weak (r <.1; + , -), moderate (r <.3; + , -), and large (r <.5;
)
associations. Note that we predict no large associations between our lay theories and other
motivational constructs. aConstrual level is represented such that lower values are concrete and
larger values are abstract, such that a positive association implies that high lay theory scores
would be associated with a more abstract construal.

View publication stats

Running head: SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

1

New Evidence on Self-Affirmation Effects and Theorized Sources
of Heterogeneity from Large-scale Replications
Paul Hanselman, Christopher S. Rozek, Jeffrey Grigg,
and Geoffrey D. Borman

ACCEPTED FOR PUBLICATION AT JOURNAL OF EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

Author Note
Paul Hanselman, University of California, Irvine
Christopher S. Rozek, University of Chicago
Jeffrey Grigg, Johns Hopkins University
Geoffrey Borman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
We are grateful to Geoffrey Cohen for sharing implementation materials, and to Geoffrey Cohen,
Gregory Walton, Joshua Aronson, and Valerie Purdie-Vaughns for advice during the design of
this project. We appreciate helpful comments on previous versions of this manuscript from Greg
Duncan and Judy Harackiewicz, as well as seminar participants at the advisory board meeting of
the Irvine Network on Interventions in Development (January, 2015) and the Irvine Motivation
Meeting (January, 2015). Jaymes Pyne provided specific research assistance related to this paper.
Research reported in this paper was supported by: U.S. Department of Education, through Grant
R305A110136 to the University of Wisconsin, (PI: Geoffrey Borman) and Grant R305B120013
to the University of California, Irvine (PI: Greg Duncan); the Spencer Foundation Grant
201500044 (PI: Geoffrey Borman); and the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute Of Child
Health & Human Development of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number
P01HD065704 (PI: Greg Duncan). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and
does not necessarily represent the official views of the supporting agencies.
Address correspondence to Paul Hanselman, University of California, Irvine, 3200 Education
Irvine, CA 92697-5500.
Contact: paul.hanselman@uci.edu

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

2

Abstract
Brief, targeted self-affirmation writing exercises have recently been offered as a way to reduce
racial achievement gaps, but evidence about their effects in educational settings is mixed, leaving
ambiguity about the likely benefits of these strategies if implemented broadly. A key limitation
in interpreting these mixed results is that they come from studies conducted by different research
teams with different procedures in different settings; it is therefore impossible to isolate whether
different effects are the result of theorized heterogeneity, unidentified moderators, or
idiosyncratic features of the different studies. We addressed this limitation by conducting a wellpowered replication of self-affirmation in a setting where a previous large-scale field experiment
demonstrated significant positive impacts, using the same procedures. We found no evidence of
effects in this replication study and estimates were precise enough to reject benefits larger than
an effect size of 0.10. These null effects were significantly different from persistent benefits in
the prior study in the same setting, and extensive testing revealed that currently theorized
moderators of self-affirmation effects could not explain the difference. These results highlight
the potential fragility of self-affirmation in educational settings when implemented widely and
the need for new theory, measures, and evidence about the necessary conditions for selfaffirmation success.
Keywords: values affirmation, replication, stereotype threat, intervention, achievement gap,
scale-up, middle school

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

3

New Evidence on Self-Affirmation Effects and Theorized Sources of Heterogeneity from
Large-scale Replications
One potentially promising approach to reducing persistent racial/ethnic achievement gaps
is to tackle their social-psychological dimensions, including the negative consequences of
stereotype threat and other identity threats in school. Because identity threats have detrimental
consequences for marginalized groups in many academic settings (Steele, Spencer, & Aronson,
2002), such approaches can have substantial impacts. For instance, brief reflective writing
exercises conducted in school settings can provide large and lasting benefits for theoreticallythreatened groups, such as African American and Hispanic middle-school students (Cohen,
Garcia, Purdie-Vaughns, Apfel, & Brzustoski, 2009; Sherman et al., 2013), women in a college
physics course (Miyake et al., 2010), and first-generation college students (Harackiewicz et al.,
2014).
How robust are these effects? Although benefits of seemingly simple interventions
suggest great potential, researchers caution that these techniques are “not magic” (Yeager &
Walton, 2011). By their nature, the interventions target specific interactions between individuals
and their social context and, therefore, critical differences in intervention delivery, individual
students, or social contexts may lead to substantial variability in effectiveness. As a result, one
must gauge the impact of these interventions in diverse settings and, to the extent that there are
meaningful differences in effects, assess whether theorized moderators explain these differences.
If heterogeneous effects follow theoretically predictable patterns, then these interventions have a
clear role in improving educational outcomes and reducing achievement gaps. However, if
heterogeneity remains unpredictable, then the immediate value of these interventions is less
clear.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

4

Theorized heterogeneity also complicates the fundamental enterprise of independent
replication, which is increasingly recognized as necessary to build firm scientific understanding
in psychology as in other fields (Ioannidis, 2005; Ioannidis, 2012; Pashler & Harris, 2012). If the
impacts of social-psychological interventions depend on seemingly subtle differences in
delivery, individuals, and social contexts, then discrepant replication results may reflect
predictable differences in effectiveness across diverse settings. On the other hand, mixed results
may be due to unpredictable study-specific differences, such as unrecognized moderators or
sampling variation. This distinction is especially difficult to disentangle when studies are
conducted by different investigators and with different populations in different contexts. As a
result, initial replication efforts of affirmation interventions in educational settings—which
demonstrate success (e.g. Sherman et al., 2013), challenges (e.g. Kost-Smith et al., 2012), and
failure (e.g. Dee, 2015)—raise questions about both the size and variability of these effects when
implemented broadly. In particular, do theorized moderators explain differences in selfaffirmation benefits? This study provides unique evidence on this question by reporting on a new
large-scale test of self-affirmation effects and comparing these results to a previous effort in the
same setting.
Self-affirmation: Theory and Promise
This study is informed by theories of social identity threats, which create particular
challenges for members of marginalized social groups in school (Steele et al., 2002). For
instance, Black and Hispanic students are subject to stereotype threat in academic settings, in
which they face the threat of conforming to or being judged by negative stereotypes about their
racial/ethnic group (Steele & Aronson, 1995). The experience of stereotype and other identity
threats leads to poorer academic performance through a variety of psychological responses,

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

5

including stress, anxiety, and vigilance (Schmader, Johns, & Forbes, 2008), and may contribute
to longer term disengagement and a “downward spiral” of performance (Cohen & Garcia, 2008).
Since these stereotype threats uniquely apply to groups subject to negative academic stereotypes,
they may account for portions of the widening of racial achievement gaps in school.
Stereotype threats are pernicious because students are affected by virtue of membership
in a marginalized group (regardless of whether or not they endorse a negative stereotype, as long
as they are aware of it), and broad social stereotypes are difficult to change. Instead, the goal of
many social-psychological interventions is to reduce the harm that existing threats cause by
shifting how students view themselves and/or their social world (Wilson, 2011). The example we
consider is a set of brief writing exercises that ask students to reflect on meaningful personal
values, such as family, friends, music, or sports. Following their initial presentation (e.g. Cohen,
Garcia, Apfel, & Master, 2006; Cohen et al., 2009; Sherman et al., 2009), we refer to these
activities as self-affirmation interventions throughout this paper, reflecting the goal to allow
students to “reaffirm their self-integrity” (Cohen et al., 2006, p. 1307). Similar interventions have
also been described as “values affirmation” (e.g. Cook, Purdie-Vaughns, Garcia, & Cohen, 2012;
Harackiewicz et al., 2014; Shnabel, Purdie-Vaughns, Cook, Garcia, & Cohen, 2013).
Self-affirmation interventions are believed to restore an individual’s sense of worth in the
face of threats related to social identity, thus mitigating detrimental stress responses (Steele,
1988). Because individual identities are complex, individuals “can maintain an overall selfperception of worth and integrity by affirming some other aspect of the self, unrelated to their
group” (Sherman & Cohen, 2006, p. 206). Threats to academic identity experienced by minority
members in school can be muted by focusing attention on other specific aspects of identity
(Critcher & Dunning, 2015; Sherman & Cohen, 2006; Steele, 1988; Walton, Paunesku, &

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

6

Dweck, 2012). Reflection on important values provides a psychological buffer against the full
brunt of detrimental stereotype threats in school, and because of the potentially recursive nature
of threat and poor performance, subtle buffering early on may lead to substantial benefits over
time (Cohen & Garcia, 2008; Cohen et al., 2009; Taylor & Walton, 2011; Walton, 2014).
Geoffrey Cohen and his colleagues have developed these theoretical ideas alongside
specific classroom writing activities to promote self-affirmation via reflection on important
values. Each activity takes 15-20 minutes and is conducted by classroom teachers several times
during the school year; the timing emphasizes critical moments such as the beginning of the
school year and potentially stressful evaluative milestones. Consistent with theoretical
expectations, these activities did not significantly impact White students’ academic performance,
who likely experienced relatively little academic identity threat (Walton & Cohen, 2003).
However, the effects on grade point average for 7th grade African American and Hispanic
students were substantial and persistent (Cohen et al., 2006; Cohen et al., 2009; Cook et al.,
2012; Sherman et al., 2013). Remarkably, the benefits of the intervention reduced the racial
achievement gap in the targeted course by 40% (Cohen et al., 2006, p. 1307), which suggests
great potential for this approach to address educational disparities that are associated with
identity threat processes.
What mediates these effects? Critcher and Dunning (2015) presented recent laboratory
evidence for an “affirmation as perspective” model, in which self-affirmations “expand the
contents of the working concept—thus narrowing the scope of any threat” (p. 4). Working
concept refers to the salient identities that make up one’s self-concept in consciousness at any
point in time. When aspects of identity are threatened, working self-concept tends to constrict,
amplifying the negative experiences of that threat. However, if a broader working concept is

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

7

maintained, then threats associated with a specific aspect of identity are less salient. It stands to
reason that self-affirmation in school expands the contents of self-concept for students subject to
academic stereotypes, thus reducing attention to the threat and muting the stress responses that
lead to poorer performance.
Empirical tests of mediators in middle school settings have been mixed. Cook et al.
(2012) reported impacts of self-affirmation on Black students’ level and variability of sense of
belonging in school, which indicate effects on students’ construal of their social environments,
but the authors argued that these effects are “not a mechanism in the sense of mediation” (p.
483). Similarly, Sherman et al. (2013) reported impacts on higher levels of construal and a more
robust sense of social belonging, while Cohen et al. (2006) reported decreases on a measure of
cognitive activation of racial stereotype, yet neither found evidence that these effects mediated
the impact of self-affirmation. Shnabel et al. (2013) found that writing about social belonging
mediated some of the self-affirmation benefits; however, Tibbetts et al. (in press) did not
replicate this result in another setting and instead found that writing about independence
mediated some of the affirmation benefits.
The self-affirmation writing exercises have been implemented in at least four middle
school field settings beyond the original one. Figure 1 summarizes both the positive impacts
from early field trials within three schools (Cohen et al., 2006; Sherman et al., 2013) and smaller
and sometimes non-statistically significant estimates in large-scale, multi-school replications
(Borman, Grigg, & Hanselman, 2016; Dee, 2015).1 The latter are well-powered studies

1

The summary presented in Figure 1 should be viewed as an informal account of previous self-affirmation
impacts in middle school settings. A formal and more expansive meta-analysis will certainly be useful in the future
as more independent evidence emerges, but our specific purpose in collecting these estimates was to provide context
for the current study. We therefore focus only on studies in middle schools that report self-affirmation effects on
overall GPA relative to an alternate activity. These criteria rule out studies at other levels (e.g., Miyake et al., 2010),

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

8

conducted by independent research teams, and their results raise questions about the fundamental
sources of variability in self-affirmation effects. Unfortunately, many features of the research
settings varied in these studies and little implementation information is available to isolate the
impact of specific differences. For instance, the study conducted by Dee (2015) illustrates
multiple potentially relevant changes across research efforts. For one, it was conducted in
schools with substantial minority student populations; these are contexts where self-affirmation
may be less effective (Hanselman, Bruch, Gamoran, & Borman, 2014). For another, it recruited
an unusually representative sample of students (a 94% consent rate), which could account for
dampened impacts if the students not typically included in other studies benefit less from the
intervention. These preliminary results suggest the need for more precise consideration of where,
for whom, and under what conditions self-affirmation is beneficial.
Theoretical Moderators of Self-Affirmation Effects
Psychological theory posits that self-affirmation is beneficial in specific circumstances
(Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Yeager & Walton, 2011), highlighting the need to identify the
necessary and sufficient “preconditions” for its benefits in educational settings (Cohen et al.,
2006). Null results emphasize this point, since existing theory provides post hoc explanations but
not clear insight into when, where, and why self-affirmation might not have worked (e.g., see
Harackiewicz, Canning, Tibbetts, Priniski, & Hyde, in press). And of course if moderators were
well understood, then studies would likely not have been fielded in such unsuccessful contexts.

those that consider other outcomes (e.g., Cook et al., 2012, Study 1), and those without a non-self-affirmation
control group (e.g., Cook et al., 2012, Study 2). Similarly, we omit the study by Bowen, Wegmann, and Webber
(2013) because reported values do not include an overall estimate of impacts on GPA (that study reports offsetting
impacts on initial GPA and slope over time; inspection of their Table 3 and Figure 1 suggests this study would
contribute a small negative effect on overall GPA to our summary if included). We include detailed information
about the source of represented estimates in Appendix Table A1.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

9

In surveying potential self-affirmation moderators, the literature points to three relevant
domains: features of the delivery of the activities, individual characteristics of the participating
students, and aspects of the social context. First, specific features of the delivery of the brief selfaffirmation intervention are hypothesized to be necessary for students to benefit. For example,
Critcher, Dunning, and Armor (2010) found that self-affirmation exercises were only effective
when introduced before a threat or before participants became defensive in response to a threat,
which suggests that it is important to implement self-affirmation exercises before stressful events
in school in order to short-circuit negative recursive cycles (see also Cohen & Garcia, 2014;
Cook et al., 2012). Qualities of presentation that shape how students perceive the writing
activities—such as making participants aware that exercises are beneficial (Sherman et al., 2009)
or externally imposing affirmation (Silverman, Logel, & Cohen, 2013)—may mute selfaffirmation benefits. Conversely, researchers have argued that the activity is most beneficial
when presented as a normal classroom activity (Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Purdie-Vaughns et al.,
2009) and when promoting specific types of writing (e.g., Shnabel et al., 2013). Finally, the type
of control group used has also been suggested as an implementation-based moderator of the
effects of self-affirmation. The typical control group, which asks students to write about nonimportant values, has the potential to undermine students’ confidence if they write about
activities in which they have low ability whereas other control writing prompts, which are more
neutral or open-ended, might allow control participants to spontaneously affirm themselves
(McQueen & Klein, 2006).
Second, numerous individual difference variables have been hypothesized to make
students more vulnerable to stereotype threat and thus moderate the effects of self-affirmation,
including identifying with a negatively stereotyped group, being knowledgeable about self-

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

10

relevant negative stereotypes, and caring about doing well in school (Aronson, Lustina, Good,
Keough, & Steele, 1999; Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Shapiro & Neuberg, 2007). Therefore, while
all negatively stereotyped minority students might be helped by self-affirmation, subgroups that
are even more highly negatively stereotyped, such as Black males (Eagly & Kite, 1987; PurdieVaughns & Eibach, 2008; Sidanius & Pratto, 1999) or the lowest-achieving minority students
(Cohen et al., 2009), might benefit most from self-affirmation.
Finally, context variables are hypothesized to moderate self-affirmation benefits. Social
characteristics, such as group composition and environmental cues, influence the behavior and
performance of stereotyped students (Dasgupta, Scircle, & Hunsinger, 2015; Inzlicht & BenZeev, 2000; Murphy, Steele, & Gross, 2007). The effectiveness of self-affirmation approaches
depends on the identity threats “in the air” in a particular setting (Steele, 1997), and the
hypothesized recursive benefits are theorized to depend on relatively rich learning environments
for threatened students to take advantage of as they are buffered from perceived threats (Cohen
& Sherman, 2014). Because self-affirmation is theorized to disrupt stereotype threat processes,
settings in which threats are more likely to be experienced may provide the greatest opportunity
for benefits. For instance, while self-affirmation reduced gender disparities in performance in an
introductory college physics course (Miyake et al., 2010), it was not beneficial in introductory
science settings in which gender gaps and stereotype threat were not present (Lauer et al., 2013).
Theory and empirical evidence also suggest that minority students attending schools in which
their group is poorly represented and in which there are large racial achievement gaps benefit
most from self-affirmation (Cohen & Garcia, 2014; Hanselman et al., 2014).
In summary, psychological theory posits moderators of self-affirmation effects in several
domains, but evidence for specific moderators is limited because the data to test these theories

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

11

are lacking, especially in applied educational settings. This means that mixed evidence of selfaffirmation benefits may be due to theorized variation in how the activities were delivered,
individual characteristics, or social contexts. In particular, very little is known about how to
translate theorized constructs and laboratory manipulations into measures of the relevant
moderating features as they occur in applied settings. Moreover, it is impossible to isolate
specific relevant differences between the independent field trials to date, which have been
conducted in different contexts with different populations and different procedures. Nonetheless,
interrogating potential moderators is key to assessing both the underlying theory of selfaffirmation and its likely practical impact. To the extent that a priori hypotheses predict
heterogeneity, these results would confirm theory and point to where these strategies have the
most potential to improve student outcomes. On the other hand, it is possible that mixed selfaffirmation results are not explained by currently theorized moderators, which would imply the
need for greater and more specific inquiry into the necessary conditions for success.
A New Self-affirmation Replication Study
Given variable evidence of impacts in applied settings, we tested the effects of brief, inclass self-affirmation writing exercises for 7th grade students on subsequent academic outcomes
in a new double-blind randomized experiment in a sample of over 1200 students in one
Midwestern school district. We sought to learn whether similar benefits could be attained in a
different setting, both in terms of geographic location and scale of implementation.
The Original Study
The original self-affirmation study in a middle school setting was first reported by Cohen
et al. (2006), with supplemental analyses elsewhere (Cohen et al., 2009; Cook et al., 2012;
Shnabel et al., 2013). We replicated the procedures in the original experiments as described

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

12

below. Cohen and his colleagues originally reported several substantively important features of
self-affirmation intervention on student outcomes: substantial persistent benefits for “negatively
stereotyped” students (African American and Hispanic students) on Grade Point Average;
significantly higher benefits for low-performing African American students; an improved trend
in grades throughout the year; and no benefits for European American students. Our primary
focus was on the first finding, representing the highly policy-relevant main impact of the
intervention on negatively stereotyped groups. The impact for African American students ranged
from 0.21 to 0.34 GPA points across individual experiments and across courses (Cohen et al.,
2006, p. 1308).
The Previous Independent Replication in the Current Research Setting
The immediate precedent for the current self-affirmation replication is the study reported
by Borman et al. (2016). That study was the first successful independent replication of the
benefits of self-affirmation benefits in middle schools. The researchers reported statistically
significant benefits for “potentially threatened” students (Black and Hispanic) on 7th grade GPA
across all schools in the district. Like the original study, term-specific GPA data revealed a less
negative trend for potentially threatened students in the self-affirmation condition, and no
benefits for “not potentially threatened” students (White and Asian). Some results deviated from
the original patterns. For one, the impacts were smaller, with an impact of 0.065 cumulative
GPA points; the confidence interval for this estimate was (0.001, 0.128), which excludes all
impact estimates from the original study. The authors speculated that this difference may have
been at least partially related to the challenges of implementing at scale. Also, the replication
found no evidence of an interaction between the intervention and prior achievement. In
supplemental analyses, researchers reported that the treatment benefits in this scale-up were

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

13

concentrated in a subset of schools hypothesized to have the most threatening environments for
potentially threatened groups, based on the numerical presence and relative academic standing of
these students (Hanselman et al., 2014).
The Current Study
The current study was designed to replicate both the original self-affirmation study
(Cohen et al., 2006) and the previous successful independent replication (Borman et al., 2016).
Three key features of this design provide unique insights into the effects of self-affirmation in
educational settings. First, procedures followed those in the original study, including intervention
materials, as we detail below. The study therefore is an example of a well-powered “close”
replication of the effects of self-affirmation for potentially threatened groups in middle school
(Brandt et al., 2014). Moreover, given the scale of the research, the study contributes important
evidence about the general promise of these interventions to improve minority students’
achievement.
The second key feature of the study is that it was conducted in the same setting as a
previous randomized trial of self-affirmation, in the same district and schools, by the same
research team, with the same research protocols. In the current study, we ask whether these
middle school scale-up results were replicated, and we use comparisons across studies to test
theorized sources of heterogeneity. Since features of the study corresponded closely to those in
the previous one (Borman et al., 2016; see Table A2 for a summary), the within-setting
comparisons across the two studies allow for much more specific tests of moderation than
comparisons between settings. A recent precedent for such a within-setting comparison is
provided by Harackiewicz et al. (in press), who found different affirmation effects in a college

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

14

setting and discussed several potential explanations for the difference. We exploit a similar
pattern to conduct comprehensive tests of theorized sources of heterogeneity.
A third contribution of this study is that we collected information on self-affirmation
implementation, including qualitative features of students’ responses to the exercises. These data
provide an unprecedented picture of the experience of the self-affirmation activities when they
are implemented in an entire school district. And, in combination with information about
individual student characteristics and features of the social context, this information supports
unique tests of the theorized sources of heterogeneity.
Building on the unique empirical features of this research, we addressed three sequential
research questions. Our first question was: (1) what was the effect of the self-affirmation
intervention in the new large-scale implementation? Because we found no evidence of benefits,
we asked: (2) were estimated effects substantively and significantly different from the impacts
for the students from a previous study in the same setting? Given meaningful and detectable
differences, we finally asked: (3) why was the same intervention seemingly beneficial for
targeted students in one implementation but less so in the next?
The third research question is the most theoretically important, but it also is the most
challenging. To preview our approach, we drew on the theory underlying the design of the
interventions to conduct a series of tests of potential explanations for differences in effects across
studies. Based on hypothesized moderators of the impacts of self-affirmation, these explanations
fall into three broad classes: characteristics of implementation, individuals, and social context.
We then conducted a series of empirical tests of these potential explanations to assess which, if
any, explained the differences in experimental impact estimates.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

15

Method
The Large-scale Self-Affirmation Studies
All data were generated or collected as part of two randomized trials of self-affirmation
writing activities among 7th grade students. The research was conducted through a partnership
with the school district, which recognized large racial achievement gaps and was interested in
strategies to improve the performance of minority students. District administrators provided
support to the project, and principals at all 11 regular middle schools agreed to participate. Given
this support, study implementation involved researchers (who provided training and activity
materials), school learning coordinators (who coordinated the site-specific logistics, including
scheduling), and teachers (who implemented the activities in their classrooms). The involvement
of educators in diverse roles approximated how the exercises would be likely to be implemented
if adopted as a universal district initiative.
Throughout this paper we refer to the first study, conducted with 7th grade students in
2011-2012, as “cohort 1” and the second study, conducted in 2012-2013, as “cohort 2.” The
focus of this paper is on the new evidence on self-affirmation effects provided by cohort 2; no
results from this study have been reported previously. In order to compare results across the two
studies, we also conducted new analyses of participants in cohort 1, including documenting
impacts in 8th grade. We therefore detail aspects of both the new study (cohort 2) and the
previous one (cohort 1).
The general outline of both studies was similar, as follows: Research activities began in
the summer with parallel contact at each of district’s 11 middle schools. After confirming
authorization from the principal and identifying an appropriate setting for the writing exercises
with each school’s learning coordinator, research staff provided a training session for the 7th

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

16

grade instructional teams at each school. During the 30-minute training session, a member of the
research staff introduced the study as research about 7th grade students’ experiences, beliefs, and
social-emotional learning. The researcher described the mechanics of implementation and
reviewed the teacher implementation script. Teachers administered the writing exercises during
normal class time with materials provided by the research team and the completed exercises were
returned to the research team for recording. After the school year, the district provided
administrative data, including transcript and demographic information. No study activities were
conducted after the 7th grade year, but additional administrative data on 8th grade performance
were collected after the following year.
Below we highlight the core features of the intervention, with a focus on similarities and
differences between the two studies. Appendix Table A2 provides a summary.
Self-affirmation Intervention and Implementation
The self-affirmation intervention procedure followed Cohen et al. (2006). Seventh grade
students completed a short (15-20 minute) writing prompt as part of normal class activities
several times during the school year. We identified four time points for the self-affirmation
writing interventions. These provided a consistent template for the district, but scheduling varied
according the formative assessment dates in individual schools. The time points were: (1) at the
start of the school year, in the week prior to formative fall standardized assessments, (2) in
November, in the week prior to the state’s standardized achievement test for accountability
purposes, (3) in the winter, in the week prior to a midyear language skills formative assessment,
and (4) in the spring, in the week prior to the final formative assessment of the year. Based on
the evidence that self-affirmation exercises are most effective earliest in the school year (Cook et

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

17

al., 2012), we provided school officials with the option of omitting the winter exercise to reduce
logistical challenges; four schools did so for cohort 1 and two did so for cohort 2.
The activities were administered by teachers in the classroom using scripts provided by
the original research team. 45 teachers were involved in cohort 1, 44 were involved in cohort 2,
and 33 were consistent across both studies; teacher changes reflected exits from the school, reassignments, and looping (teachers moving grades along with students). The intervention
activities were completed in a classroom setting determined by the school’s learning coordinator
to be the most appropriate for the writing exercises: in Language Arts classes at seven schools
and homeroom period at four (constant across both cohorts). Homeroom periods were
abbreviated classes with non-academic curricula, including activities related to socio-emotional
standards. In either case, exercises were implemented among all 7th graders in these regular
classrooms by their classroom teachers.
The activities were packets of 3-4 pages with prompts and spaces for individual writing
responses. They were identical on the cover sheet, which included the student’s name. On
subsequent pages the exercises varied by randomly assigned condition (for consented students;
all non-consented students, including newly enrolled students without a personalized packet,
completed the procedural/neutral control prompts). The treatment condition, following the
original study, prompted students to reflect on values (such as friends, family, music, or sports)
that were important to them. The precise format of the treatment exercise varied throughout the
year to avoid repetition. There were two randomly assigned control conditions: one focused on
values, in which students are asked to select least important values from the same list presented
to treatment students and explain why they may be important to someone else, and a second
devoted to various procedural writing prompts, such as describing summer activities or

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

18

explaining how to open a locker (we refer to these prompts as “neutral,” as they do not explicitly
concern values). The latter control branch was introduced after the first administration in the
cohort 1 study, so all control students in the first cohort received the “Least Important Values”
prompt for the first exercise. Because we found no evidence of differences between control
conditions in either cohort nor evidence that these differences explain differential impacts, we
combined both control groups in our main analyses.
Individualized packets were prepared for every student in the district based on classroom
rosters and distributed to teachers ahead of implementation. The priority in implementation
procedures was to promote an environment in which students engaged in the genuine selfreflection about aspects of identity that is hypothesized to lead to self-affirmation benefits. One
implication, following previous research, is that activities were to be conducted as a normal part
of classroom activity; this point was stressed in the teacher training and implementation scripts.
However, the fact that teachers implemented the activities independently in their own classrooms
created challenges for documenting precise features of implementation, as we discuss below.
We also instructed teachers to avoid representing the activities as evaluative, to avoid
reference to external research, and to avoid presenting the activities as beneficial. These
guidelines were based on theory and empirical evidence (Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Silverman et
al., 2013), with the caveat that there is little existing guidance about how these features translate
into best practice for teachers in established educational settings. For instance, anecdotal
feedback from teachers highlighted some tension between these theoretical ideals and integration
into classroom activities. For many students and some teachers, the medium of the activities—a
personalized packet completed individually—led to a default perception of the activities as a test
or assessment. We made efforts to mitigate these perceptions. For instance, previous studies have

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

19

distributed activities in individual envelopes. In initial planning, we found this to be well outside
the norm of classroom activities in the current setting, and instead used a collated packet of
papers with a cover sheet to mask differences across conditions.
Some teachers also reported questions from students along the lines of: “if this isn’t
graded, why do I have to do it?” One response was for teachers to justify the activities as part of
a research study. Recognizing the potential for such deviations from instructions, researchers
never described the project to teachers in terms of stereotypes, identity, or self-affirmation.
Instead, researchers emphasized that the study concerned the thoughts and opinions of middle
school students. Therefore, to the extent that teachers presented or justified the activities as part
of a research project, they communicated that students’ responses were valued, which we
expected would encourage expressive self-reflection.
Comparison to Original Study
In the context of replication, it is important to be clear about key similarities and
differences in protocol, subjects, and context. This is particularly true for interventions in applied
school settings, where procedures must be sensitive to local conditions and can shift over time
due to logistical constraints or contextual appropriateness. Previous self-affirmation interventions
highlight this point: Sherman et al. (2013) reported creating simplified versions in a setting with
many English Language Learners, and even in the original setting, the experimental protocols
(including the number of exercises, and instructions for choosing important values) shifted
between years (Cohen et al., 2006).
The current study set out to replicate the original research (i.e., Cohen et al., 2006) as
closely as possible at a larger scale in a new setting. Intervention materials—student exercises
and teacher implementation instructions—were provided by the original research team. The

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

20

fielded activities correspond most closely to Experiment 2 reported by Cohen et al. (2006)—
circling important values instead of marking most and least important—and the simplified
version employed by Sherman et al. (2013). Timing followed the original experiments,
prioritizing a first administration as early in the school year as possible and spacing additional
implementations throughout potentially stressful periods later in the school year.
The original study included three to five 7th grade implementations, depending on
experiment (Cohen et al., 2009); we fielded three or four (depending on school) in both cohorts.
In contrast to the original studies, we did not field implementations in 8th grade; a maximum of
four implementations was feasible in the current context, and we prioritized the earliest
activities. The original study also administered a student survey at the beginning and end of the
7th grade academic year. The survey addressed students’ “self-perceived ability to fit in and
succeed in school” (Cohen et al., 2009, p. 401). We conducted a similar survey at the beginning
and end of the 7th grade school year for cohort 2. In this respect, the cohort 2 study was more
similar to the original research than cohort 1, when no surveys were administered.
The original study was conducted in a single school, described as “middle- to lowermiddle-class families at a suburban northeastern middle school whose student body was divided
almost evenly between African Americans and European Americans” (Cohen et al., 2006, p.
1307). The current context included students in 11 Midwestern middle schools in a single
district. Overall student 7th grade enrollments in the district were 45% White, 25% Black, 19%
Hispanic, and 10% Asian. Based on the original finding that results were consistent when nonAsian minority students were combined as “potentially stereotyped,” we combined Black and
Hispanic (including multiracial) students in preferred analyses. Across the 11 schools, the share
of potentially threatened students ranged from 19% to 81%. As in the original study, the

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

21

intervention was provided to students independently by teachers in their classrooms, with
materials provided by the research team. The original study was conducted with 3 teachers. The
current study (cohort 2) was conducted with 44 teachers in 77 classrooms.
Our analyses include only administrative outcomes. It was not feasible to collect the more
detailed outcome measures of the original study, including teacher gradebooks and a race
activation task at the end of grade 8 (Experiment 2) or grade 7 (Experiment 1). However, we
collected state standardized achievement test results, which were not considered in the original
research.
Fidelity
Previous research provides little specific guidance on how to identify or measure the
most relevant aspects of self-affirmation implementation, but the anecdotal challenges that
teachers reported in implementing the activities in their classrooms highlight the need for more
attention to these issues in applied settings. We considered several indicators of fidelity. One
indicator is whether students responded to the writing prompts. By that standard, fidelity was
quite high in both cohort 1 and cohort 2. In terms of basic exposure to the assigned materials, 8895% of students completed the assigned activity for each administration. Student absences from
class accounted for the majority of non-completion, while less than 1% of students in each
administration completed a non-assigned packet due to administrative errors (such as a roster
change).
We also coded the content of all students’ responses, distinguishing between responses
that showed clear evidence of self-affirming reflection and those that did not. Each response was
coded independently by two trained coders who were blind to the experimental condition. A
response was coded as self-affirming if it met three criteria: (1) the student wrote about

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

22

themselves, (2) the response identified a listed “value” from the experimental prompt, and (3) the
text expressed either the importance of the value (for example: “My family is the most important
thing to me because…”) or that they are “good in” the valued domain (example: “I’m good at
drawing.”). Inter-rater agreement was above 80% in both cohorts, and discrepant cases were
resolved with the guidance of a core research team member. Based on those measures, fidelity to
treatment was high in both cohorts, with 98.0% of treatment students providing at least one
response reflecting self-affirming reflection, and 95.8% doing so during the first two exercises of
the year.
Although our study is unprecedented in the scale at which we have documented fidelity
in self-affirmation writing exercises, we acknowledge that it is possible for more subtle aspects
of implementation to have failed in ways that we could or did not observe. Teachers’
independent actions in the classroom, as discussed above, provide one example. Educational
research has highlighted the organizational mechanisms that buffer teachers’ practice from
external demands (Weick, 1976) and the role of individual teachers’ sense-making in shaping
how reforms are enacted in the classroom (Coburn, 2004). We therefore gathered additional
evidence with a teacher survey conducted at the end of each school year. These responses should
be interpreted with caution for several reasons: we obtained reports from the teachers of only
56.0% of students (46.1% for cohort 1 and 64.2% for cohort 2), the items were retrospective
reports (6 months on average after the fact), and it is unknown whether these (or any) teacher
behaviors are critical to self-affirmation success. Nevertheless, these data complement other
implementation measures and provide a preliminary window into teachers’ administration of the
activities.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

23

Teacher responses supported the anecdotal reports discussed above, suggesting that the
presentation of the exercises was not always as directed. Teachers of 31.1% of students reported
describing the writing exercises as being part of a research study, and teachers of 20.3% of
students reported describing the activities as “good for” students. These deviations may have
detracted from the effectiveness of the self-affirmation activities, but we do not know how they
compare to previous studies, since prior research has not reported systematically on teacher
administration.
Sample
Because the study was administered in regular classrooms, all students in these
classrooms completed some form of individual activity during implementation. However,
students were only participants in the study (i.e., they were randomized to experimental
condition, had data collected, and were included in analyses) if they assented and their parents
consented. All seventh grade students in all 11 regular middle schools in the Midwestern school
district were recruited to participate at school registration days (attended by the vast majority of
parents and students) at the end of summer and with follow-up at the start of the school year. In
the cohort 1 study, we received consent and assent for 63.6% (1048/1648) of the population; for
cohort 2 the number was 72.8% (1269/1722), reflecting improved recruiting efforts. Study
participants were individually randomly assigned to the experimental group with randomization
blocked by school.
Because attrition was low, even into 8th grade, we analyzed a consistent full cases sample.
We dropped 9.0% of cases overall due to missing data/attrition: 2.6% of cases were missing data
on covariates we included in models for precision, an additional 4.4% had no transcript data in
8th grade, and 2.1% more were missing standardized testing outcomes. The extent of attrition

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

24

overall and the individual sources of attrition were statistically equivalent across experimental
condition (cohort 1: 10.6% treatment and 10.2% control, 𝜒 2 =0.03, df=1, p=0.86; cohort 2: 7.5%
and 8.1% attrition, respectively, 𝜒 2 =0.14, df=1, p=0.71); overall attrition was higher for cohort 1
than cohort 2 (10.4% vs. 7.8%, 𝜒 2 =4.75, df=1, p=0.03). To the extent that differential attrition
contributed to possible differences between cohorts, it would have operated (along with
differences in recruiting) through different types of individuals being included in the two analytic
samples, which we addressed explicitly (see “Individual Student Differences” Results section).
Measures
All student demographic information was derived from district administrative records.
Our primary individual demographic variable was an indicator for students’ potential
susceptibility to social identity threats relating to academic performance in school, which we
operationalized as African American or Hispanic racial/ethnic group membership. We treated
multiracial students as potentially susceptible to racial identity threat because they are likely to
identify with or be perceived as a member of a marginalized group, but results were similar when
these students were excluded (see Figure 3, Panel C). To the extent that administrative
racial/ethnic group membership misrepresents susceptibility to social identity threats, our impact
estimates may have been attenuated, but similarly so for both cohorts.
To increase the precision of the self-affirmation treatment effect estimates, we included
additional baseline student characteristics in our preferred specification for impact models. These
included pre-treatment (grade 6) achievement outcomes and binary indicators for female, limited
English proficiency status, receipt of special education services, and eligibility for free or
reduced price lunch, which we included as a proxy for family economic resources. Results were
substantively similar when we excluded these covariates (see Figure 3 and Appendix Figure A1).

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

25

In some models, we restricted the sample to schools with relatively low proportions of
Black and Hispanic students and relatively large prior achievement gaps for those students, both
of which serve as proxies for more potentially threatening school contexts. Following previous
research, we created a binary indicator for potentially threatening school contexts, defined as
schools with below average numbers of Black and Hispanic students and above average prior
racial achievement gaps (Hanselman et al., 2014).
Our ultimate interest was students’ academic performance. The primary outcomes,
following previous research in the self-affirmation literature, were students’ overall grade point
average (GPA) in grade 7 and grade 8. GPA reflects overall academic performance across all
academic subjects and was recorded on a 4-point scale. Results were robust to focusing on only
core academic courses, which corresponded closely to overall GPA (correlations of 0.98-0.99 in
each grade). We gave grade 8 GPA conceptual priority, as it was the only grade point average
measured entirely subsequent to the full treatment regime.
In supplementary analyses, we assessed treatment effects on a standardized academic
assessment, the Wisconsin Knowledge and Concepts Examination (WKCE) tests in mathematics
and reading. During the study period, WKCE tests were administered for state accountability
purposes in November of grade 7 and grade 8. Although the grade 7 tests were administered
relatively early in the course of the intervention, the second exercise explicitly targeted the
potentially high stress week prior to WKCE testing, making effects on this early outcome worthy
of consideration.
Experimental Balance
Table 1 reports descriptive statistics and tests of baseline experimental equivalence for
each cohort, both overall and within the subset of potentially threatened (Black and Hispanic)

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

26

students. The sample was majority White, but included a substantial number of potentially
threatened students in each cohort (reported numbers include multi-racial students). Pretreatment differences between the treatment and control group were substantively small
(generally less than 0.1 standard deviations) and not statistically significantly different,
suggesting that randomization was successful in yielding comparable groups.
Analyses
All analyses were based on intention-to-treat estimates of the effect of self-affirmation,
which assess the impact of assignment to the treatment group and therefore reflect the policyrelevant impacts of providing the self-affirmation (Borman, 2002). We calculated effects overall
and within theoretically relevant subgroups. Estimates were based on the following general
multilevel model of treatment effects:
𝑌𝑖𝑗 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 (𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖 ) + 𝛽𝑿𝒊 + 𝜂𝑗 + 𝜀𝑖

(1)

In this model, 𝑌𝑖𝑗 is the observed outcome for student i in school j, 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖 is the
randomly assigned self-affirmation treatment status for student i, 𝑿𝒊 is a vector of pre-treatment
covariates (grade 6 outcome, gender, limited English proficiency, special education, and free
lunch eligibility), 𝜂𝑗 is the residual component for school j, and 𝜀𝑖 is the residual for student i.
Because the treatment was randomly assigned to each student, 𝛽1 provides an unbiased estimate
of the effect of the self-affirmation intervention without additional controls, but we included a
pretreatment achievement measure and additional covariates, 𝑿𝒊 , to increase the precision of this
estimate.2

2

Some previous research has highlighted self-affirmation effects on achievement trajectories. These trends
are especially helpful in characterizing the decline of minority students’ achievement relative to majority students.
We focus only on impacts on outcomes at single points in time here for two reasons: (a) our substantive interest is
(variability in) the ultimate benefits of the intervention among potentially threatened students, which is best captured
by overall impacts, and (b) given baseline equivalence, impacts on overall outcomes are analogous to impacts on

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

27

Within this basic framework, we conducted specific analyses to explore potential
differences between the two studies, including alternate outcomes and estimates for theoretically
relevant sub-groups. Many of our analyses tested for differences in effects between cohort 1 and
cohort 2 by estimating cohort-by-treatment interactions in pooled models with all observations,
and we also estimated overall effects with the pooled data. We provide additional details for
specific analyses as we present the results below.
Results
Estimated Impacts of Self-Affirmation
The raw pattern of results for the new study of self-affirmation (cohort 2) for the focal
outcome (Grade Point Average) is presented in the right panel of Figure 2. As expected, there
were no effects of the intervention on the performance of Asian and White students, who are not
hypothesized to be subject to the same types of identity threats in school as are the other groups.
Potentially threatened groups (Black and Hispanic) performed worse overall, but the differences
between treatment and control groups were similarly small in both 7th and 8th grade. To estimate
treatment effects as precisely as possible for this targeted group, we used multilevel models of
the self-affirmation intervention, controlling for pre-treatment student characteristics. Estimates
for all outcomes were negative, but none were statistically different from zero (Table 2). The
GPA effect in grade 7 was approximately zero (d=-0.002), while the effect in grade 8 was
nominally negative (d=-0.072). Because the sample was quite large, these null results rule out (at
the 0.05 significance level) impacts of 0.10 standard deviations or greater on GPA in grades 7

(linear) trends. Estimates from longitudinal growth models were substantively similar to those presented here but
less precise.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

28

and 8.3 Results for standardized achievement outcomes were similar. Concerning our first
research question, therefore, we found no evidence of treatment benefits for the targeted
population in the new study.
Although not our primary focus, we also tested three additional findings reported by
Cohen et al. (2006). First, we found no evidence of greater benefits of the intervention for
potentially threatened students; the estimated interaction pointed in the opposite direction in our
preferred specification but was not significantly different from zero (p=0.15). Second, we found
no evidence of differential effectiveness by prior academic performance. Following the
procedures described by Cohen et al. (2006), we created tercile groups based on 6th grade GPA,
within the potentially threatened and potentially non-threatened groups. We failed to reject the
null hypothesis that treatment impacts were equivalent across all three groups (p=0.20). We also
found no evidence of differential impacts by prior achievement among White and Asian students
(p=0.73). Finally, we tested for evidence of an improved trajectory of performance throughout
the year. Considering students’ grades in each of the four terms of the school year, we tested for
an interaction between treatment and term. GPA declined by 0.05 GPA points per term on
average among Black and Hispanic students, but there was no difference by experimental
condition (p=0.77).
Comparing Self-affirmation Effects across Studies
The results above led us to ask whether the null effects in the current study (cohort 2)
differed from those in the previous research in the same setting (cohort 1). A first question was
whether the benefits observed previously (Borman et al., 2016) were detectable in the year

3

The 95 percent confidence interval for the self-affirmation effect on overall grade point average in grade 7
was (-0.047, 0.165) for cohort 1 and (-0.088, 0.083) for cohort 2. The intervals for grade 8 were (0.015, 0.282) and (0.192, 0.047).

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

29

following the intervention. We analyzed data from the subset of students from the prior study
with valid observations in grade 8, using parallel procedures to those above (estimates
summarized in Table 2).4 We found that self-affirmation group students received significantly
higher grades in 8th grade (d=0.152), bolstering the interpretation that the intervention led to
detectable increases in academic performance for African American and Hispanic students.
However, when we combined cases across studies, we did not find a statistically significant
average self-affirmation treatment effect (grade 7: p = 0.54, grade 8: p = 0.58).
To address our second research question, we estimated the difference between selfaffirmation impacts for cohort 1 and cohort 2 by pooling data from both samples and including
cohort interactions with all covariates. We found that in several cases the null effects for cohort 2
were distinguishable from comparable effects for cohort 1. For the primary outcome, 8th grade
GPA, the standardized cohort 2 estimate was small and negative (d=-0.072), while the cohort 1
estimate was positive (d=0.152), and we could reject the null hypothesis that effects were equal
(p = 0.013).5 We also found statistical evidence of differences between the treatment effects
across cohorts for the two supplementary mathematics state test score outcomes (p = 0.037 in
Grade 7, p = 0.023 in Grade 8), although only the grade 8 mathematics cohort effect difference
would be statistically significant if the Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons was
applied to both estimates in this mathematics domain.

4

These analyses differed from previous reported by considering only students with grade 8 information for
all outcomes. The main implication was that the reanalyzed results were less precise, and therefore provided more
conservative tests of statistical significance. The pattern of results across grade 7 matched those reported by Borman
et al. (2015)—positive benefits for GPA and mathematics achievement and smaller negative impacts on reading—
although none of these were statistically significant in the reduced sample (see Table 2).
5
Appendix Table A3 presents all estimates from pooled models of treatment effects in both cohorts. These
models suggest general similarity between cohorts in the associations between covariates and outcomes (fewer
significant interactions than would be expected by chance). There is also suggestive evidence that the control group
was higher achieving in cohort 2 in GPA and mathematics, conditional on grade 6 scores, but none of these
differences are significant at the 0.05 level.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

30

These results were robust across different specifications of the treatment effects model. In
addition to our preferred specification, which included the full set of individual control variables,
we also estimated impacts in models with no covariates and with controls only for the pretreatment outcome measure. Figure 3 summarizes results of these three specifications
(represented by symbol shapes) for the focal group and comparison (Black/Hispanic students,
combined control; Panel B1), as well as for alternate comparisons testing theorized moderators
(discussed in the corresponding sections below). Appendix Figure A1 presents comparable
results for grade 7 overall grade point average. In all cases, results were substantively robust
across all covariate specifications, although predictably less precise for the models omitting the
alternate control cases.
To summarize results to this point, the two studies provided diverging pictures of the
impacts of the self-affirmation intervention on Black and Hispanic students’ academic outcomes.
For cohort 1, benefits in GPA persisted in the academic year following the intervention. For
cohort 2, however, we found no evidence of benefits of the intervention. Moreover, we rejected
the null hypothesis that impacts were equal in both studies, despite being conducted in the same
research setting. These results motivated our final research question: do the currently theorized
moderators of self-affirmation explain the differences in treatment effects across the two
cohorts? In the remaining sections, we focus on the primary outcome measure, grade 8 GPA, and
assess potential explanations for the decline in treatment effects from cohort 1 to cohort 2.
Differences in the Delivery of Self-affirmation: Intervention Design
Research projects, like educational practice, evolve over time for pragmatic reasons. For
instance, in previous self-affirmation studies, investigators adjusted the frequency and content of
intervention exercises as they were implemented across successive cohorts and in new settings

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

31

(Cohen et al., 2009; Sherman et al., 2013). In the current study, two design changes between the
first and second cohort created differences in the delivery of the self-affirmation activities that
potentially explain differential impacts: a shift in comparison group activities for one of the four
exercises and a pre-intervention survey, which was added in the second study.
First, a randomly selected half of the control group was assigned a different first exercise
in the cohort 2 study, compared to cohort 1. All control students were assigned the original
control activity in cohort 1, which directed students to select values that were unimportant to
them and write about why these values may be important to someone else. Half of the control
group did the same in cohort 2, but half was randomly assigned to an alternate control activity
for exercise 1 that asked students to write about what they did over the summer. Alternate
control conditions were added in response to reported struggles of some students with the
original “least important values” control activity. The alternate control writing prompt was
modeled after typical classroom free-writing prompts, and was administered to non-consented
students in both years. This prompt is “neutral” in the sense that it does not explicitly refer to
values, but students could, potentially, write self-affirming responses (see “Student Experiences”
section below). A random half of the control group in both cohorts completed a comparable
alternate activity for exercise 2, which asked students to describe how to complete a procedural
task, such as how to open a locker.
To assess whether this modification in the control regime contributed to different
intervention impacts, we focused on the randomly selected half of the control group in both
cohorts that received exactly the same sequence of exercises, which directly followed the
original design (Cohen et al., 2006). These estimates are presented in Figure 3 in subpanel 2 for
each sample (labeled “Original Control”). The cohort-by-treatment interaction estimates were

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

32

substantively unchanged in these analyses, though less precise owing to the smaller sample size,
implying that the slight procedural change does not explain the drop-off in impact in the second
cohort. Since we found no evidence of differences between the two control groups, we pooled
both groups for all reported analyses, unless noted otherwise.
A second design change for the second cohort was the administration of a 15-20 minute
survey by researchers in classrooms in the first week of school. Interaction with research team
members was similar for both studies because, for cohort 1, researchers visited classrooms
during this time to collect student assent forms. In both assent (cohort 1) and survey (cohort 2),
researchers did not connect these overt research activities with the writing exercises, the first of
which was administered on average one week later. Students were told in both cases that the
study was interested in their thoughts and opinions as middle school students. The survey
included items about individual characteristics (e.g., locus of control, self-complexity, and social
belonging) but omitted any specific reference to racial identity, stereotypes, or self-affirmation,
which might have primed students to experience identity threats.
It is theoretically possible that survey prompts about social-psychological constructs like
social belonging could change how students respond to the self-affirmation exercises. Although
we could not directly assess whether the inclusion of the survey accounted for lower benefits for
cohort 2, this explanation is unlikely for two reasons. First, to explain the decline in our setting,
prior surveys would needed to have muted the treatment contrast (such as by inoculating
treatment students from self-affirmation benefits), but the original large and persisting impacts
were found in the presence of a pre-survey (Cohen et al., 2009). Based on this result, we might
have expected the largest benefits for cohort 2. Second, the prior surveys were distinct from the
self-affirmation exercises, fielded on a different day by the researchers, instead of teachers, and

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

33

not explicitly linked to the exercises. Therefore social psychological responses activated by the
survey would have to persist over time and remain relevant for a separate task. While future
research is necessary to test whether such prior prompts modify self-affirmation benefits, we
note that if such brief, distinct stimuli moderate self-affirmation impacts, then there are many
other school experiences that are also likely to matter. If true, the effects of the self-affirmation
intervention would be extremely difficult to predict a priori.
Differences in the Delivery of Self-affirmation: Student Experiences
One potential explanation for heterogeneity in treatment effects between the two studies
is a decline in the quality of students’ experience of the activities related to implementation.
Although formal and informal procedures were consistent, the hypothesized psychological
processes may be sensitive to subtle changes in delivery (Yeager & Walton, 2011), and it is
possible that small changes in classroom procedures had large consequences for effectiveness.
For instance, if teachers presented the materials differently in the second cohort, then fewer
students may have engaged in genuine self-reflection. As discussed in the “Fidelity” section, no
direct observations of classroom implementation were collected (the activities were intended to
be part of regular classroom activities and not to be associated with research). Instead we
conducted three indirect tests of implementation differences as explanations for differential
benefits between cohorts: changes in theorized features of implementation, changes in
implementing teachers, and changes in students’ written responses to the intervention.
First, we noted three theoretically important features of the self-affirmation writing
intervention design: that activities are administered during targeted times of potential stress,
especially early in the school year (Cook et al., 2012; Critcher et al., 2010), that activities are not
explicitly presented as externally imposed (Silverman et al., 2013), and that activities are not

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

34

presented as being beneficial to students (Sherman et al., 2009). We documented that that these
features of implementation did not vary (or improved) between cohorts. With respect to timing,
91% of classrooms for cohort 1 administered exercise 1 prior to the targeted first formative
standardized assessment of the year, and 81% administered exercise 2 prior to the state
standardized testing. The comparable numbers in cohort 2 were 91% and 97%, respectively.
Based on retrospective self-reports from teachers provided at the end of the school year, we also
found more faithful implementation for the second cohort. In cohort 1, 31.1% of students were
taught by a teacher who reported describing the activities as “good for” them, while 42.2% were
taught by a teacher who reported explaining the activities as connected to a research study. Both
figures improved for cohort 2: 13.9% for “good for” instructions and 24.6% for mention of a
research study. With the caveats outlined in the “Fidelity” section, these reports show no
indication of poorer implementation in cohort 2. In other words, while imperfect delivery of the
exercises may explain some of the attenuation of self-affirmation effects, these features did not
explain the difference in effects between the two studies here.
Second, we considered whether changes in implementing teachers accounted for the
decline in benefits. Due to staffing changes, 77% of the Black and Hispanic students in cohort 1
and 60% in cohort 2 completed the exercises with a teacher who implemented in both studies. If
teacher fatigue with the study adversely affected implementation, then impact declines should
have been largest among the “both-cohort” teachers. Conversely, if unique cohort 1 teachers
were especially effective, the declines should have been be largest among “single-cohort”
teachers. We found no evidence for either hypothesis (see Appendix Table A4). Treatment by
cohort interactions were substantively equivalent in both sub-populations (-0.196 grade points

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

35

for the both-cohort teachers; -0.188 for the single-cohort teachers) and these interactions were
statistically indistinguishable from one another (p = 0.99).
Finally, we tested whether students’ written responses differed across the two cohorts of
the study. While features of the written responses are imperfect proxies for the desired selfreflection, they provide an indication of whether the quantity or quality differed across cohorts.
The two most basic measures of overall engagement were comparable in both studies: exercise
completion and words written. A high proportion of students completed the activities, ranging
from 85-95% (Table A5, Column 1). Completion did not differ by experimental condition or
cohort. In supplementary analyses, we found that completers tended to have higher prior GPA
than non-completers—no other baseline covariate predicted completion—but this difference was
not distinguishable between cohorts.
The relative length of students’ responses was consistent across cohorts too, after
accounting for variation due to differences in prompts over time (Columns 2 and 3). The only
treatment-control difference between cohorts was in mean words written for exercise 1 (Panel
A), and this was completely explained by the randomly assigned “neutral” comparison group;
students were more prolific when writing about their summer (in cohort 2) than about an
unimportant value. Comparing students with the same, “original” prompts (Column 3), there
were no cohort differences. By these measures, basic engagement with the activities was
consistent across the two cohorts.
Analyses of the qualitative measure of students’ responses to the exercises (introduced in
the “Fidelity” section above) implied that treatment caused students to engage in much higher

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

36

rates of affirmation across all exercises in both studies.6 The estimates are based on linear
probability models, so the coefficient of 0.709 (Table A5, Panel B, Column 4) implies that the
chance of affirmation writing was 71 percentage points higher in the treatment group in cohort 1
for exercise 2. The interaction coefficient (0.0796) implies that this treatment effect was actually
higher in the second cohort, at a significance level of p < 0.1. Exercise 1 was again an exception,
but the difference was solely explained by the modifications to the control group (see Column 5).
Not surprisingly, the control group in cohort 2, including students who wrote about their
summer, was more likely to write affirming statements, which others have noted is a risk in
choosing that type of comparison activity (Cohen, Aronson, & Steele, 2000). Even so, treatment
impacts on self-affirming writing were greater than 40 percentage points (0.427=0.721-0.294) in
the second cohort overall.
On balance, analyses of implementation features, consistent teachers, and direct measures
of intervention responses did not support the hypothesis that declines in implementation quality
could explain lower benefits for cohort 2. In particular, responses to the exercises were strong
overall, and comparable between cohorts. These results cannot rule out the possibility of
differential psychological responses to the exercises in the two implementations, which deserves
attention in future research. However, for this possibility to be true, the association between key
psychological responses and the desired features of students’ written responses must have
changed between cohorts. The more parsimonious explanation is that declines in implementation
did not account for lower effectiveness.

6

Treatment effects are muted in exercise 3 for both cohorts because overall impacts include several schools
that opted out of this exercise, and therefore students had no opportunity to engage in affirmation.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

37

Individual Student Differences
The success of social-psychological interventions depends fundamentally on individual
characteristics. Self-affirmation is only hypothesized to help students who are subject to identity
threat, and students may also differ in how they respond to the specific reflective writing activity.
Meaningful individual differences between cohorts could have resulted from sampling variability
and/or because the second cohort study sample was larger, including 36% more potentially
threatened students (449 vs. 331 in cohort 1), and different in terms of mean individual
characteristics (see Table 1), due to more successful recruitment. We used three strategies to test
for individual-level explanations of cohort differences: effects in theoretically sensitive
subgroups, observable differences between the two cohorts, and the plausible influence of
unobserved heterogeneity.
One implication of theorized moderation of self-affirmation benefits by individual
characteristics is that results should be consistently stronger, and therefore less variable across
cohorts, in subpopulations where academic stereotype threats are hypothesized to be most
salient. We tested effects in two such subpopulations: students identified as only Black or
Hispanic (excluding multiracial students), who may identify more strongly with a stereotyped
identity, and Black/Hispanic Males, who may be subject to the most acute general academic
stereotypes in middle school (Purdie-Vaughns & Eibach, 2008). Results are summarized in
Panels C and D of Figure 3. Contrary to the individual difference hypotheses, differential effects
across cohorts were similar in both of these subpopulations, even though lower precision in the
male subgroup led similar size differences to be statistically insignificant.
We also tested all observed individual student characteristics as explanations of cohort
differences. For individual characteristics to explain the decline in treatment effects, differences

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

38

between the two samples must have been related to treatment effect heterogeneity. We did find
some descriptive differences between studies (see Table 1): the sample for cohort 2 had more
female students (52.6% vs. 49.8%; p = 0.03), lower 6th grade GPAs on average (2.78 vs. 2.85; p
= 0.11), and more students eligible for free or reduced price lunch (85.1% vs. 80.1%; p = 0.07).
However, we found no statistically significant interaction between treatment and individual
characteristics (grade 6 grade point average, gender, English proficiency, or Special Education
designation) in either cohort, suggesting little opportunity for individual observed characteristics
to explain different treatment effects. Not surprisingly, when we re-weighted individual cases in
each cohort to balance populations in terms of each of these observable characteristics (for
instance, giving greater weight to poor students in cohort 1, who were relatively underrepresented in that sample), the effect estimates in each cohort were substantively unchanged
(see Table A7).
More generally, we gauged how large total (including unobservable) sub-population
differences would need to be to explain the different estimates between the two cohorts,
assuming that individual-level treatment effects were constant over time. We considered a
thought experiment in which the population was composed of two types of students: strong selfaffirmation responders that benefit most from the intervention (type A), and weak selfaffirmation responders that benefit least (type B). Assuming the boundary case that the cohort 1
Black/Hispanic sample was populated solely by strong responders, then an estimate of the
average impact for this type of student (𝑑𝐴 ) on grade 8 GPA is 0.152. Assume the cohort 2
sample was comprised of a mixture of students of type A and B, with the effects for type B
students (𝑑𝐵 ) unknown. The total impact in cohort 2 would then be an average of the two typespecific effects, weighted by the share of teach type (𝑝𝐴 and 𝑝𝐵 , respectively):

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

39

𝑑𝑐𝑜ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑡 2 = 𝑝𝐴 (𝑑𝐴 ) + 𝑝𝐵 (𝑑𝐵 )
Based on the total effect estimate in cohort 2 (-0.072) and the fact that the proportions of
type A and type B students sum to 1, this implies:
𝑑𝑐𝑜ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑡 2 = −0.072 = (1 − 𝑝𝐵 )(0.152) + 𝑝𝐵 (𝑑𝐵 )
Rearranging algebraically:
𝑑𝐵 =

. 224
+ (. 152)
𝑝𝐵

The implication of this inverse relationship between the share and effect size for weakresponders is that cohort 2 null effects could only be explained by very large shares of weakresponders or by substantially negative effects for these students. For instance, if only the surplus
students in cohort 2 (25%) were weak responders, then the effect of the intervention among this
population of students must have been -0.74 (=-.224/.25 + .152) to explain the total cohort 2
impact; if half of the cohort 2 population was the second type of student, then effects for this
group would need to be -0.30 (=-.224/.5 + .152).7 Since such drastic changes in the underlying
population and such large negative effects of the intervention are not plausible, it is unlikely that
differences in the underlying student populations explain cohort differences.
Changes in Social Context
Social-psychological interventions are also theoretically sensitive to features of the social
environment in which they are implemented (Yeager & Walton, 2011). Since the studies for both
cohorts were conducted in the same classrooms, schools, and district, we expected there to be
relatively small differences in the relevant social conditions that students experienced across
cohorts. This intuition was not directly testable, as there are no definitive measures of the

7

Similar calculations using the upper bound of the 95% confidence interval for the treatment effect in
cohort 2 results in necessary effects for the new student population of -0.29 as a 25% share of cohort 2 and -0.07 as a
50% share.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

40

relevant contextual features, but we assessed several indirect indicators of contexts that may be
meaningful. We considered the demographic characteristics of the school population, differences
in aggregate achievement, and school-specific impact estimates.
Previous research using data from the cohort 1 study suggested that school contexts
moderated the self-affirmation treatment effect on 7th grade outcomes, with the greatest benefits
in schools with low minority populations and large prior achievement gaps (Hanselman et al.,
2014). In new analyses (summarized in the Figure 3, Panel E), we found that larger than average
treatment benefits in these schools in cohort 1 persisted into 8th grade; however, self-affirmation
benefits were no more consistent across cohorts in the population of “High Threat” schools,
suggesting that context moderation does not explain the overall decline.
In addition, we considered whether shifts in demographic context of all students in the
school (conceptually and empirically distinct from individual characteristics of the study samples
discussed above) plausibly explained the difference in effects between cohorts. We found no
evidence of this possibility, primarily because student characteristics did not change substantially
between studies. One proxy for broad context differences related to academics and racial/ethnic
identity is sub-group academic achievement and achievement gaps, which were similar for both
cohorts and consistent with historic patterns (Figure A2). At the school level, racial/ethnic cohort
composition was similar in both cohorts, while achievement gaps, which are one proxy for a
racialized academic school environment, were consistently large (Figure A3). Moreover,
controlling for either school-level racial/ethnic composition or prior achievement gaps did not
alter the core treatment-by-cohort interaction estimate, suggesting that these documented school
characteristics did not account for the decline in treatment effects in the second cohort.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

41

Finally, we estimated school-specific impacts for Black and Hispanic students using data
from both cohorts to assess whether patterns were consistent across these local contexts. Effects
in most schools were similar or slightly lower for the second cohort (Figure A4), suggesting
general consistency in lower impacts in cohort 2. However, dramatic changes from positive
estimates for cohort 1 to negative estimates for cohort 2 were apparent in two schools (labeled
points 5 and 11 in Figure A4). These differences may have been due to either drastic
consequential changes in the local context or sampling variation. The latter is a more
parsimonious explanation in light of the consistent demographic context discussed above, post
hoc qualitative checks (which revealed no substantial year-to-year differences at these schools),
and the implausibly large magnitude of the point estimate of the interaction for these schools
(0.4-0.5 standard deviations).
To assess whether individual schools drove the overall results, we re-estimated pooled
treatment effect models omitting each of the 55 unique pairs of schools in the study (see Figure
A5). The main results—small positive effects for cohort 1, slightly negative effects for cohort 2,
and therefore a consequential interaction—held in all omitted samples. One school (11) stood out
as an extreme case: omitting this school reduced the interaction effect by 20-40% (depending on
which additional school was also omitted), while the range for all other omitted pairs estimates
was within 15% of the overall estimate. Subsamples that excluded school 11 exhibited greater
similarity in estimates across cohorts (smaller interactions) due mostly to smaller estimated
benefits for cohort 1, but also due to somewhat smaller estimated negative effects for cohort 2.
On the whole, while a single school contributed the most to the decline in effectiveness between
cohorts, the differences were meaningfully large without it.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

42

Classroom and district context features may also have contributed to the difference in
treatment effects across cohorts. However, we did not have strong a priori predictions about the
importance of features at either level. To the extent that individual teachers shape the relevant
features of the classroom environment, the similarity in effects for consistent and inconsistent
teacher populations (reported above) suggests a small role for these factors. At the district level,
even substantial system-wide events are especially difficult to connect theoretically to
differences in the treatment effect. For instance, there was notable political and civic unrest
during the study surrounding legislation limiting public sector unions, rhetoric surrounding
teachers’ work, and school closures due to teacher protests. Schools in the district were closed
for four days in February during the cohort 1 study, and the associated gubernatorial recall
election occurred in June between the two self-affirmation studies. We do not have strong
theoretical predictions about whether these events translated to differences in school
environments that moderated self-affirmation effects, but it seems unlikely that the unrest and
missed days of regular schooling were critical to intervention success in cohort 1. More
generally, this example highlights that if self-affirmation effects are sensitive to context changes
such as public debate about education then they are fundamentally fragile in the sense that
relevant critical conditions are difficult to diagnose, and more importantly, to anticipate.
Discussion
The replication results reported in this paper provide new evidence concerning two
fundamental questions about the potential of self-affirmation interventions to improve academic
performance and close achievement gaps (Cohen et al., 2006; Yeager & Walton, 2011): 1) Are
there benefits of self-affirmation interventions for academic performance in middle school? and
2) Can we identify the necessary and sufficient preconditions for self-affirmation success? The

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

43

large-scale replication results reported here, coupled with extensive post hoc tests of
heterogeneous effects, provide disconfirming evidence on both counts: we found no effects of
the intervention for cohort 2, and we found no evidence that moderators from existing theory
explained why this result differed from those in a previous study in the same setting. These
results rule out important hypotheses about self-affirmation effects, both in terms of the
magnitude of benefits and the sufficiency of theorized moderators, which refines our
understanding of both fundamental questions. In closing, we elaborate these specific
contributions, highlighting the unique evidence provided by this multi-cohort large-scale
replication and implications for future research.
Are there benefits of self-affirmation interventions at scale for academic performance in
middle school?
An important contribution of this paper is that it reports on a new large-scale replication
of the promising self-affirmation writing interventions introduced by Cohen et al. (2006).
Comprehensive null results from this experiment provide no evidence of self-affirmation
benefits, and the precision of the impact estimates rules out benefits that are as large as one third
the size of those reported by Cohen et al. (2009). Like the recent replication by Dee (2015), our
results suggest that self-affirmation has at best modest benefits for minority students when
implemented at a large scale. Unlike that study, however, the current failure to replicate cannot
be plausibly attributed to idiosyncratic features of the research site or procedures, because a
similar prior replication in the same setting did find benefits (Borman et al., 2016). In this paper,
we reported persistent intervention benefits for the prior cohort and documented similarity in
implementation measures across cohorts, including features of students’ written responses.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

44

It is important to point out that low statistical power is only a likely explanation for the
null results in cohort 2 if the true effect of the intervention was smaller than estimated for cohort
1 and much smaller than in initial studies (Cohen et al., 2009; Sherman et al., 2013). Using the
post hoc power calculations suggested by Gelman and Carlin (2014), we investigated the power
of our cohort 2 study design for a range of true effect sizes (Figure 4). If the true benefit of selfaffirmation on grade 8 GPA was 0.30, similar to the initial study, then our power was above
0.99. If the true effect was 0.15, as estimated for cohort 1, then power was 0.68. However, if the
true effect size was 0.07, the average across the studies summarized in Figure 1, then this study
had only a 21% chance of detecting an effect and a type II inferential error was to be expected.
These power calculations highlight a more general possibility: the true impacts of these
brief self-affirmation interventions may be positive but relatively small when implemented at
scale and across heterogeneous contexts. As Bryk, Gomez, and Grunow (2011, p. 130) observe,
“the history of educational innovation is replete with stories that show how innovations work in
the hands of a few, but lose effectiveness in the hands of the many” (see also: Schneider &
McDonald, 2006). This could be true for self-affirmation due to implementation challenges or
differential effects across contexts. If so, then even very large field trials, such as the one
conducted by Dee (2015) and the current study, are underpowered and unlikely to detect effects
reliably. An important corollary implication, if the true effect size is small, is that significant
estimates in individual trials are expected to overstate the magnitude of the effect by a substantial
amount (Gelman & Carlin, 2014). If the true effect size is 0.07, then statistically significant
results from the current design would over-state this effect by a factor of 2.2 in expectation.8

8

Note that if the same scenario (true effect of 0.07) were true for the previous study (cohort 1), then our
results (estimated significant effect of 0.15) would make the correct inference about the existence of a positive effect

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

45

The plausible magnitude of self-affirmation effects is a crucial consideration for future
work in this field, including implications for study design. If the true self-affirmation effect size
for Black and Hispanic students when implemented on a large scale is 0.07, then we are aware of
no studies with adequate power to reliably detect the effect, and statistically significant published
results are likely to overstate the true impacts. The practical importance of such a small effect
may be debatable, but from a policy perspective even a small benefit at scale could justify the
negligible cost of this intervention. For instance, the benefits of the Tennessee STAR class size
reduction experiment have been estimated to be 0.07 standard deviations in student reading
achievement per $1,000 in per-pupil expenditure (Borman & Hewes, 2002, p. 258). A
comparable benefit for brief self-affirmation activities, which are orders of magnitude less costly,
would be very valuable for educators and policymakers. Therefore, more precise evidence about
even potentially small effects of self-affirmation are needed. However, we recognize that more
effective implementation of self-affirmation activities may be more expensive, especially if it
requires dynamic guidance from a dedicated “psychological engineer” (Yeager & Walton, 2011).
If this approach proved successful, then policy implications would then depend on the trade-off
between greater benefits and costs.
Can we identify the necessary and sufficient preconditions for self-affirmation success?
A second key contribution of this paper is our detailed analysis of the differential effects
of self-affirmation in two large-scale studies conducted in the same research setting. The results
are puzzling in their lack of definitive explanation for differences, but they are informative
because they demonstrate variation that cannot be explained by the moderators of selfaffirmation benefits that have been proposed in the literature (see summary in Table 3). Our

but overstate the magnitude of this effect by approximately the amount expected by a significant effect for this study
design.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

46

general conclusion is that the current hypotheses about variation in self-affirmation effects are
insufficient to explain the potentially subtle moderators of impacts. We highlight three specific
and related implications of the results.
First, our analyses demonstrate the value of tests of moderators to assess theory about
where, and ultimately how, specific interventions are successful. The tests conducted here
provide strong, if indirect, evidence about hypothesized differences due to implementation,
individual, and context characteristics. Our assessment of individual differences is notable in this
regard. Even though we did not directly measure all potential individual difference moderators,
we calculated that the offsetting negative impacts of self-affirmation required for an individual
difference moderator to explain the cohort differences were too large to be plausible. As a result,
theorized differences in individuals across the two cohorts are unlikely to explain the
heterogeneous results. In addition, our tests of moderators draw on the analytic leverage
provided by a within-research site comparison across multiple cohorts and on the collection of
relatively detailed implementation data, including students’ written responses. This demonstrates
the value of replication over time within a consistent research setting.
At the same time, unexplained variability highlights the need for additional inquiry into
the implementation of these activities in diverse educational settings. Our attention to teachers’
delivery of the activities and students’ responses in large-scale implementations provides a first
step in measuring variation in the implementation of self-affirmation exercises, but more work is
needed to identify the necessary components for success. One insight from the scale-up effort
reported here is the potential tension between fidelity to the scripted intervention and adaptation
to local classrooms. At scale, teachers are unlikely to have close, long-standing relationships
with researchers, and they are likely to respond to this tension in different ways. Some responses

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

47

may have undercut the potency of the intervention, even though they did not preclude benefits in
cohort 1 and they did not seem to explain the different results in cohort 2. One future direction
could be to remove teachers from delivery through computerized implementation. However, the
protocol might alternatively be modified to include teachers more fully. Our anecdotal
interactions suggest that teachers would implement much more organically if they were allowed
to read students’ responses. Future research could explore implications for implementation and
effectiveness.
Second, our results point to the need to develop the theory and evidence about how and
where self-affirmation works. Because we tested a comprehensive list of proposed moderators of
self-affirmation and failed to explain the variation in our findings between cohorts, we conclude
that the current cadre of moderators offered by the literature is insufficient. Future experimental
studies are needed to robustly assess the existing theorized moderators, and it may be that current
theory needs to expand to incorporate new potential explanations for self-affirmation effects.
Our results call more attention to the overall lack of empirical evidence about moderators
of self-affirmation effects, which makes it difficult to judge whether theory testing or expansion
is the more crucial next step for the field. For example, there is little relevant data and few
studies assessing whether awareness about the benefits of self-affirmation, one of the best
substantiated potential influences, moderates the effectiveness of the intervention. Sherman et al.
(2009) is frequently cited for this point, but this paper only shows a correlational relationship
between awareness and affirmation effects on task performance. More research is needed to
isolate to what extent this and other theorized components contribute to effectiveness.
Moreover, the unique challenges that arise at scale highlight the need for future research
to consider the necessary and sufficient conditions of self-affirmation in applied settings. Our

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

48

results point to two important avenues in future research: measures of features of implementation
and variations in protocol. First, future research needs to develop systematic measures of
implementation. This may include videos or observations of classrooms or, alternatively, getting
more detailed information from classroom teachers soon after implementation in the form of
interviews or surveys. Similarly, administrative data offer imperfect proxies for the social
context in which self-affirmation takes place. School climate instruments, including measures of
overt and subtle forms of bias and discrimination, should be tested as more direct indices of
context. A stronger measurement component would allow researchers to assess how potentially
relevant environmental changes, such as the political unrest that occurred during the research
reported here, did or did not translate into differences in schools.
Another suggestion for future self-affirmation research in applied settings is to
experiment with features of the delivery of the intervention. For instance, researchers might
contrast computerized delivery (Paunesku et al., 2015), which may help standardize the delivery
of the intervention, to delivery by classroom teachers who, alternatively, may play important
roles if their students believe that the values-affirming exercises are coming from them. If
teacher-based delivery is employed, our experiences suggest that teacher protocols are an
important area to focus on, since even with a script individual teachers may implement materials
differently. By systematically varying these protocols, future research should consider how
different instructions affect the activities being presented as beneficial, and whether this explains
differential benefits.
Third, our unexplained heterogeneity results imply practical limitations of selfaffirmation as a tool to improve student performance and close achievement gaps. The proposed
efficacy of brief social-psychological interventions to improve educational performance is

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

49

specific, requiring tailoring the right kind of program to the right kind of students in the right
kind of social environment (Walton, 2014; Yeager & Walton, 2011). If variability in impacts
cannot be predicted with the information available to educators, then the practical value of these
interventions is unclear. That said, short self-affirmation writing exercises in the classroom
remain a virtually costless approach to potentially addressing some of the racial disparities in
school. Students often participate in broadly similar writing activities in the classroom during the
school day, and targeted self-affirmation activities are unlikely to negatively impact students.
The impacts may well be positive, but they are likely small, and our results suggest that
challenges remain in predicting where exactly, and therefore how widely, the potential benefits
of self-affirmation writing activities will extend.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

50

References
Aronson, J., Lustina, M. J., Good, C., Keough, K., & Steele, C. M. (1999). When white men
can't do math: Necessary and sufficient factors in stereotype threat. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 35(1), 29-46. doi: 10.1006/jesp.1998.1371
Borman, G. D. (2002). Experiments for Educational Evaluation and Improvement. Peabody
Journal of Education, 77(4), 7-27.
Borman, G. D., Grigg, J., & Hanselman, P. (2016). An Effort to Close Achievement Gaps at
Scale through Self-Affirmation. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 38(1), 2142. doi: 10.3102/0162373715581709
Borman, G. D., & Hewes, G. M. (2002). The Long-Term Effects and Cost-Effectiveness of
Success for All. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 24(4), 243-266. doi:
10.3102/01623737024004243
Bowen, N. K., Wegmann, K. M., & Webber, K. C. (2013). Enhancing a brief writing
intervention to combat stereotype threat among middle-school students. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 105(2), 427-435. doi: 10.1037/a0031177
Brandt, M. J., Ijzerman, H., Dijksterhuis, A., Farach, F. J., Geller, J., Giner-Sorolla, R., . . . van 't
Veer, A. (2014). The Replication Recipe: What makes for a convincing replication?
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 50, 217-224. doi: 10.1016/j.jesp.2013.10.005
Bryk, A. S., Gomez, L. M., & Grunow, A. (2011). Getting ideas into action: Building networked
improvement communities in education Frontiers in sociology of education (pp. 127162): Springer.
Coburn, C. E. (2004). Beyond Decoupling: Rethinking the Relationship Between the
Institutional Environment and the Classroom. Sociology of Education, 77(3), 211-244.
Cohen, G. L., Aronson, J., & Steele, C. M. (2000). When beliefs yield to evidence: Reducing
biased evaluation by affirming the self. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
26(9), 1151-1164. doi: 10.1177/01461672002611011
Cohen, G. L., & Garcia, J. (2008). Identity, Belonging, and Achievement: A Model,
Interventions, Implications. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 17(6), 365-369.
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8721.2008.00607.x
Cohen, G. L., & Garcia, J. (2014). Educational Theory, Practice, and Policy and the Wisdom of
Social Psychology. Policy Insights from the Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 1(1), 13-20.
doi: 10.1177/2372732214551559
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., & Master, A. (2006). Reducing the racial achievement gap: A
social-psychological intervention. Science, 313(5791), 1307-1310. doi:
10.1126/science.1128317
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Apfel, N., & Brzustoski, P. (2009). Recursive
Processes in Self-Affirmation: Intervening to Close the Minority Achievement Gap.
Science, 324(5925), 400-403. doi: 10.1126/science.1170769
Cohen, G. L., & Sherman, D. K. (2014). The Psychology of Change: Self-Affirmation and Social
Psychological Intervention. Annual Review of Psychology, Vol 65, 65, 333-371. doi:
10.1146/annurev-psych-010213-115137
Cook, J. E., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (2012). Chronic Threat and
Contingent Belonging: Protective Benefits of Values Affirmation on Identity
Development. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102(3), 479-496. doi:
10.1037/a0026312

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

51

Critcher, C. R., & Dunning, D. (2015). Self-Affirmations Provide a Broader Perspective on SelfThreat. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 41(1), 3-18. doi:
10.1177/0146167214554956
Critcher, C. R., Dunning, D., & Armor, D. A. (2010). When Self-Affirmations Reduce
Defensiveness: Timing Is Key. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 36(7), 947959. doi: 10.1177/0146167210369557
Dasgupta, N., Scircle, M. M., & Hunsinger, M. (2015). Female peers in small work groups
enhance women's motivation, verbal participation, and career aspirations in engineering.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(16), 4988-4993. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1422822112
Dee, T. S. (2015). Social Identity and Achievement Gaps: Evidence from an Affirmation
Intervention. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 8(2), 149-168. doi:
10.1080/19345747.2014.906009
Eagly, A. H., & Kite, M. E. (1987). Are stereotypes of nationalities applied to both women and
men? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53(3), 451-462. doi: 10.1037/00223514.53.3.451
Gelman, A., & Carlin, J. (2014). Beyond Power Calculations: Assessing Type S (Sign) and Type
M (Magnitude) Errors. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 9(6), 641-651. doi:
10.1177/1745691614551642
Hanselman, P., Bruch, S. K., Gamoran, A., & Borman, G. D. (2014). Threat in Context: School
Moderation of the Impact of Social Identity Threat on Racial/Ethnic Achievement Gaps.
Sociology of Education, 87(2), 106-124. doi: 10.1177/0038040714525970
Harackiewicz, J. M., Canning, E. A., Tibbetts, Y., Giffen, C. J., Blair, S. S., Rouse, D. I., &
Hyde, J. S. (2014). Closing the social class achievement gap for first-generation students
in undergraduate biology. Journal of Educational Psychology, 106(2), 375-389. doi:
10.1037/a0034679
Harackiewicz, J. M., Canning, E. A., Tibbetts, Y., Priniski, S. J., & Hyde, J. S. (in press).
Closing Achievement Gaps with a Utility-Value Intervention: Disentangling Race and
Class. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. doi: 10.1037/pspp0000075
Inzlicht, M., & Ben-Zeev, T. (2000). A threatening intellectual environment: Why females are
susceptible to experiencing problem-solving deficits in the presence of males.
Psychological Science, 11(5), 365-371. doi: 10.1111/1467-9280.00272
Ioannidis, J. P. A. (2005). Why most published research findings are false. Plos Medicine, 2(8),
696-701. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0020124
Ioannidis, J. P. A. (2012). Why Science Is Not Necessarily Self-Correcting. Perspectives on
Psychological Science, 7(6), 645-654. doi: 10.1177/1745691612464056
Kost-Smith, L. E., Pollock, S. J., Finkelstein, N. D., Cohen, G. L., Ito, T. A., & Miyake, A.
(2012). Replicating a self-affirmation intervention to address gender differences:
Successes and challenges. AIP Conference Proceedings, 1413(1), 231-234. doi:
10.1063/1.3680037
Lauer, S., Momsen, J., Offerdahl, E., Kryjevskaia, M., Christensen, W., & Montplaisir, L.
(2013). Stereotyped: Investigating Gender in Introductory Science Courses. CBE-Life
Sciences Education, 12(1), 30-38. doi: 10.1187/cbe.12-08-0133
McQueen, A., & Klein, W. M. P. (2006). Experimental manipulations of self-affirmation: A
systematic review. Self and Identity, 5(4), 289-354. doi: 10.1080/15298860600805325

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

52

Miyake, A., Kost-Smith, L. E., Finkelstein, N. D., Pollock, S. J., Cohen, G. L., & Ito, T. A.
(2010). Reducing the Gender Achievement Gap in College Science: A Classroom Study
of Values Affirmation. Science, 330(6008), 1234-1237. doi: 10.1126/science.1195996
Murphy, M. C., Steele, C. M., & Gross, J. J. (2007). Signaling threat: How situational cues affect
women in math, science, and engineering settings. Psychological Science, 18(10), 879885. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.01995.x
Pashler, H., & Harris, C. R. (2012). Is the Replicability Crisis Overblown? Three Arguments
Examined. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7(6), 531-536. doi:
10.1177/1745691612463401
Paunesku, D., Walton, G. M., Romero, C., Smith, E. N., Yeager, D. S., & Dweck, C. S. (2015).
Mind-Set Interventions Are a Scalable Treatment for Academic Underachievement.
Psychological Science, 26(6), 784-793. doi: 10.1177/0956797615571017
Purdie-Vaughns, V., Cohen, G., Garcia, J., Sumner, R., Cook, J., & Apfel, N. (2009). Improving
minority academic performance: How a values-affirmation intervention works. The
Teachers College Record.
Purdie-Vaughns, V., & Eibach, R. (2008). Intersectional Invisibility: The Distinctive Advantages
and Disadvantages of Multiple Subordinate-Group Identities. Sex Roles, 59(5/6), 377391. doi: 10.1007/s11199-008-9424-4
Schmader, T., Johns, M., & Forbes, C. (2008). An integrated process model of stereotype threat
effects on performance. Psychological Review, 115(2), 336-356. doi: 10.1037/0033295x.115.2.336
Schneider, B., & McDonald, S.-K. (2006). Scale-up in education: Ideas in principle (Vol. 1):
Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.
Shapiro, J. A., & Neuberg, S. L. (2007). From Stereotype Threat to Stereotype Threats:
Implications of a Multi-Threat Framework for Causes, Moderators, Mediators,
Consequences, and Interventions. Personality & Social Psychology Review (Sage
Publications Inc.), 11(2), 107-130. doi: 10.1177/1088868306294790
Sherman, D. K., & Cohen, G. L. (2006). The psychology of self-defense: Self-affirmation theory.
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 183.
Sherman, D. K., Cohen, G. L., Nelson, L. D., Nussbaum, A. D., Bunyan, D. P., & Garcia, J.
(2009). Affirmed Yet Unaware: Exploring the Role of Awareness in the Process of SelfAffirmation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 97(5), 745-764. doi:
10.1037/a0015451
Sherman, D. K., Hartson, K. A., Binning, K. R., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., Taborsky-Barba,
S., . . . Cohen, G. L. (2013). Deflecting the Trajectory and Changing the Narrative: How
Self-Affirmation Affects Academic Performance and Motivation Under Identity Threat.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 104(4), 591-618. doi: 10.1037/a0031495
Shnabel, N., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Cook, J. E., Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (2013). Demystifying
Values-Affirmation Interventions: Writing About Social Belonging Is a Key to Buffering
Against Identity Threat. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 39(5), 663-676. doi:
10.1177/0146167213480816
Sidanius, J., & Pratto, F. (1999). Social dominance : an intergroup theory of social hierarchy
and oppression. Cambridge, UK; New York: Cambridge University Press.
Silverman, A., Logel, C., & Cohen, G. L. (2013). Self-affirmation as a deliberate coping
strategy: The moderating role of choice. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
49(1), 93-98. doi: 10.1016/j.jesp.2012.08.005

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

53

Steele, C. M. (1988). The psychology of self-affirmation: Sustaining the integrity of the self.
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 21(2), 261-302.
Steele, C. M. (1997). A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape intellectual identity and
performance. American Psychologist, 52(6), 613-629. doi: 10.1037/0003-066X.52.6.613
Steele, C. M., & Aronson, J. (1995). Stereotype Threat and the Intellectual Test-Performance of
African-Americans. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69(5), 797-811.
Steele, C. M., Spencer, S. J., & Aronson, J. (2002). Contending with group image: The
psychology of stereotype and social identity threat. Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology, 34, 379-440. doi: 10.1016/s0065-2601(02)80009-0
Taylor, V. J., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Stereotype Threat Undermines Academic Learning.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 37(8), 1055-1067. doi:
10.1177/0146167211406506
Tibbetts, Y., Harackiewicz, J. M., Canning, E. A., Boston, J. S., Priniski, S. J., & Hyde, J. S. (in
press). Affirming independence: Exploring mechanisms underlying a values affirmation
intervention for first-generation students. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology.
Walton, G. M. (2014). The New Science of Wise Psychological Interventions. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 23(1), 73-82. doi: 10.1177/0963721413512856
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2003). Stereotype Lift. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 39(5), 456-467. doi: 10.1016/S0022-1031(03)00019-2
Walton, G. M., Paunesku, D., & Dweck, C. S. (2012). Expandable selves. In M. R. Leary & J.
Tangney (Eds.), Handbook of self and identity (2nd ed.) (pp. 141-154). New York, NY:
Guilford Press.
Weick, K. E. (1976). Educational Organizations as Loosely Coupled Systems. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 21(1), 1-19. doi: 10.2307/2391875
Wilson, T. D. (2011). Redirect : the surprising new science of psychological change. New York,
NY: Little, Brown and Company.
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-Psychological Interventions in Education:
They're Not Magic. Review of Educational Research, 81(2), 267-301. doi:
10.3102/0034654311405999

Running head: SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

54

Table 1. Descriptive Statistics and Experimental Balance by Study, Overall and for Potentially Threatened Students (Black/Hispanic)
Cohort 1
Sample
Variable
All Students
Female
Potentially Threatened
American Indian
Asian
Black
White
Limited English Proficiency
Free/Reduced Lunch
Grade 6 GPA
Grade 6 WKCE Math
Grade 6 WKCE Reading

Black/Hispanic Students
Female
Potentially Threatened
American Indian
Asian
Black
White
Limited English Proficiency
Free/Reduced Lunch
Grade 6 GPA

Mean
[939]
0.502
0.353
0.039
0.106
0.183
0.757
0.144
0.411
3.27
(0.64)
525.3
(57.5)
510.8
(56.4)

C
Mean
[465]
0.520
0.357
0.047
0.092
0.163
0.768
0.159
0.413
3.28
(0.65)
522.2
(57.8)
508.0
(56.7)

T
Mean
[474]
0.483
0.348
0.032
0.120
0.203
0.747
0.129
0.409
3.27
(0.63)
528.4
(57.1)
513.6
(56.0)

[331]
0.489
1
0.112
0.009
0.520
0.568
0.293
0.801
2.85

[166]
0.512
1
0.133
0.006
0.458
0.584
0.343
0.819
2.83

[165]
0.467
1
0.091
0.012
0.582
0.552
0.242
0.782
2.87

Cohort 2
Std
Diff.
(C-T)

p

0.075
0.019
0.080
-0.090
-0.101
0.049
0.087
0.007
0.009

0.253
0.776
0.218
0.168
0.122
0.456
0.184
0.910
0.896

-0.108

0.098

-0.100

0.127

0.091

0.410

0.132 0.231
-0.064 0.560
-0.248 0.024
0.066 0.548
0.221 0.044
0.094 0.395
-0.061 0.583

Mean
[1170]
0.499
0.384
0.032
0.142
0.230
0.702
0.170
0.463
3.19
(0.67)
516.8
(51.7)
504.8
(57.1)

C
Mean
[580]
0.498
0.367
0.028
0.147
0.209
0.712
0.167
0.459
3.21
(0.68)
515.0
(51.1)
505.0
(57.4)

T
Mean
[590]
0.500
0.400
0.036
0.137
0.251
0.692
0.173
0.468
3.18
(0.67)
518.6
(52.3)
504.5
(56.9)

[449]
0.566
1
0.082
0.020
0.599
0.519
0.294
0.851
2.78

[213]
0.568
1
0.075
0.028
0.568
0.521
0.300
0.864
2.75

[236]
0.564
1
0.089
0.013
0.627
0.517
0.288
0.839
2.80

Std
Diff.
(C-T)

p

-0.003
-0.067
-0.046
0.027
-0.100
0.045
-0.015
-0.018
0.042

0.953
0.250
0.434
0.650
0.086
0.443
0.798
0.753
0.477

-0.071

0.227

0.009

0.872

0.009

0.923

-0.050
0.110
-0.120
0.008
0.027
0.070
-0.076

0.595
0.244
0.203
0.930
0.775
0.461
0.420

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

55

(0.65)
(2.83)
(0.61)
(0.65)
(0.63)
(0.66)
Grade 6 WKCE Math
491.3
488.9
493.8
-0.092 0.406
486.1
482.6
489.3
-0.149 0.114
(53.1)
(55.2)
(51.1)
(44.7)
(44.7)
(44.6)
Grade 6 WKCE Reading
477.9
475.9
480.0
-0.076 0.490
471.9
471.3
472.4
-0.021 0.823
(53.3)
(51.9)
(54.8)
(52.1)
(52.5)
(51.9)
T = Treatment, C = Control, Std Diff. = Treatment-control in standardized units, p = p-value for test of the null hypothesis that the
difference (C-T) is equal to zero.
Standard deviations in parentheses; sample sizes in brackets
Notes: Racial/ethnic indicators are not mutually exclusive and do not sum to 1 across groups. This table includes multiracial and
White Hispanic students with potentially threatened students, as in our main specifications.

Running head: SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

56

Table 2. Standardized Self-affirmation Treatment Impact Estimates for Black and Hispanic
Students
Cohort 1
Cohort 2
p-value
(N = 331)
(N = 449)
for
Outcome
Estimate
SE
Estimate
SE
Difference
GPA, Grade 7
0.062
0.057
-0.002
0.043
0.363
GPA, Grade 8
0.152
0.070
-0.072
0.058
0.013
WKCE Mathematics, Grade 7
0.072
0.059
-0.085
0.047
0.037
WKCE Mathematics, Grade 8
0.101
0.070
-0.080
0.044
0.023
WKCE Reading, Grade 7
-0.034
0.069
-0.005
0.055
0.737
WKCE Reading, Grade 8
-0.030
0.071
-0.005
0.056
0.781
SE = Standard Error; GPA = Overall grade point average; WKCE = Wisconsin Knowledge and
Concepts Examination
Note: All estimates are based on models including controls for pre-treatment measures of the
outcome and baseline student characteristics (gender, special education status, Limited English
Proficiency designation, and eligibility for free or reduced price lunch). See Table A3 for full
pooled model results.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

57

Table 3. Summary of Tested Hypotheses
Hypothesized Explanation for
Difference in Effects
Different effects due to features of the
intervention delivery/implementation
Providers

Control group

Stealth

Awareness of Purported benefits

Timing
Engagement with the prompt

Empirical Tests of Consistency between
Cohorts

Consistent benefits for teachers
implementing in both cohorts?
All changes in benefits are due to teachers
implementing in both cohorts (due to
fatigue)?
Consistent benefits when compared to
students in the original control
condition?
Teachers report more violations of
protocol in second cohort: describing the
activity as externally imposed research?
Teachers report more violations of
protocol in second cohort: describing the
activity as “good for you”?
Intervention more likely to miss key
stressful periods in second cohort?

Result

No
No

No

No

No
No

Students complete fewer exercises in
second cohort?

No

Students write fewer words in second
cohort?

No

Impact on self-affirming writing is
different in second cohort?

No

Consistent benefits for all Black and
Hispanic students?

No

Consistent benefits for non-multiracial
Black and Hispanic students?

No

Different effects due to individual
characteristics
Racial group

Race and gender
Prior achievement and other
administrative characteristics
Unobserved receptivity to selfaffirmation
Social context differences

Consistent benefits for male minority
students?
Consistent benefits when populations are
re-weighted across cohorts on
observable characteristics?
Magnitude of different benefits for
unobserved populations are plausible?

No
No
No

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

58

Broad (district) racial and academic
climate

No

School racial and academic climate

Different representation of racial
minorities for the second cohort?
Lower racial achievement differences for
the second cohort?
More consistent benefits in “high threat”
schools with few minority students and
large gaps?
Differential benefits explained by one or
two schools?

No
No
No

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

59

Figure 1. Estimated Effects of Self-affirmation Writing Exercises on Middle School Grade Point
Average

Source: Authors’ calculations; see Table A1 for specific references.
Notes: Symbols plot reported effect sizes for potentially stereotyped groups (African American
and/or Hispanic students) for the first year of the self-affirmation intervention, and lines
represent 95% confidence intervals (+/- 1.96 standard errors). Shapes represent distinct school or
district contexts. For instance, Sherman et al. (2013) studies 1 and 2 were conducted in different
schools in different states. Dee (2015) reports subgroup results from the same sample of
Philadelphia-area schools. The dashed line represents the overall mean effect size (0.07),
calculated by weighting individual estimates according to the inverse of their squared standard
error. The impact estimates are lower in the large-scale replication studies (Dee 2015, Borman et
al. 2016, and Current Study), but these differences could reflect heterogeneous effects across
local context, research team, and implementation. This paper investigates two effects observed
within the trial conducted in a single school district (represented by circles), for which context
and procedures were consistent.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

60

Figure 2. Yearly Grade Point Average (with 95% Confidence Intervals) by Race/ethnicity and
Experimental Condition

Notes: Randomly assigned self-affirmation writing interventions were administered throughout
the 7th grade year. No effects of the treatment are hypothesized for Asian and White students,
who are not subject to general negative stereotypes about academic ability. Raw treatment vs.
control differences are statistically different from zero only for Black and Hispanic students in
Grade 8 in cohort 1. The treatment benefits in that cohort are statistically different than the small
negative effect observed in cohort 2. See Table 2 for standardized estimates and Table A3 for
results from a pooled treatment effects model.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

61

Figure 3. Estimated Self-affirmation Treatment Effects on Grade 8 GPA by Cohort, Sample,
Comparison Group, and Included Covariates

GPA = Overall Grade Point Average; CI = Confidence Interval

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

62

Note: Each estimate was calculated from a separate multilevel model (students nested within
schools) of intention to treat effect of the self-affirmation writing activities. Full covariates
specifications include: grade 6 GPA, gender, special education status, Limited English
Proficiency designation, and eligibility for free or reduced price lunch. Prior outcome is grade 6
GPA. In the “Original Control” condition, students wrote about a least important value in each of
the first two interventions. The “Combined Control” group includes these students as well as
those who were assigned at least one writing prompt that did not explicitly mention values. For
readability, the displayed range is restricted to effect sizes of absolute value 0.3 or less. Asterisks
indicate that the estimated effects are statistically significantly different between cohorts (p <
0.05), based on a pooled model. The primary result, reported in Table 2, is the estimate for
Black/Hispanic sample with combined control condition and full covariates (Panel B1 circles).
Other results assess whether patterns were different for subpopulations and comparisons where
self-affirmation benefits are hypothesized to be stronger and more consistent, as described in the
text. Because the cohort difference persists across all specifications (although less precise in
smaller subsamples), these tests provide no evidence that hypothesized moderators explain the
difference.

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

63

Figure 4. Power Calculations for Range of True Effect Sizes of Self-affirmation Intervention
Effects

Notes: Curves represent power (left panel) and expected exaggeration of a treatment effect
estimate significant at the 0.05 level (right panel) for self-affirmation effects in grade 8, given the
design for new study (cohort 2) reported here. Calculations are based on the procedure suggested
by Gelman and Carlin (2014). Diamonds represent an effect size of 0.3, consistent with the initial
study of self-affirmation interventions (Cohen et al. 2006); if true effects are this large, then
power is virtually 1.0 and expected exaggeration is minimal. Circles represent the estimated
effect size for the first cohort of students (d = 0.15). If the true effect were this large, then cohort
2 power would be 0.68 and expected exaggeration would be 1.21. Xs represent the mean effect
size calculated in Figure 1 (d = 0.07). If the true effect were this large, power would be 0.21 and
significant values would exaggerate the true effect by 2.22 times on average.

Running head: SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS

64

SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIALS INTENDED FOR ONLINE DISTRIBUTION
Appendix
Table A1. Source of Standardized Impact Estimates Displayed in Figure 1
Citation
Cohen et al.
(2006)

Grade(s) N
N Source
7
119 p. 1307

D
SE Impact Source
0.31 0.12 "African American students in the
affirmation condition earned a higher grade
point average (GPA) in these nontargeted
courses than did those in the control
condition [experiment 1: B = 0.31, t(40) =
2.63, P < 0.02; experiment 2: B = 0.21,
t(58) = 1.70, P < 0.10 two-tailed test, P <
0.05 one-tailed test]. Pooling data from both
experiments yielded a significant effect [B
= 0.23, t(108) = 2.51, P = 0.02]." (p. 1308)
81 p. 596
0.29 0.10 "Affirmed Latino American students (M =
2.62, SE = 0.06) had a higher GPA than
unaffirmed Latino American students (M =
2.40, SE = .06), F(1, 177) = 8.18, p =
.005, d = 0.29." (p. 600)
55 p. 602
0.45 0.18 "Affirmed Latino American students (M =
2.84, SE = 0.12) had a higher GPA than
unaffirmed Latino American students (M =
2.46, SE = 0.11), F(1, 146) = 5.05, p = .026,
d = 0.45." (p. 605)
994 Calculated 0.02 0.06 Raw impact estimate reported in Table 5;
from
SD of outcome reported in Table 3.
Table 2

Additional Notes
SE calculated from
reported t statistic and
estimate. Effect size
calculated assuming
GPA standard deviation
of 0.75.

Sherman et
al. (2013)
Study 1

6,7,8

Sherman et
al. (2013)
Study 2

7

Dee (2015):
Black
Students

7

Dee (2015):

7

SE calculated from
derived t statistic
(square root of F
statistic) and reported
estimate.
SE calculated from
derived t statistic
(square root of F
statistic) and reported
estimate.
Overall GPA not
reported. Estimate
reflects targeted class
only.
Overall GPA not

495 Calculated 0.05 0.10 Raw impact estimate reported in Table 5;

SELF-AFFIRMATION HETEROGENEITY IN TWO COHORTS
Hispanic
Students
Borman et
al. (2016)

from
Table 2
7

65

SD of outcome reported in Table 3.

374 Calculated 0.09 0.04 "To illustrate, the estimated interaction term
from
(0.082) and marginal effect (0.065) for the
Table 1
cumulative GPA outcome correspond to
effect sizes of 0.11 and 0.09, respectively."
(35)
449 Table 1
0.00 0.04 Table 2

reported. Estimate
reflects targeted class
only.
SE is calculated from CI
for raw estimate
reported in Table A5.

Current
7
Study
D = Standardized Treatment Effect, SE = Standard Error, CI = 95% Confidence Interval
Notes: All estimates reflect standardized impacts on grade point average (overall if reported) during the year of implementation. A
spreadsheet with all calculations is available upon request.

Running head: EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS
Table A2. Summary of the Madison Writing and Achievement Project Self-affirmation
Randomized Control Trial in Two Cohorts
Cohort 1
Cohort 2
Overview

Recruitment

7th Grade Year

2011-2012

2012-2013

Treatment
Implementation

Conducted by Language
Arts or Homeroom
Teachers 3-4 times during
year

Conducted by Language
Arts or Homeroom
Teachers 3-4 times during
year

Experimental
Groups

Treatment (50%), Control
A (25%), and Control B
(25%)

Treatment (50%), Control
A (25%), and Control B
(25%)

Parental Consent

Collected at school
registration days (August)
and follow-up via
permission slips
distributed in school
(September)

Collected at school
registration days (August)
and follow-up via
permission slips
distributed in school
(September)

Student Assent

Conducted in classrooms
at the beginning of the
school year (September)

Collected at school
registration days (August)
and individual follow-up
in school (September)

Consent Rate

63.6%

72.8%

Students select from a list
and write about their
important values

Students select from a list
and write about their
important values

"Original" control:
students select nonimportant values and write
about their potential
importance to someone
else

"Original" control:
students select nonimportant values and write
about their potential
importance to someone
else

Intervention
Details
Treatment
Ex 1
(September or
October)
Control A

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS

Ex 2
(November)

Ex 3 (January
or February)

Ex 4 (April or
May)

67

Control B

"Original" control:
students select nonimportant values and write
about their potential
importance to someone
else

"Neutral" Control:
Students respond to a
writing prompt about their
summer that does not
explicitly mention values

Treatment

Students select from a list
and write about their
important values

Students select from a list
and write about their
important values

Control A

"Original" control:
students select nonimportant values and write
about their potential
importance to someone
else

"Original" control:
students select nonimportant values and write
about their potential
importance to someone
else

Control B

"Neutral" Control:
students respond to a
procedural writing
prompt, such as
explaining how to open a
locker

"Neutral" Control:
students respond to a
procedural writing
prompt, such as
explaining how to open a
locker

Treatment

Students write freeresponse about important
values

Students write freeresponse about important
values

Control (A and B) Students respond to a
procedural writing prompt
about their morning
routine

Students respond to a
procedural writing prompt
about their morning
routine

Treatment

Students write about how
a previously selected
value is important now

Students write about how
a previously selected
value is important now

Control (A and B) Students respond to a
procedural writing prompt
about their after-school
routine

Students respond to a
procedural writing prompt
about their after-school
routine

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS
Other In
Class
Activities

68

In-class assent

Conducted by researchers
in classrooms at the
beginning of the school
year (September) with no
specific reference to selfaffirmation activities

None

In-class survey

None

Conducted by researchers
at beginning (September)
and end (May) of 7th
grade with no specific
reference to selfaffirmation activities

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS

69

Table A3. Regression Estimates from Pooled Multilevel Models of Treatment Impacts on each
Outcome for Potentially Threatened Students (Black and Hispanic)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Grade 7 Grade 8
Grade 7
Grade 8 Grade 7 Grade 8
GPA
GPA
Math
Math
Read
Read
Treatment
0.044
0.124*
2.996
4.954+
-2.035
-1.336
(0.041)
(0.054)
(2.573)
(2.905)
(3.432)
(3.445)
Cohort 2
0.185
0.535*
7.065
8.338
51.166+ 11.904
(0.179)
(0.235)
(23.358)
(26.375) (28.740) (28.860)
Treatment * Cohort
-0.046
-0.180*
-6.893*
-8.850*
1.589
0.872
(0.054)
(0.071)
(3.386)
(3.823)
(4.512)
(4.530)
6th Grade Outcome
Measure

0.935*

0.864*

0.722*

0.754*

0.811*

0.750*

(0.037)
0.089*
(0.041)
0.063

(0.049)
0.112*
(0.054)
0.163*

(0.032)
2.395
(2.565)
-2.262

(0.036)
-2.074
(2.896)
-0.437

(0.042)
5.805+
(3.420)
-6.495

(0.042)
9.925*
(3.433)
2.262

(0.048)
-0.012
(0.056)
-0.207*
(0.057)
-0.027

(0.063)
0.001
(0.073)
-0.187*
(0.075)
-0.086

(3.060)
-7.653*
(3.863)
-6.935+
(3.594)
0.014

(3.455)
-16.141*
(4.362)
-10.572*
(4.058)
-0.018

(4.212)
-11.394*
(4.986)
-18.284*
(4.766)
-0.107*

(4.227)
-17.482*
(5.005)
-17.924*
(4.772)
-0.044

(0.049)
Cohort 2 * Female
-0.073
(0.055)
Cohort 2 * Limited English 0.008
Proficiency
(0.063)
Cohort 2 * Special
0.128+
Education
(0.074)
Cohort 2 * Free/reduced
-0.019
Price Lunch
(0.078)
Constant
0.082
(0.148)
Variance Component
Estimates
var(School)
0.036*

(0.064)
0.005
(0.072)
-0.003

(0.042)
-3.337
(3.413)
5.383

(0.048)
1.132
(3.854)
3.558

(0.053)
-5.676
(4.555)
6.442

(0.053)
-9.961*
(4.572)
-2.177

(0.082)
0.074

(3.947)
-7.312

(4.456)
1.176

(5.409)
-4.201

(5.423)
1.942

(0.098)
-0.183+

(5.013)
-6.558

(5.660)
-2.920

(6.592)
2.487

(6.617)
2.110

(0.103)
0.185
(0.189)

(4.891)
160.789*
(17.710)

(5.523)
(6.479)
(6.503)
159.516* 120.567* 159.464*
(19.997) (22.613) (22.689)

0.036*

0.000

0.000

Female
Limited English
Proficiency
Special Education
Free/reduced Price Lunch
Cohort 2 * 6th Grade
Outcome Measure

10.671*

5.544

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS
(0.016)
var(Residual)
0.137*
(0.007)
N
780
Schools
11
Standard errors in parentheses
+ p<.1, * p<.05

(0.017)
0.236*
(0.012)
780
11

(0.001)
539.207*
(27.306)
780
11

70
(0.000)
687.458*
(34.811)
780
11

(10.845)
956.376*
(48.790)
780
11

(8.492)
964.651*
(49.205)
780
11

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS

71

Table A4. Estimates for Treatment Impacts on Grade 8 GPA by Cohort and Teacher Type (bothcohort versus single-cohort) for Potentially Threatened Students (Black and Hispanic)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
All
BothSingleAll
Teachers cohort
cohort
Teachers
Teachers Teachers
Treatment
0.122*
0.109+
0.158
0.168
(0.055)
(0.061)
(0.120)
(0.114)
Cohort 2
0.149*
0.165*
0.098
0.110
(0.052)
(0.062)
(0.108)
(0.099)
Treatment * Cohort 2
-0.188* -0.196*
-0.188
-0.199
(0.073)
(0.086)
(0.144)
(0.137)
Both-cohort Teacher
0.010
(0.096)
Treatment * Both-cohort Teacher
-0.060
(0.130)
Cohort 2 * Both-cohort Teacher
0.066
(0.118)
Treatment * Cohort 2 * Both-cohort
0.003
Teacher
(0.163)
Grade 6 GPA
Female
Limited English Proficiency
Special Education
Free/reduced Lunch
Intercept
Variance Component Estimates
var(School)
var(Residual)
N
Schools

0.831*
(0.033)
0.102*
(0.037)
0.152*
(0.042)
0.041
(0.051)
-0.272*
(0.055)
0.353*
(0.137)

0.806*
(0.040)
0.077+
(0.044)
0.189*
(0.051)
0.023
(0.057)
-0.259*
(0.064)
0.465*
(0.160)

0.871*
(0.060)
0.155*
(0.071)
0.090
(0.075)
0.074
(0.109)
-0.293*
(0.104)
0.275
(0.248)

0.832*
(0.033)
0.103*
(0.037)
0.151*
(0.042)
0.038
(0.051)
-0.272*
(0.055)
0.342*
(0.155)

0.034*
(0.016)
0.242*
(0.013)
744
11

0.030*
(0.016)
0.229*
(0.015)
501
9

0.051*
(0.031)
0.262*
(0.024)
243
9

0.034*
(0.016)
0.242*
(0.013)
744
11

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS

Standard errors in parentheses
+ p<.1; * p<.05

72

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS

73

Table A5. OLS Estimates of Implementation Measures for each Exercise by Treatment Group
and Cohort for Black and Hispanic Students
Model
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Outcome
Returned
Words
Words
SelfSelfAssigned
Written
Written
affirmation affirmation
Exercise
Writing
Writing
Control Group
Both
Both
Original
Both
Original
Only
Only
A. Exercise 1
Treatment (in Cohort 1)
Cohort 2 (among control
students)
Treatment x Cohort 2
N
Outcome mean
B. Exercise 2
Treatment (in Cohort 1)
Cohort 2 (among control
students)
Treatment x Cohort 2
N
Outcome mean
C. Exercise 3
Treatment (in Cohort 1)
Cohort 2 (among control
students)
Treatment x Cohort 2
N
Outcome mean
D. Exercise 4

-0.0004
(0.0346)
0.0242

10.94+
(5.929)
13.46*

9.169
(6.474)
-1.911

0.721*
(0.0321)
0.330*

0.724*
(0.0367)
0.0431

(0.0276)
-0.0446
(0.0465)
780
0.931

(4.186)
-16.38+
(7.563)
741
71.8

(4.800)
-0.630
(6.981)
586
69.3

(0.0367)
-0.294*
(0.0433)
780
0.587

(0.0543)
-0.0105
(0.0476)
619
0.601

0.0354
(0.0258)
0.0134

7.304
(5.383)
6.652

15.47*
(6.202)
5.236

0.709*
(0.0423)
0.00792

0.669*
(0.0473)
-0.0436

(0.0556)
0.00480
(0.0472)
780
0.879

(3.766)
-4.941
(6.702)
705
70.8

(4.656)
-2.590
(7.070)
561
67.9

(0.0229)
0.0796+
(0.0413)
780
0.442

(0.0446)
0.129*
(0.0568)
619
0.546

-0.0912
(0.0555)
0.0952

14.33
(9.707)
-1.364

9.952
(11.40)
-16.13

0.370*
(0.125)
-0.0177

0.334*
(0.140)
-0.0473

(0.181)
0.0800
(0.0651)
780
0.597(a)

(10.28)
-6.801
(11.45)
464
77.6

(13.11)
8.553
(14.26)
356
77.6

(0.0121)
0.273+
(0.131)
780
0.282

(0.0263)
0.297+
(0.135)
619
0.354

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS
Treatment (in Cohort 1)
Cohort 2 (among control
students)
Treatment x Cohort 2

74

0.00791
(0.0506)
0.0458

-5.118
(6.927)
-10.48

-6.270
(7.650)
-13.11

0.611*
(0.0386)
0.0215

0.601*
(0.0403)
0.0195

(0.0384)
-0.0313
(0.0725)
780
0.868

(8.462)
4.243
(6.838)
695
82.4

(11.45)
7.705
(8.874)
547
82.1

(0.0219)
0.0795
(0.0631)
780
0.362

(0.0359)
0.0821
(0.0693)
619
0.451

N
Outcome mean
+ p < .1; * p< .05
(a) Lower exercise completion rates in exercise 3 reflect the inclusion of students in several
schools that opted out of this implementation.
Notes: Each panel presents selected results of one of 20 separate Ordinary Least Squares
regression models, defined by the model specification listed in the column heading (1-5) for the
exercise listed in the row (A-D). All models include indicators for randomization block (school)
and intercept (not shown). Standards errors (adjusted for clustering within schools) reported in
parentheses.

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS

75

Table A6. Logistic Regression Estimates of Predictors of Membership in Cohort 1 among Black
and Hispanic Students (N=780)
Coef.
Std.
P-value
Err.
Treatment
-0.071 0.152
0.639
Female
-0.327 0.156
0.036
Limited English
0.121
0.182
0.507
Proficiency
Special Education
0.136
0.224
0.545
Free/Reduced Lunch
-0.301 0.234
0.198
Grade 6 GPA Quintiles
2
0.076
0.249
0.761
3
0.233
0.266
0.380
4
0.352
0.290
0.225
5
0.399
0.348
0.252
Grade 6 Math Achievement Quintiles
2
-0.556 0.262
0.034
3
-0.872 0.294
0.003
4
-0.662 0.313
0.034
5
-0.083 0.367
0.821
Grade 6 Reading Achievement Quintiles
2
0.344
0.254
0.175
3
0.400
0.282
0.155
4
0.584
0.302
0.054
5
0.033
0.369
0.929
School Indicators
2
0.508
0.300
0.091
3
0.158
0.339
0.641
4
-0.326 0.440
0.458
5
0.077
0.347
0.825
6
-0.006 0.373
0.987
7
0.669
0.351
0.057
8
-0.061 0.397
0.878
9
0.256
0.331
0.441
10
-0.750 0.385
0.051
11
-0.051 0.332
0.879
Intercept
-0.081 0.446
0.856

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS

76

Table A7. Ordinary Least Squares Estimates of Self-affirmation Treatment Effects on Grade 8
GPA (4 point scale) for Black and Hispanic Students by Cohort, with and without Weights for
Cohort Membership
Cohort 1 Cohort 2
N
331
449
Unweighted 0.118
-0.056
(0.055)
(0.046)
Weighted
0.117
-0.041
(0.058)
(0.044)
Standard errors in parentheses.
Note: All estimates are based on models including controls for randomization block (school),
grade 6 GPA, and baseline student characteristics (gender, special education status, Limited
English Proficiency designation, and eligibility for free or reduced price lunch). Weighted
models are weighted by the inverse of the estimated probability of inclusion in the cohort. For
example, the weights for cohort 2 members are defined as:
1
𝑤𝑖 =
Pr(𝐶𝑜ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑖 = 2)
We estimated the probability of inclusion in a cohort with a logistic regression of group
membership on student characteristics, estimates reported in Table A6.

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS

77

Figure A1. Estimated Self-affirmation Treatment Effects on Grade 7 GPA by Cohort, Sample,
Comparison Group, and Included Covariates

GPA = Overall Grade Point Average; CI = Confidence Interval
Note: Each estimate was calculated from a separate multilevel model (students nested within
schools) of intention to treat effect of the self-affirmation writing activities. Full covariates

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS

78

specifications include: grade 6 GPA, gender, special education status, Limited English
Proficiency designation, and eligibility for free or reduced price lunch. Prior outcome is grade 6
GPA. In the “Original Control” condition, students wrote about a least important value in each of
the first two interventions. The “Combined Control” group includes these students as well as
those who were assigned at least one writing prompt that did not explicitly mention values. For
readability, the displayed range is restricted to effect sizes of absolute value 0.3 or less. Asterisks
indicate that the estimated effects are statistically significantly different between cohorts (p <
0.05), based on a pooled model. The main result is the Black/Hispanic sample with combined
control condition and full covariates (Panel B1 circles). Other results assess whether patterns
were different for subpopulations and comparisons where self-affirmation benefits are
hypothesized to be stronger and more consistent, as described in the text. Because the cohort
difference persists across all specifications (although less precise in smaller subsamples), these
tests provide no evidence that hypothesized moderators explain the difference.

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS

79

Figure A2. Racial/ethnic Achievement Gap in 6th Grade Mathematics, 2007-2013

450

470

490

510

530

550

6th Grade WKCE Math Gap Across Years, By Threat Status

2007

2008

2009

2010
Year

Non-Threatened

2011

2012

2013

Threatened

WKCE = Wisconsin Knowledge and Concepts Evaluation
Notes: Non-threatened students include White and Asian students. Threatened students are Black
and Hispanic.

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS

80

Figure A3. Demographic Consistency between the Two Cohorts: Racial Composition and
Standardized Achievement Gaps Prior to the Intervention
Proportion of Threatened Students in Each Cohort, By School

-1

.1

-1.6

.2

-1.4

.3

.4

-1.2

.5

.6

WKCE Math Gap

-.8

.7

.8

-.6

.9

-.4

1

WKCE Math Gap in Each Cohort, By School

1

2
Cohort

1

2
Cohort

Notes: Each line represents one school. Horizontal slopes indicate no absolute change in the
demographic characteristic between each cohort. Racial achievement gaps are calculated as the
standardized difference in Wisconsin Knowledge and Concepts Examination (WKCE)
mathematics scale scores in 6th grade for Black and Hispanic students compared to Whites and
Asians.

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS

81

Figure A4. Treatment Impact Estimates for Black/Hispanic Students in Cohort 1 and 2 by School

Notes: Each point represents the two cohort treatment effect estimates for grade 8 GPA for a
each school (among Black and Hispanic students), including controls for grade 6 GPA, gender,
special education status, Limited English Proficiency designation, and eligibility for free or
reduced price lunch. The line y=x is plotted, representing equal estimates in both cohorts.

EFFECTS OF SELF-AFFIRMATION IN TWO COHORTS

82

Figure A5. Distribution of Self-affirmation Treatment Estimates in each Cohort and Interaction,
Omitting Pairs of Schools

Each boxplot represents the distribution of estimates omitting 10 school pairs, grouped by the 11
schools. The top boxplot in each panel reflects estimates from all pairs omitting school 1 (1 and
2, 1 and 3, …, 1 and 11). The next reflects all estimates omitting school 2 (2and 1, 2 and 3, … , 2
and 11). Note that each pair of schools is therefore represented twice (the 1-2 pair is represented
in the distribution for school 1 and for school 2, for instance). The dashed lines represent the
overall estimate (omitting no schools).

PS69CH17-Harackiewicz

ARI

14 November 2017

8:28

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

Annual Review of Psychology

Improving Student Outcomes
in Higher Education: The
Science of Targeted
Intervention
Judith M. Harackiewicz and Stacy J. Priniski
Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53706;
email: jmharack@wisc.edu, spriniski@wisc.edu

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018. 69:409–35

Keywords

First published as a Review in Advance on
September 20, 2017

intervention, achievement gaps, belonging, utility value, values affirmation

The Annual Review of Psychology is online at
psych.annualreviews.org

Abstract

https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-122216011725
c 2018 by Annual Reviews.
Copyright 
All rights reserved

ANNUAL
REVIEWS

Further

Click here to view this article's
online features:
• Download ﬁgures as PPT slides
• Navigate linked references
• Download citations
• Explore related articles
• Search keywords

Many theoretically based interventions have been developed over the past
two decades to improve educational outcomes in higher education. Based
in social-psychological and motivation theories, well-crafted interventions
have proven remarkably effective because they target specific educational
problems and the processes that underlie them. In this review, we evaluate
the current state of the literature on targeted interventions in higher education with an eye to emerging theoretical and conceptual questions about
intervention science. We review three types of interventions, which focus
on the value students perceive in academic tasks, their framing of academic
challenges, and their personal values, respectively. We consider interventions that (a) target academic outcomes (e.g., grades, major or career plans,
course taking, retention) in higher education, as well as the pipeline to college, and (b) have been evaluated in at least two studies. Finally, we discuss
implications for intervention science moving forward.

409

PS69CH17-Harackiewicz

ARI

14 November 2017

8:28

Contents

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
THREE TYPES OF INTERVENTIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
SCOPE OF REVIEW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
TASK VALUE INTERVENTIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Course-Specific Task Value Interventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Field-Specific Task Value Interventions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Task Value Interventions: Summary and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
FRAMING INTERVENTIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
College-General Framing Interventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Field-Specific Framing Interventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Framing Interventions: Summary and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
PERSONAL VALUES INTERVENTIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Course-Specific Values Affirmation Interventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
College-General Values Affirmation Interventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Values Affirmation Interventions: Summary and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IMPLICATIONS FOR INTERVENTION SCIENCE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Replication and Beyond . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Implementation: How and Where? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Implementation: Who and Why? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

410
411
412
417
418
419
420
421
422
424
424
425
425
426
427
428
428
430
431

INTRODUCTION
Many theoretically based interventions have been developed over the past two decades to improve educational outcomes in higher education, and there has been great interest and excitement
about the potential of these brief and cost-effective interventions to address important societal
issues (Wilson 2011). Researchers have found that targeted interventions can have powerful and
long-lasting effects when they address specific motivational processes at crucial time points in
the educational process. Some have called these targeted interventions motivation interventions
(Lazowski & Hulleman 2016) or social-psychological interventions (Wilson 2006, Yeager & Walton 2011), reflecting their theoretical grounding. Walton (2014) has referred to them as wise
interventions because they are theoretically precise and address basic psychological processes that
can interfere with optimal academic functioning. Indeed, these three labels all capture a critical
feature of targeted interventions—a basis in theory that identifies the most powerful levers of
change in academic settings. The theories that underlie these interventions take into account the
context, the person, and person × context interactions to address real-world problems and are
thus inherently social psychological. We refer to these social-psychological interventions as targeted because they target a specific problem, the psychological process underlying the problem,
the students who should benefit from intervention, and the specific academic outcomes that should
reveal those benefits.
Targeted interventions address specific educational problems, such as closing achievement
gaps for underrepresented racial/ethnic minority (URM) students; promoting science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) career pursuit among women; increasing interest and
engagement in gateway science courses; or helping first-year students cope with the college transition. With a well-defined problem, interventions can target the psychological processes most
410

Harackiewicz

·

Priniski

PS69CH17-Harackiewicz

ARI

Assessment of:
problem,
population,
context

14 November 2017

Intervention
design

8:28

Intervention

Targeted
processes

Targeted
outcomes

Recursive
processes

Distal
outcomes

Figure 1

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

Conceptual model of targeted interventions.

relevant to the problem. Students can struggle in college or lose motivation in fields of study for
many reasons. They may lack a strong preparatory background for college or financial resources,
and we would not expect social-psychological interventions to address these structural factors.
However, students may also struggle for more psychological reasons: They may lack interest in
certain topics and become disengaged in classes, or they may lack confidence in their abilities.
They may experience identity threat in certain fields and wonder if an academic discipline is right
for them, or they may doubt whether they belong in college. They may experience a cultural
mismatch between institutional norms and their own values. All of these psychological processes
are critical for academic outcomes, and all can be targeted by social-psychological interventions.
In addition to identifying the specific problem targeted by an intervention, it is important to
consider the implications for measurement of academic outcomes. Some interventions focus on
promoting motivation and performance in particular courses, where measures would thus be course
specific, such as engagement, interest, and course grades. Others focus on promoting motivation in
a field or broader domain, such as STEM fields or engineering, in which case the outcome measures
would be field specific, such as course taking, retention in those fields, or interest in a discipline.
Many interventions are even more general, targeting academic adjustment and performance in
college, in which case the outcome measures would be college general, such as college adjustment
and fit, overall grade point average (GPA), and graduation rate. The primary outcomes targeted
by an intervention serve as a measure of intervention efficacy, but they can also trigger positive
recursive processes that drive longer-term impacts. For example, if a student gets a good grade in
a critical gateway science course, they may become more interested in the field, take more science
courses, and eventually pursue a STEM career. Figure 1 shows our conceptual model.

THREE TYPES OF INTERVENTIONS
In this review, we consider a wide range of targeted interventions that have been tested in higher
education and distinguish between three types of intervention: those that focus on how students
perceive value in academic tasks (task value interventions), those that change the way students
frame academic challenges (framing interventions), and those that focus on students’ personal
values (personal values interventions). These interventions are all student-centered and share
some core features: All convey some information hypothesized to affect a psychological process
and engage the student in a process of active reflection that often involves conversation or writing.
There are important differences, however, in their domain specificity and the behaviors, thought
processes, and academic outcomes they target. In short, the primary difference is in where they
focus students’ attention and reflection.
Task value interventions focus on the task at hand, which can be defined as a specific topic in
a class or a field of study, but the emphasis is always on academic content. These interventions
communicate the value or importance of the content, either by providing examples of the relevance
or usefulness of academic tasks for personal goals or by encouraging students to think about task
www.annualreviews.org • The Science of Targeted Intervention

411

ARI

14 November 2017

8:28

value for themselves through writing exercises. For example, in a utility-value intervention (a type
of task value intervention) implemented in a college biology class, students wrote about how course
topics were relevant to their own lives or useful for themselves or others (Harackiewicz et al. 2016a).
In a communal utility-value intervention, Brown et al. (2015) provided students with information
about how biomedical research could address communal goals (helping others, working with
others). Such task value interventions focus on how students perceive their coursework or fields of
study, which can then be connected with personal goals through a process of reflection. Because
of their task specificity, these interventions may be most relevant for stimulating engagement and
performance in specific courses or promoting interest in particular fields.
Framing interventions focus on the challenges that students may face during academic transitions and help students cope with adversity by framing challenges as common and improvable.
They include a broad range of interventions designed to address a variety of common concerns,
such as doubts about belonging, doubts about ability, or group-specific challenges (e.g., coming
to college as a URM student), by helping students adopt a more adaptive outlook or mindset. For
example, Walton & Cohen’s (2007) social belonging intervention provided statistics and quotes
from more senior students illustrating the fact that challenges of adjustment to college are common and can be overcome. These interventions focus on influencing how students think about
challenges, whereas task value interventions focus on the task at hand. Framing interventions
may be most relevant for promoting adjustment during critical academic transitions, such as the
transition to college, and for academic performance at a general level across courses or domains.
Personal values interventions focus on students’ core values. Like framing interventions, these
interventions center on the student, but they work more indirectly by reinforcing personal values
rather than the academic tasks at hand. For example, in their seminal values affirmation intervention with middle school students, Cohen and colleagues (2006) asked students to choose their
most important values from a list and then write about why those values were important to them.
The same intervention has been used in college physics classes (Miyake et al. 2010). These values are broad (e.g., friends and family, independence, sense of humor), and writing about them
reinforces a student’s sense of identity and self-worth, providing a buffer against threats so that
they can cope with adversity in college. As such, this may be the most general of the three types
of intervention considered in this review, and personal values interventions may be particularly
relevant for promoting academic adjustment and performance at a general level, across courses or
domains and over time.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

PS69CH17-Harackiewicz

SCOPE OF REVIEW
In this review, we consider interventions that (a) target academic outcomes (e.g., grades, major or
career plans, course taking, retention) in higher education, as well as the pipeline to college, and
(b) have been evaluated in at least two studies.1 Those that meet our criteria are summarized in
Tables 1–3. Many of the interventions covered in this review have also been tested in middle school
or high school contexts, but because we focus on interventions that target educational issues in
college, we focus our review on experimental studies conducted in college and university settings

1
Several other promising interventions have not (yet) been tested in multiple studies and are therefore not included: Acee &
Weinstein’s (2010) and Yeager and colleagues’ (2014) task value interventions; Landau and colleagues’ (2014), Jamieson and
colleagues’ (2016), and Browman & Destin’s (2016) framing interventions; and Kizilcec and colleagues’ (2017) intervention,
which is a hybrid of task value and personal values interventions. In addition, two studies in our review also contain tests of
interventions not (yet) tested in multiple studies: Yeager and colleagues’ (2016) critical feedback and cultural fit interventions
and Walton and colleagues’ (2015) affirmation training intervention are not included in this review.

412

Harackiewicz

·

Priniski

PS69CH17-Harackiewicz

Table 1

ARI

14 November 2017

8:28

Summary of task value interventions in higher education

Study

Problem

Context and sample

Intervention

Primary findings

Task value interventions

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

Course specific
Hulleman
et al. (2010,
study 2)a

Promoting
engagement for
low performers

One section of
introductory psychology
at a public university
(n = 318)

Utility value: two
writing assignments,
completed as
homework

Increased interest in the
course and intention to major
in psychology for students
with low initial exam grades

Hulleman
et al. (2017,
study 2)a

Promoting
engagement for
low performers

Two sections of
introductory psychology
at a public university
(n = 357)

Utility value: two
writing assignments,
completed as an online
homework activity

Increased interest in the field
of psychology and final exam
performance for all students
and particularly for students
with low initial exam scores,
especially men

Harackiewicz
et al. (2016a)b

Racial and social
class achievement
gaps

Eight sections of
introductory biology for
STEM majors at a public
university (n = 1,040)

Utility value: three
writing assignments,
completed as
homework

Increased course performance
for all students and
particularly for firstgeneration underrepresented
minority students, as well as
students with low prior
GPAs and students with high
motivation to help others

Canning et al.
(2018)a

Promoting
persistence in
STEM

Majority students in three
sections of introductory
biology for STEM majors
at a public university
(n = 577)

Utility value: one to
three writing
assignments, completed
as homework

Increased course performance,
enrollment in another
biology course, and STEM
major persistence

Brown et al. (2015,
studies 1–3)

Promoting
interest in
biomedical
research careers

Three laboratory studies
with undergraduates
from public universities
(n = 55, 140, 160);
studies 1 and 2 took place
at a Hispanic-serving
institution

Utility value: an article
read by students
describing how a
faculty’s biomedical
research project could
help others

Increased interest in pursuing
a career in biomedical
research

Harackiewicz
et al. (2012)
and Rozek
et al. (2017)

Promoting STEM
motivation

High school students and
their parents from the
longitudinal Wisconsin
Study of Families and
Work and a five-year
follow-up (n = 181
families)

Utility value: two
brochures and a website
sent to parents in their
teens’ tenth- and
eleventh-grade years,
highlighting the
usefulness of STEM
courses and strategies
for talking about
STEM courses with
their teens

Increased STEM course
taking among the teens in
high school, increased math
and science scores on ACT
college preparatory exam;
indirectly increased college
STEM course taking, career
aspirations, and likelihood of
declaring a STEM major in
college through the high
school STEM outcomes

Field specific

a

Measured a combination of course-specific, field-specific, and college-general outcomes.
Tested interventions from two different categories.
Abbreviations: GPA, grade point average; STEM, science, technology, engineering, and mathematics.
b

www.annualreviews.org • The Science of Targeted Intervention

413

PS69CH17-Harackiewicz

ARI

14 November 2017

8:28

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

and discuss studies from other contexts only if they were critical in the development of interventions
tested in higher education contexts (e.g., Cohen et al. 2006, Hulleman & Harackiewicz 2009) or if
the intervention was implemented in high school with a follow-up in college (e.g., Harackiewicz
et al. 2012, Yeager et al. 2016).
The intervention studies we review are diverse. They range in scope from small-scale
field studies, with interventions administered in labs or single classes, to large-scale field trials. Some interventions were integrated into classes, but others were administered outside of
classes, in prematriculation activities, special orientation projects, or laboratory studies. We
focus on the context and sample for the research, the educational problem targeted, the
specific intervention tested, and the outcome measures assessed, examining whether targeted

Table 2

Summary of framing interventions in higher education

Study

Problem

Context and sample

Intervention

Primary findings

Gender gap in
engineering

First-year engineering
students at a public
university; activities were
completed one on one or
in small groups in
engineering classrooms, as
a research study (n = 228)

Social belonging: reading
materials framing
belonging concerns in the
engineering program,
saying-is-believing essay

Increased first-year engineering
GPAs for women in
male-dominated engineering
majors

Wilson &
Linville
(1982, 1985)

Promoting
performance
for first-year
students

Three laboratory studies
with first-year
undergraduates who
reported being concerned
about their first-semester
grades (n = 31; 37; 36)

Attributional reframing:
booklet and video framing
GPA concerns,
saying-is-believing essay

Increased overall GPAs in the
semester after the intervention
was implemented, especially
for men

Walton &
Cohen (2007,
study 2; 2011)

Racial
achievement
gap

First-year students (second
semester) at a selective
private university, in a
laboratory setting
(n = 37; 92)

Social belonging: reading
materials framing
belonging concerns,
saying-is-believing essay
and video

Increased overall GPAs in the
semester after the intervention
was implemented (Walton &
Cohen 2007) and through
senior year (Walton & Cohen
2011) for African American
students

Yeager et al.
(2016,
study 1)

Promoting
persistence in
college

High school seniors from
five urban charter schools
who had been admitted to
two- or four-year colleges
(primarily African
American and FG
students); activities
completed online in high
school computer labs in
May of their senior year
(n = 584)

Social belonging: reading
materials framing
belonging concerns,
saying-is-believing essays
Mindset: reading materials
framing intelligence,
saying-is-believing essays
Combined: both
interventions, received one
week apart

Social belonging: increased
percentage of students who
stayed enrolled full-time
through their first year of
college
Mindset: no effect
Combined: increased college
persistence to the same degree
as social belonging alone

Framing interventions
Field specific
Walton et al.
(2015)

College general

(Continued )

414

Harackiewicz

·

Priniski

PS69CH17-Harackiewicz

Table 2

ARI

14 November 2017

8:28

(Continued )

Study

Problem

Context and sample

Intervention

Primary findings

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

College general
Yeager
et al. (2016,
study 2)

Racial
persistence
gap

Incoming students at a
public university; activities
completed as part of
prematriculation tasks
online in the summer
before college (n = 7,335)

Social belonging: reading
materials framing
belonging concerns,
saying-is-believing essays
Mindset: reading materials
framing intelligence,
saying-is-believing essays
Combined: shortened
versions of both
interventions, received in
one session

Social belonging: increased
percentage of
underrepresented (FG and
URM) students who stayed
enrolled full-time through
their first year of college
Mindset: increased college
persistence among
underrepresented students to
the same degree as social
belonging alone
Combined: increased college
persistence among
underrepresented students to
the same degree as either
intervention alone

Yeager
et al. (2016,
study 3)

Racial
achievement
gap

Incoming students at a
selective private university;
activities completed as part
of prematriculation tasks
online in the summer
before college (n = 1,592)

Social belonging: reading
materials framing
belonging concerns,
saying-is-believing essays

Increased first-year GPAs for
underrepresented (FG and
URM) students

Stephens et al.
(2014, 2015)

Social class
achievement
gap

First-year students at a
selective private university;
activities completed as part
of a research study in the
first month of the semester
(n = 168)
Two-year follow-up
laboratory study (n = 133)

Difference education: a
discussion panel framing
diverse backgrounds and
adjustment to college,
saying-is-believing video

Increased first-year GPAs for
FG college students; increased
psychosocial adjustment
during the first year of college
for all students
Improved coping in stressful
situations for FG students two
years later

Aronson et al.
(2002)

Racial
achievement
gap

Undergraduates at a
selective private university;
activities completed in
small-group laboratory
sessions (n = 79)

Mindset: video framing
intelligence,
saying-is-believing essays

Increased overall GPAs for the
quarter after the intervention
for all students, especially for
African American students

Abbreviations: FG, first-generation; GPA, grade point average; URM, underrepresented racial minority.

outcomes are course or field specific (e.g., course grades, STEM grades) or college general
(e.g., overall GPA), as well as longer-term effects, such as course taking over time or career
choices.
Our goal is to assess the state of the intervention research literature, with an eye to theoretical
and conceptual questions about intervention science more generally. What makes these interventions so powerful? How replicable are the effects obtained to date? When possible, we evaluate
evidence for targeted intervention processes, i.e., whether the researchers identified processes
that help us understand how the intervention works and whether they tested for mediation
www.annualreviews.org • The Science of Targeted Intervention

415

PS69CH17-Harackiewicz

Table 3

ARI

14 November 2017

8:28

Summary of values affirmation interventions in higher education

Study

Problem

Context and sample

Intervention

Primary findings

Values affirmation interventions

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

Course specific
Miyake et al.
(2010)

Gender gap in
physics

Two sections of
introductory physics for
STEM majors at a public
university (n = 399)

Values affirmation:
students wrote about their
most important values,
once as an in-class practice
writing exercise and once
as an online homework
assignment

Increased performance for
women on course exams
and a standardized physics
test

Harackiewicz
et al. (2014a)a

Social class
achievement
gap in biology

Three sections of
introductory biology for
STEM majors at a public
university (n = 798)

Values affirmation: twice
during the semester,
students wrote about their
most important values as
an in-class practice writing
exercise

Increased course
performance, enrollment
in another biology course,
and overall semester GPAs
for first-generation college
students

Harackiewicz
et al. (2016a)b

Social class
achievement
gap in biology

Eight sections of
introductory biology for
STEM majors at a public
university (n = 1,040)

Values affirmation: twice
during the semester,
students wrote about their
most important values as
an in-class practice writing
exercise
Utility value: see Table 1

No effect

Layous et al.
(2017)

Promoting
performance for
students with
low belonging

First- and second-year
undergraduates at a public
university; activities
completed in small groups
in a laboratory setting
(n = 105)

Values affirmation:
students ranked a list of
values and wrote about
their most important value

Increased overall GPAs for
all students and
particularly for students
with low sense of
belonging and for men

Brady et al.
(2016)

Racial
achievement
gap for Latino
students

First- and second-year
undergraduates; activities
completed in a laboratory
setting
Follow-up two years later
(n = 183)

Values affirmation:
students ranked a list of
values and wrote about
their most important value

Increased postintervention
GPAs for Latino students;
decreased postintervention
GPAs for White students

Tibbetts et al.
(2016a)

Social class
achievement
gap

Three-year follow-up of an
intervention completed in
three sections of
introductory biology for
STEM majors at a public
university (n = 788)

Values affirmation: twice
during the semester,
students wrote about their
most important values as
an in-class practice writing
exercise

Increased postintervention
GPAs for first-generation
college students

College general

a

Measured a combination of course-specific, field-specific, and college-general outcomes.
Tested interventions from two different categories.
Abbreviation: STEM, science, technology, engineering, and mathematics.
b

416

Harackiewicz

·

Priniski

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

PS69CH17-Harackiewicz

ARI

14 November 2017

8:28

Task value

Framing

Personal values

Course specific
e.g., engagement,
interest, course grades

Utility-value intervention (4)

X

Values affirmation
intervention (3)

Field specific
e.g., course taking,
interest in field,
career choices

Communal utility-value
intervention (3)
Parent utility-value
intervention (2)

Social belonging
intervention (1)

X

School general
e.g., enrollment rates,
retention, overall GPA

X

Attributional reframing (3)
Mindset intervention (3)
Difference education
intervention (2)
Social belonging
intervention (5)

Values affirmation
intervention (3)

Figure 2
Targeted interventions in higher education can be divided into three types (task value, framing, and personal
values) targeting outcomes at three levels (course specific, field specific, and school general). This figure
summarizes the interventions that have been tested in each category of this classification system, as well as
the number of experimental studies conducted (in parentheses).

of intervention effects. In addition, we consider whether intervention effects extended across
contexts or over time through recursive processes. Figure 2 shows our classification system, the
specific interventions tested, and the number of experimental studies evaluated in each category.

TASK VALUE INTERVENTIONS
Of the task value interventions reviewed in this article, the utility-value intervention is supported
by the highest number of randomized controlled trials (Harackiewicz et al. 2016b, Tibbetts et al.
2016b). This intervention is grounded in Eccles and colleagues’ (Eccles et al. 1983, Eccles &
Wigfield 2002) expectancy value model, which posits that the most proximal predictors of achievement and achievement-related choices (e.g., which courses to take, how hard to study for an exam)
are students’ expectations that they can succeed and the extent to which they value the task or
topic. Thus, the students who are most likely to struggle in a given course are those with low
expectations of success (due to either a history of poor performance or a lack of confidence) and
those who do not see the value in what they are learning. The hypothesis driving the utility-value
intervention is that if educators can help their students find value in the course material, this
will give students a reason, and thus the motivation, to engage with the material and ultimately
improve their performance. Specifically, the intervention targets utility value, the value perceived
in a task or topic as a result of its usefulness for achieving short- or long-term goals. For example,
students might perceive utility value in a physiology course because they can use what they learn
to make their workouts safer and more effective.
There are two basic strategies by which educators can promote perceptions of value: They
can tell students that course topics are useful and important (i.e., educators communicate value
directly), or they can task their students with discovering that value for themselves (i.e., students
generate value), most often through a writing exercise in which students relate course topics
to their own lives (Canning & Harackiewicz 2015, Durik et al. 2015, Gaspard et al. 2015).
Both strategies were tested first with several laboratory studies and then in the field, although
self-generated utility-value interventions are more common in the field (for a review, see
Harackiewicz & Hulleman 2010, Harackiewicz et al. 2014b). Because these interventions target
www.annualreviews.org • The Science of Targeted Intervention

417

PS69CH17-Harackiewicz

ARI

14 November 2017

8:28

value in particular content, most are course-level interventions. However, it is important to note
that engaging students with the content of a course also engages them with the content of that
field. This is one avenue by which these seemingly granular, content-focused interventions could
have far-reaching consequences, such as impacting students’ educational and career choices.

Course-Specific Task Value Interventions

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

The course-specific task value interventions tested to date have been self-generated utility-value
interventions. In a prototypical self-generated utility-value intervention, students complete a series
of course writing assignments in which they choose a topic covered in the current unit of the
course and either discuss the relevance and utility value of the topic (the intervention condition)
or summarize the topic (the control condition). This intervention provides students opportunities
to make concrete connections between what they are learning and things that they care about,
fostering perceptions of value as well as engagement with the course content. The first field test
of this intervention was in high school science classes (Hulleman & Harackiewicz 2009). The
utility-value intervention was particularly effective for students with low expectations of success,
improving their grades in the science course and increasing their interest in science more broadly.
Since this initial high school study, the intervention has been tested in a variety of college courses,
with promising results.
Hulleman et al. (2010) administered a utility-value intervention twice during the second half
of the semester in one large section of a college introductory psychology course. Among students
who performed poorly on early exams, the utility-value intervention increased interest in the field
of psychology, as well as intention to major in psychology. Furthermore, Hulleman and colleagues
found that the mechanism driving these effects was the targeted process of perceived utility value.
In other words, for students who were initially struggling, the intervention increased perceptions
of value for the material they were learning, which, in turn, increased their interest in the field
and their intention to major in psychology.
Another study, conducted in two large sections of an introductory psychology course, found that
the utility-value intervention increased final exam scores and interest in psychology for all students
on average and for students who performed poorly on initial exams in particular (Hulleman et al.
2017). In addition, they found that the utility-value intervention had the strongest positive effects
for the students who were most at risk in this context, males who performed poorly on initial
exams. They examined intervention mechanisms and found that, for students with low grades on
early exams, the intervention increased their confidence (i.e., performance expectations) and that
this confidence, in turn, explained higher final exam grades.
Hulleman and colleagues’ (2010, 2017) work in large introductory psychology courses demonstrates that the utility-value intervention can be effective for struggling students, including groups
of students who tend to underperform. This raises the possibility that the utility-value intervention can address achievement gaps. Harackiewicz and colleagues (2016a) tested this possibility
with a large-scale field trial in eight sections of an introductory biology course for STEM majors
(over four semesters). Their approach was novel in two ways. First, they used an intersectional
analysis to examine achievement gaps for first-generation (FG) college students (i.e., those for
whom neither parent has a four-year college degree) and URM students, as well as students at
the intersection of these groups, who are both FG and URM (FG-URM). Second, they examined
students’ motivational profiles to understand the characteristics of different groups that might
influence their receptivity to the intervention.
Harackiewicz and colleagues (2016a) found that FG-URM students had a unique motivational
profile: They were least confident about their background in biology and were uncertain about
their belonging in college more generally. However, they were also highly motivated to perform
418

Harackiewicz

·

Priniski

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

PS69CH17-Harackiewicz

ARI

14 November 2017

8:28

well in the course and to use their education to give back to society and help others, especially
their families and communities. Harackiewicz and colleagues hypothesized that the utility-value
intervention might give FG-URM students opportunities to connect course material to their
positive motivations (i.e., their desire to use their education to help others), which could make
the intervention particularly powerful for this group. Indeed, the intervention increased grades
for all students on average and for FG-URM students in particular, reducing the achievement
gap between FG-URM and majority students by 61%. Interestingly, the intervention was also
effective for students with low prior GPAs (above and beyond the FG-URM intervention effect),
replicating prior work by Hulleman and colleagues (2010), and for any students with higher levels
of helping motives (not just FG-URM students).
Harackiewicz and colleagues (2016a) examined intervention mechanisms and found that the
intervention effect for FG-URM students was mediated by engagement. Students in the utilityvalue condition, and FG-URM students in particular, wrote longer essays, indicating that they
engaged more with the material than did students in the control condition. This engagement, in
turn, explained increases in course performance. To explore how this played out in the content
of the essays, Harackiewicz and colleagues analyzed the essays using text analysis (Pennebaker
et al. 2007). Utility-value essays contained more personal pronouns and more words related to
social relationships, especially family, which is concordant with FG-URM students’ desire to
give back to their families and communities. Furthermore, these essays contained more words
indicative of cognitive engagement and insight. This is consistent with experimental work showing
that task value interventions increase engagement and conceptual change ( Johnson & Sinatra
2013). Beigman Klebanov and colleagues (2017) analyzed these same essays using natural language
processing techniques. They found that utility-value writing was characterized by argumentative
and narrative elements, suggesting that students were both providing personal narratives and
building arguments and claims (e.g., about why biology is valuable). Together, these analyses reveal
some of the ways that writing about utility value can increase engagement and promote learning.
Canning and colleagues (2018) tested the utility-value intervention in three sections of an
introductory biology class for STEM majors but varied the number of utility-value assignments
(from zero to three) to examine the effects of intervention dosage on performance. They also
followed students to see whether they enrolled in the second course in the biology sequence
and whether they abandoned plans to major in STEM (93% of students entered the course with
plans to major in a STEM field), as measures of STEM persistence. They found that students
who received at least one utility-value assignment earned higher grades in the course, were more
likely to enroll in the second biology course, and were less likely to abandon their STEM major.
However, students assigned the maximum dosage (three assignments) earned the highest grades
and were most likely to take the next biology course, suggesting that students benefited from
multiple doses of the intervention. Moreover, the intervention’s positive effect on continuation to
the second course (a distal outcome) was mediated by grades in the first course. In other words,
students who performed better as a result of the utility-value intervention were more likely to take
another biology course, suggesting one mechanism by which a course-specific intervention can
influence field-specific outcomes through recursive processes.

Field-Specific Task Value Interventions
Many studies of course-specific task value interventions also found effects on field-level outcomes,
such as interest in the field (Hulleman et al. 2017), intention to major in the field (Hulleman et al.
2010), retention in a STEM major, or course taking in a field (Canning et al. 2018). In addition,
some task value interventions targeted field-level outcomes directly. Brown and colleagues (2015)
developed an intervention designed to promote interest in biomedical careers by helping students
www.annualreviews.org • The Science of Targeted Intervention

419

ARI

14 November 2017

8:28

perceive the value of biomedical research for achieving communal (i.e., helping-oriented) goals.
They communicated utility value directly by giving students an article that described how a research project could help others. Across three laboratory studies, they found that the communal
utility-value intervention increased students’ interest in pursuing a career in biomedical research,
relative to a control group, and that these effects were mediated by the perceived communal value
of biomedical research (Brown et al. 2015).
In an experimental field study, Harackiewicz and colleagues (2012) tested a directly communicated utility-value intervention to help parents of high school students see the value of math
and science course taking and share that value with their teens. They hypothesized that giving
parents tools (two brochures and a website) to help them talk about the importance of math and
science would influences their teens’ perceptions of value and elective course choices. Indeed,
teens whose parents received the utility-value intervention took, on average, an extra semester of
math or science in their last two years of high school, relative to a control group whose parents
did not receive the intervention.
A five-year follow-up of these students found that the intervention had also increased students’
math and science scores on college preparatory exams (i.e., the ACT) by 12 percentile points
(Rozek et al. 2017). Importantly, these short-term outcomes (course taking and ACT scores in
high school) had long-term consequences. Rozek and colleagues found indirect effects of the
intervention such that students whose parents had received the utility-value intervention took
more math and science courses in high school and earned higher ACT scores, and that these
targeted high school outcomes were predictive of students’ college STEM course taking, majors,
and career aspirations. Thus, even when an intervention is not expected to directly influence longterm outcomes—this intervention targeted parental involvement and high school course taking—
short-term intervention effects can initiate recursive processes that impact students’ long-term
trajectories.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

PS69CH17-Harackiewicz

Task Value Interventions: Summary and Discussion
Together, these studies show that task value interventions can be a powerful tool for engaging students in thinking and writing about the why of learning, giving them a platform for exploring how
their coursework can help them achieve important personal goals. A consistent pattern of results
has emerged across a variety of contexts and modes of intervention delivery; these interventions
have proven most effective for students who struggle in courses. However, there is also evidence
of main effects in almost all of these studies; in other words, some utility-value interventions have
had positive effects for all students on average (Harackiewicz et al. 2012, 2016a; Brown et al. 2015;
Canning et al. 2018; Hulleman et al. 2017), and it will be important to clarify when and why
task value interventions should work for all students versus only for those who struggle (Schwartz
et al. 2016). Careful attention has been paid in these studies to targeted motivational processes
in these studies, with evidence for mediation of intervention effects by the targeted process of
perceived utility value and other processes such as positive expectancies and engagement. Finally,
the results of Canning et al. (2018) and Rozek et al. (2017) document some recursive effects from
the targeted outcomes (course grades and high school course taking) to more distal outcomes,
illuminating important pathways for the long-term effects of utility-value interventions.
Perhaps unsurprisingly given the theoretical grounding of these interventions, they most often
focus on single courses or particular fields. Indeed, we did not find any task value interventions
targeting college-general outcomes (e.g., cumulative GPA). However, the evidence indicates that
task value interventions can increase motivation at the field level both directly, in a single-session
laboratory study (Brown et al. 2015) and a semester-long biology course (Canning et al. 2018), and
420

Harackiewicz

·

Priniski

PS69CH17-Harackiewicz

ARI

14 November 2017

8:28

indirectly, over a span of five years, by promoting STEM course taking and test performance in
high school (Rozek et al. 2017). Furthermore, recent work (Brown et al. 2015, Harackiewicz et al.
2016a) suggests connecting specifically to helping-oriented goals might be a powerful intervention
technique (Thoman et al. 2015, 2017). In fact, Yeager and colleagues (2014) and Paunesku et al.
(2015) have developed a task value intervention for high school students that focuses students on
self-transcendent (helping-oriented) goals for learning. Like other task value interventions, the
purpose intervention has shown positive effects on grades for low-performing students. Although
there have not been enough studies testing the purpose intervention at the college level for inclusion in this review, initial work is promising. In sum, current research suggests that task value
interventions can have broad implications for educational trajectories.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

FRAMING INTERVENTIONS
Framing interventions include a diverse set of interventions to counteract the maladaptive ways
students might interpret challenges. Drawing on attribution theory (Weiner 1974, Ross & Nisbett
2011), these interventions tap into processes by which students make sense of their academic
experiences. For example, a student who receives bad grades in their first semester might attribute
their poor performance to a lack of intelligence (a maladaptive attribution) or to the steep learning
curve of adjusting to college, which they will overcome in time (an adaptive attribution). Thus,
framing interventions target common maladaptive beliefs by providing students with alternate
frames. Two messages are key: that challenge is a normal or natural experience (i.e., not exclusively
attributable to an individual’s own shortcomings) and that students can exercise control over their
academic outcomes through personal growth (i.e., challenges can be overcome with effort). These
messages are particularly important in the transition to college for underrepresented students (e.g.,
URM students, FG students, women in STEM) who may experience adversity as evidence that the
college environment is unwelcoming or even discriminatory, posing major threats to their sense of
belonging (Walton 2014). Therefore, almost all of the studies in this category are college-general
interventions targeting students’ framing of challenge in the transition to college.
Early work by Wilson & Linville (1982, 1985) tested an intervention using this attributional
approach. They showed struggling first-year students statistics and interviews indicating that most
students’ grades were lower than anticipated their first semester but improved over time. Some
participants also wrote an essay explaining to high school students how initial low grades were
attributable to temporary factors (e.g., not knowing how to take college exams). Such saying-isbelieving exercises are designed to increase internalization of the intervention message by having
students convey it in their own words (often through writing) to benefit students who will face
similar challenges in the future (Aronson 1999). Across three studies, the intervention improved
students’ performance on GRE problems immediately after the intervention and improved students’ college GPAs in the following semester, although both effects were stronger for men than
for women (Wilson & Linville 1985). These strategies have informed the design of interventions
in more recent work. In fact, a research group in Canada has implemented a very similar treatment
protocol, called attributional retraining (AR), with introductory psychology students (for a review,
see Perry & Hamm 2017, Perry et al. 2014),2 and all the interventions reviewed below draw, at
least in part, on the methods developed by Wilson & Linville.

2
There are many studies of AR (see, e.g., Hall et al. 2007, Haynes et al. 2006, Perry et al. 2010), but we do not include
these studies in our review because they employ different methodology. AR treatment interventions have been studied with
longitudinal quasi-experimental designs with treatment not randomized at the student level, whereas all the studies included
in our review conducted randomization at the student level.

www.annualreviews.org • The Science of Targeted Intervention

421

PS69CH17-Harackiewicz

ARI

14 November 2017

8:28

College-General Framing Interventions
Our review identified three types of framing interventions that were tested at the college-general
level and met our inclusion criteria. These interventions include social belonging interventions,
difference education interventions, and mindset interventions.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

Social belonging interventions. The seminal work on the social belonging intervention was
conducted by Walton & Cohen (2007, 2011) to address achievement gaps for African American
students at a selective college. Second-semester students read statistics and quotes from more
senior students indicating that most students worry about whether they belong in college during
their first year but that these concerns lessen over time. Participants then wrote an essay about
why that would be the case, using examples from their own experiences, and recorded a video
testimonial for future students. Control activities were similar but focused on adjusting to the
physical environment in college (e.g., the architecture, weather). This intervention improved
African American students’ GPAs the semester after the intervention (Walton & Cohen 2007) as
well as their overall GPAs, measured at a postgraduation follow-up (Walton & Cohen 2011). Daily
diary measures collected in the week after the intervention revealed that, for African Americans in
the intervention condition, experiences of adversity no longer influenced their sense of belonging,
and this decoupling process mediated the intervention effects on GPA (Walton & Cohen 2011).
In addition, Walton & Cohen found that African American students in the intervention condition
reported engaging in more adaptive academic behaviors (e.g., emailing professors, spending more
time studying) in the week following the intervention (Walton & Cohen 2007) and reported
higher levels of a sense of belonging, health, and well-being in the postgraduation survey (Walton
& Cohen 2011).
Yeager and colleagues (2016) adapted this social belonging intervention so that it could be
delivered online and tested at scale to address three different goals: to increase rates of college
enrollment among charter high school students (study 1), to address persistence gaps for disadvantaged (URM and FG) students at a public flagship university (study 2), and to address
performance gaps for disadvantaged students at a highly selective private university (study 3). In
all three studies, the intervention materials conveyed the same messages as Walton & Cohen’s
(2007) belonging intervention, but the student quotes were customized for each context. The
intervention delivered during senior year at charter high schools increased the percentage of students who stayed enrolled full-time through their first year of college (32% in the control group
versus 45% in the intervention group), and this effect was mediated by a measure of students’ social
and academic involvement behaviors on campus (e.g., living on campus, using academic support
services).
In studies 2 and 3, the intervention was delivered as part of the online orientation process in
the summer before college. In study 2, the intervention increased the percentage of disadvantaged
students who stayed enrolled full-time through their first year of college (69% in the control
group versus 73% in the intervention group). This effect was mediated by a survey measure of
social and academic involvement. In study 3, the intervention increased first-year GPA among
disadvantaged students, as well as these students’ social and academic involvement behaviors (e.g.,
having a mentor, using academic support services). Together, these studies demonstrate that the
social belonging intervention can be adapted to target students’ framing of belonging concerns
across a variety of contexts, with impressive results (Yeager et al. 2016).
Difference education interventions. Stephens and colleagues (2014) developed the difference
education intervention to provide a more adaptive frame for FG college students in the transition to
422

Harackiewicz

·

Priniski

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

PS69CH17-Harackiewicz

ARI

14 November 2017

8:28

college. These students are less likely to have the procedural knowledge needed to take advantage
of campus resources and less likely to feel a sense of belonging or fit in the college environment
due to a cultural mismatch between their values and institutional norms (Stephens et al. 2012). In
the difference education intervention (Stephens et al. 2014), first-year students attended a onehour panel in which a diverse group of students discussed how their backgrounds were sources of
both challenge and strength and described strategies they used to navigate challenges and become
a successful student. Participants then recorded a video testimonial for future students. Control
participants attended a similar panel, but the panelists did not discuss their backgrounds. All
students in the intervention condition reported more academic and social engagement at the end
of the first year of college, and FG students in the intervention condition earned higher first-year
GPAs than FG students in the control condition, an effect that was mediated by their increased use
of campus resources (e.g., emailing professors, attending office hours). In a follow-up study two
years later, students from the difference education intervention condition mentioned more aspects
of their background in a speech about their college experience, indicating that they retained the
intervention message and were more comfortable talking about the role of background. In addition,
FG students from the intervention condition showed higher levels of anabolic balance reactivity, a
measure of physiological striving, compared to FG students from the control condition. Stephens
and colleagues (2015) concluded that the difference education intervention initiated recursive
processes that helped FG students view their backgrounds as a source of strength and cope more
effectively with stressful tasks.
Mindset interventions. Mindset interventions are based on Dweck’s (1999) work on lay theories
of intelligence, wherein a maladaptive theory would be that intelligence cannot be changed (a fixed
mindset), whereas an adaptive theory would be that intelligence is malleable and can be increased
with effort (a growth mindset). The prototypical mindset intervention is an eight-week program to
teach middle school students about brain plasticity and how they could develop their intelligence
by exercising their brain like a muscle (e.g., Blackwell et al. 2007). Whereas this method is not
practical in college contexts, a few studies have tried to distill this message into a briefer intervention
for college students.
Aronson and colleagues (2002) developed an intervention to combat stereotype threat, with
the idea that the stereotype that African Americans have a fixed lack of intelligence could be
rendered powerless if one holds the belief that intelligence is malleable. The mindset intervention, delivered in a laboratory setting, involved a brief video explaining how researchers have
found that the brain can grow and develop new neuronal connections and a saying-is-believing
exercise. This intervention closed gaps between African American and White students’ GPAs in
the semester after the intervention, and this effect was mediated by students’ growth mindset
beliefs.
Yeager and colleagues (2016) also tested mindset interventions in studies 1 and 2 of their
social belonging research, described above. Participants read an article summarizing the scientific
research supporting the idea that intelligence is malleable and then wrote an essay expressing this
message to future students who might be struggling in school. In both studies, some students were
randomly assigned to receive both the social belonging intervention and the mindset intervention,
which allowed a test of combined intervention. In study 1, the mindset intervention had no effect on
college enrollment, and the combined intervention was no more effective than the social belonging
intervention alone. In study 2, all three interventions increased enrollment among disadvantaged
students; there were no differences in the effectiveness of the mindset intervention, the social
belonging intervention, and the combined intervention.
www.annualreviews.org • The Science of Targeted Intervention

423

PS69CH17-Harackiewicz

ARI

14 November 2017

8:28

Field-Specific Framing Interventions

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

Only one study has adapted a framing intervention to address a field-specific problem: Walton and
colleagues (2015) adapted Walton and Cohen’s (2007) original social belonging intervention (a
college-general intervention) to address the gender achievement gap in an engineering program.
First-semester engineering students in the intervention condition were given statistics and quotes
from senior engineering students and wrote a letter to a future engineering student conveying the
intervention messages in their own words. Women in male-dominated engineering majors (e.g.,
mechanical engineering) who received the social belonging intervention earned higher first-year
engineering GPAs, perceived adversity as more manageable, had more friendships with their male
colleagues, and, by the second semester, were more confident that they could succeed in the field,
compared to women in the control group.

Framing Interventions: Summary and Discussion
The framing interventions reviewed above target an impressive number of educational problems,
but they share a common goal: improving students’ academic experiences by providing adaptive frames for common challenges, from belonging concerns, to beliefs about performance and
intelligence, to cultural mismatch. They can have far-reaching benefits for students’ academic
adjustment and long-term outcomes. Across a variety of contexts and modes of intervention delivery, the pattern of results indicates that these interventions have improved important academic
outcomes for students adjusting to college. The targeted populations have varied from students
struggling in school (Wilson & Linville 1982) to African American students (Aronson et al. 2002),
first-generation students (Stephens et al. 2014), women in engineering (Walton et al. 2015), and
disadvantaged students in general (Yeager et al. 2016), and this impressive diversity suggests the
great potential of the framing approach for a number of educational problems.
However, as with task value interventions, there is also some evidence of positive effects for all
students on average (Stephens et al. 2014, 2015; Yeager et al. 2016), and it will be important to
clarify when and why framing interventions work for all students. Some results are more consistent
than they first appear, once the problem is clearly defined. For example, Yeager et al. (2016) noted
that almost all students in their study 1 were either URM or FG students and, thus, predicted a
main effect for the belonging and mindset interventions. Other findings are inconsistent; Yeager
et al. (2016, study 1) failed to find an effect of the mindset intervention, and Stephens et al. (2014)
found a main effect of the difference education intervention that specifically targeted FG students.
Overall, however, the consistency of findings is impressive, and we anticipate that the pattern of
results will become increasingly clear as more work is done to replicate these findings within the
same contexts (Wilson & Linville 1985, Walton & Cohen 2011) and between contexts (Yeager
et al. 2016).
Exploration of targeted processes in these studies has focused less on the specific cognitive
processes hypothesized to drive intervention effects (with the exception of Aronson et al. 2002)
and more on the academic behaviors that students report in academic transitions. These behaviors
are typically assessed with surveys and represent adaptive behaviors such as emailing professors,
making friends, and attending office hours. Such measures capture an approach orientation consistent with a positive framing of challenge, but they vary widely across studies. It will be important
to standardize such measures so that results can be compared across studies. However, the mediation analyses reported by Stephens et al. (2014) and Yeager et al. (2016) clearly suggest that
such measures are key to understanding how framing interventions work in college transitions.
Less attention has been paid to recursive processes in the framing studies reviewed above, in part
424

Harackiewicz

·

Priniski

PS69CH17-Harackiewicz

ARI

14 November 2017

8:28

because these studies are more recent, with less opportunity for follow-up over time. However,
there is some evidence that physical health processes may be implicated over time (Walton &
Cohen 2011, Stephens et al. 2015), and this is a promising direction. Surprisingly, scant attention
has been paid to the content and style of students’ writing in these interventions, and this might
be a missed opportunity for extending the study of these intervention dynamics. Continued exploration of targeted and recursive processes over time will be essential for understanding how
framing interventions work to improve student outcomes.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

PERSONAL VALUES INTERVENTIONS
The values affirmation intervention is based in self-affirmation theory (Steele 1988), which argues
that individuals are motivated to maintain an overall sense of self-integrity. If a student experiences
identity threat in an important academic domain (e.g., a woman taking a physics test), then their
self-integrity is called into question. Self-affirmation interventions give people an opportunity
to reflect on sources of self-worth in other domains. Writing about personal values affirms selfintegrity on a broader level and thereby diminishes the negative impact of identity threats in a
particular situation. This intervention is not specific to threats in particular domains and has been
implemented in a variety of contexts (e.g., health, relationships, sports; see Cohen & Sherman
2014 for a review).
Cohen and colleagues (2006, 2009) were the first to implement this intervention in an academic
context. They found that, when three cohorts of seventh graders completed a values affirmation
exercise in class, African American students performed better and had higher overall GPAs for the
term than African American students in the control group, and that their GPAs in core courses
remained higher over two years, especially among those with lower initial GPAs. They argued
that early improvements in performance initiated recursive processes that disrupted the negative
performance trajectory observed in the control condition. Indeed, the intervention effects on
GPA in year 2 (distal outcome) were mediated by GPA in year 1 (targeted outcome). These
effects have been replicated in several middle school studies (e.g., Bowen et al. 2013, Sherman
et al. 2013, Borman et al. 2016), and more recent work at the middle school level has focused on
understanding the mediators, moderators, and boundary conditions for these effects. For example,
Shnabel and colleagues (2013) examined the values affirmation essays from the original Cohen
studies (Cohen et al. 2006) and found that all students wrote more about social belonging in the
values affirmation condition, and that this improved grades for African American students. Thus,
recent work provides strong evidence that values affirmation can have both immediate and longterm benefits for underrepresented students, but it is also important to note that there have been
some failures to replicate these findings in middle school contexts (Dee 2015, Protzko & Aronson
2016, Hanselman et al. 2017).

Course-Specific Values Affirmation Interventions
Miyake and colleagues (2010) conducted the first test of a values affirmation intervention in
college to address gender gaps in an introductory physics course. To make the values affirmation
exercise fit seamlessly in a college science course, the instructor told students that the exercise was
a chance to practice their writing skills. It was implemented as an in-class activity in the first week
of the semester and as an online homework assignment in the fourth week (just prior to the first
midterm exam). Thus, in contrast to the social belonging or difference education interventions,
the values affirmation intervention was fully integrated into the class and presented as a course
www.annualreviews.org • The Science of Targeted Intervention

425

ARI

14 November 2017

8:28

assignment. It improved women’s exam grades and scores on a standardized physics exam, reducing
achievement gaps between women and men in the course.
Harackiewicz and colleagues (2014a) implemented the values affirmation intervention in an
introductory biology course for STEM majors, using the same basic methods as Miyake et al.
(2010). However, this intervention was targeted for a different problem, the social class achievement gap between FG and continuing-generation (CG) students. FG students in the intervention
condition earned higher grades in the biology course as well as higher overall GPAs that semester,
reducing the social class achievement gap. In addition, FG students in the intervention condition
were more likely to enroll in the next course in the biology sequence. This effect was mediated
by course grades: The intervention improved FG students’ grades in the biology course, which,
in turn, increased their likelihood of continuing in biology. Together, these two studies suggest
that the values affirmation intervention can be integrated into college science classes with positive
effects.
In the Harackiewicz et al. (2016a) utility-value intervention study, discussed above, the researchers also tested a values affirmation intervention crossed with the utility-value intervention
in a 2 × 2 design. The values affirmation intervention was implemented exactly as it was by Harackiewicz et al. (2014a), but the positive effect for FG students was not replicated, and there were no
significant interactions with the utility-value intervention. The researchers discussed a number of
factors that might have accounted for this nonreplication, most notably that the social class achievement gap was larger in the semester that the Harackiewicz et al. (2014a) study was conducted.
Indeed, previous research suggests that values affirmation is more effective when achievement
gaps are larger (Hanselman et al. 2014). Another possibility is that the addition of the utility-value
intervention (which involved three more writing assignments) dampened the effects of the values
affirmation intervention. This analysis suggests that it may not work to combine different types of
writing interventions in a single semester. Although the values affirmation intervention can have
powerful effects, it is sensitive to contextual and sample differences in ways that we do not yet
fully understand. More research is needed to identify factors that moderate the effectiveness of
the values affirmation intervention in college contexts.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

PS69CH17-Harackiewicz

College-General Values Affirmation Interventions
Self-affirmation interventions are designed to combat identity threats on a broad level. When
groups are threatened by stereotypes about intelligence or ability, their identity threat is not limited
to a single course. Therefore, it is not surprising that interventions implemented in a single course
can have downstream college-general effects (e.g., on overall GPA), as was the case in Cohen
et al.’s (2009) original study and Harackiewicz and colleagues’ (2014a) study in college biology.
However, the interventions we review in this section target college-general effects as the primary
outcomes. Furthermore, like much of the more recent work on values affirmation interventions
in middle school contexts, each of these studies has a particular focus on the moderators and
mediators of intervention effects.
Whereas other work focused on demographic moderators, such as gender, social class, or race,
Layous and colleagues (2017) examined psychological moderators of values affirmation intervention effects. They noted a common theme for all the groups that have benefited from values
affirmation: threats to a sense of belonging. Thus, in a sample of primarily White undergraduates,
Layous and colleagues administered the values affirmation exercise in a laboratory setting and
tested whether the intervention would be effective for students with a low sense of belonging.
They found no effects of the intervention on a math test administered immediately after the intervention. However, when they examined students’ grades over two semesters, they found that
426

Harackiewicz

·

Priniski

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

PS69CH17-Harackiewicz

ARI

14 November 2017

8:28

the values affirmation intervention improved GPAs for all students on average compared to the
control condition, and that this effect was stronger for men and for students with low levels of
belonging.
Brady and colleagues (2016) implemented the values affirmation intervention in a laboratory
study and then followed students over time. They found a positive effect on postintervention GPAs
for Latino students at a two-year follow-up, but the effect was negative for White students. In the
fourth semester after the intervention, participants returned to the lab and completed a stressful
academic task (making a list of everything they had to get done before the end of the semester),
after which they were given a blank piece of paper to write about whatever was on their mind.
Brady and colleagues analyzed these essays and found that Latino students who had received a
values affirmation intervention two years earlier showed spontaneous self-affirmations in their
writing. In other words, they focused on personal values and positive sources of worth. Furthermore, Latino students from the affirmation condition reported more confidence in their ability
to cope with all the tasks they needed to complete, compared to those in the control condition.
Brady and colleagues tested whether these spontaneous self-affirmations mediated the effects of
the intervention on confidence and GPA. They found that among Latino students, the intervention increased their tendency to self-affirm, which improved their confidence in their coping
ability, leading to better grades that semester. These results provide insight into the recursive
processes through which the values affirmation intervention influenced academic performance
over a two-year period.
Tibbetts and colleagues (2016a) conducted a follow-up study of the Harackiewicz et al. (2014a)
sample and found that the values affirmation intervention improved FG students’ overall postintervention GPAs over the course of three years. They used text analyses to investigate the mechanisms
of these long-term effects. Their analysis was grounded in cultural mismatch theory (Stephens
et al. 2012), which states that, although everyone holds both independent and interdependent
values to some degree, FG students face a mismatch because university culture places more emphasis on independence, whereas FG students have more interdependent backgrounds. Therefore,
Tibbetts and colleagues coded for both independent and interdependent writing. They found that
the effects of the values affirmation intervention on course grades, academic belonging, and overall
GPA three years later were all mediated by independent themes. In other words, for FG students,
writing about independence in their values affirmation essays led to higher grades in the biology
course, higher levels of academic belonging, and higher GPAs over a three-year period. Although
most FG students who wrote about independence also wrote about interdependent themes (95%),
it was affirming their independent values (which match the academic context) that proved most
beneficial in this context.

Values Affirmation Interventions: Summary and Discussion
Like the framing intervention studies, the values affirmation intervention studies reviewed above
targeted an impressive number of educational problems, from gender gaps in a physics course
(Miyake et al. 2010) and the social class achievement gap in a biology course (Harackiewicz et al.
2014a) to performance among students with low belonging (Layous et al. 2017). However, the
number of tests of values affirmation in college contexts is small, and the results have not been consistent (e.g., Harackiewicz et al. 2016a). This inconsistency highlights the urgency for researchers
to demonstrate how this intervention works in college contexts and for whom. Recent studies have provided insights into the psychological moderators of values affirmation interventions
(Layous et al. 2017), as well as the proximal and distal mediators of intervention effects. Work by
Tibbetts and colleagues (2016a) demonstrated that the content of the values affirmation essays
www.annualreviews.org • The Science of Targeted Intervention

427

ARI

14 November 2017

8:28

can provide important clues about their proximal mechanisms, revealing that, for FG students
experiencing identity threat due to a cultural mismatch, the benefits of the intervention were mediated by themes of independence. Finally, Brady and colleagues’ (2016) work illuminated a more
distal mechanism, that values affirmation interventions can improve long-term outcomes through
recursive processes involving students’ propensity to self-affirm under threat.
Values affirmation interventions were first tested in middle schools, administered by teachers
in small classes. In contrast, introductory college classes are large and impersonal, and it may be
difficult to administer a personal writing exercise in this context. However, it is not clear that
the implementation of the intervention needs to be the same across contexts. Indeed, some of the
work at the college level has been implemented in laboratory settings, rather than classrooms, with
positive results (Brady et al. 2016, Layous et al. 2017). Given the recent work showing that the
content of values affirmation essays works differently for middle school minority students and FG
college students (Shnabel et al. 2013, Tibbetts et al. 2016a), it is clear that more work is needed
to understand how values affirmation works in different contexts and for different groups.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

PS69CH17-Harackiewicz

IMPLICATIONS FOR INTERVENTION SCIENCE
The studies reviewed above reveal the power of a targeted approach to intervention research
in higher education. The interventions evaluated in these studies were grounded in theory and
developed through laboratory research and small-scale field studies, culminating in the field trials
considered in this review. As we survey the progress to date, it seems clear that intervention
scientists have made great strides over the past 15 years. The interventions are well crafted and
the research methods are rigorous, with careful attention paid to intervention mechanisms and
recursive processes.
Conducting randomized controlled field trials is a complicated process. It requires close collaboration with teaching faculty or university administrators, first to adapt the intervention for
the particular context and student population and then to implement interventions in courses or
academic advising contexts. Well-powered studies require large samples (especially if the intervention is targeted to help underrepresented minority groups) such that these studies can take
years to run. The current body of intervention research in higher education spans a wide array
of problems, ranging from achievement gaps in college courses, to promoting STEM career pursuit, to facilitating transitions to college for underrepresented students. However, these studies
represent the first wave of a new science, and there were too few studies in any category of our
classification system to permit a more quantitative review. In fact, the impressive range of problems targeted by these interventions proved to be a limitation for our review—there were very
few studies targeting the same problems with comparable measures. Although there was strong
empirical support for each of the three types of intervention in general, more research is needed
to address critical questions of replication and generalizability of findings.

Replication and Beyond
Given that the interventions reviewed above are contextually specific interventions, how should
we conceptualize the question of replication? In some ways, the interventions literature represents
an ideal case for thinking about the replication issues currently facing the field—hypotheses are
straightforward and well specified (and often preregistered), and the studies are typically well
powered, but direct replication is almost never possible. What kind of precision should we expect,
and how should we think about conceptual replications and extension of interventions to different
populations? How should we interpret nonreplications?
428

Harackiewicz

·

Priniski

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

PS69CH17-Harackiewicz

ARI

14 November 2017

8:28

Our review reveals impressive patterns of consistent findings for each type of intervention but
also reveals some inconsistencies across studies and some failures to replicate findings. We would
not expect each intervention to be equally effective across every implementation, of course; in
fact, the pattern of inconsistent findings may help identify areas for future research and qualify
conclusions until we have more data in hand. In the case of task value interventions, for example,
there was a consistent pattern of findings that the interventions had positive effects for students
who struggle in classes [with some internal replications across sections of courses or semesters (e.g.,
Harackiewicz et al. 2016a)], but there are inconsistencies in the mediators between studies (e.g.,
perceived values, expectancies, engagement) that raise important questions about intervention
mechanisms. In the case of framing interventions, there was a consistent pattern of findings that
framing interventions promoted positive outcomes in academic transitions, but some evidence of
nonreplication of growth mindset effects (Yeager et al. 2016, study 2). More critically, no two
studies in the framing category examined the exact same problem, making it difficult to assess
the question of direct replication [however, some studies had internal replications with multiple
cohorts (e.g., Walton & Cohen 2011)].
We found more evidence of nonreplication for values affirmation, in part because the foundational studies were conducted earlier (Cohen et al. 2006, Miyake et al. 2010), allowing more time
for replication studies to emerge. Indeed, future reviews may contend with more nonreplications
of task value and framing interventions, and we expect that the field of intervention science will
be all the better for it. As is the case with values affirmation, each replication and nonreplication
can tell us something about the intervention, its mechanisms, and the conditions under which it
is most effectively implemented. For example, replication studies in middle school have revealed
that intervention effects may be moderated by context (Hanselman et al. 2014) and by timing of
implementation (Cook et al. 2012).
In addition to questions about the replicability of intervention effects, it is important to think
about the generalizability of the mechanism. For example, values affirmation interventions were
successfully implemented to address achievement gaps for underrepresented minority students in
middle school, then for women in college physics, and then for FG students in college biology
classes. Should we expect the intervention to work the same way in all three cases? If a social
belonging intervention works for African American students in a selective university, will it work
the same way for women in engineering programs or for underrepresented students starting college
at their state university? And if a utility-value intervention promotes interest and performance for
struggling students in a psychology class, will we expect this to work in the same way that utilityvalue interventions help minority students perform better in college biology classes?
On the one hand, the theories behind these interventions provide hypotheses about general
mechanisms that should apply across contexts and populations. For example, if struggling students
in psychology and minority students in biology both fail to see any value in what they are learning, a
utility-value intervention might work for both groups. On the other hand, our application of theory
needs to be more context dependent; we might implement the intervention differently or invoke
different mechanisms for how the intervention works in particular contexts. In the Harackiewicz
et al. (2016a) study, FG minority students believed that biology was valuable (the vast majority had
biology-related majors), but they benefited from the utility-value intervention because it allowed
them to connect course content to their helping goals. This particular mechanism is likely not
generalizable to all populations. These questions become even more complicated when considering
recursive processes, which interact with natural processes in the environment (e.g., performing
well in a biology course may catch the attention of faculty, who invite the student to join their
lab, which increases the likelihood that the student will pursue a career in that field, etc.), and are
thus context dependent, at least to some degree. Thus, our theories will need to be informed and
www.annualreviews.org • The Science of Targeted Intervention

429

PS69CH17-Harackiewicz

ARI

14 November 2017

8:28

revised by what we learn from testing interventions in multiple contexts. Moving forward, it will
be important to consider these issues as we design and evaluate intervention research.

Implementation: How and Where?

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

There are four ways that these interventions have been implemented in randomized controlled
trials: (a) in laboratory sessions, with assessment of academic outcomes (e.g., Aronson et al. 2002,
Brown et al. 2015); (b) in orientation or advising sessions outside of class (Stephens et al. 2014,
Walton et al. 2015); (c) in preorientation activities, included as part of the prematriculation process
(Yeager et al. 2016); or (d ) in classes, integrated into the class structure (e.g., Harackiewicz et al.
2016a, Miyake et al. 2010). There are methodological trade-offs associated with each mode of
delivery. Lab studies offer the greatest control and opportunity for in-depth assessment of targeted processes. For example, Brady and colleagues (2016) were able to explore self-affirmation
and recursive processes by bringing participants back into the lab two years after participating in
a laboratory-based values affirmation study. Similarly, Stephens et al. (2015) were able to collect
physiological data to examine recursive processes two years after a differences education intervention. However, any time participants are brought back to the lab for follow-up, researchers must
contend with attrition and problems of self-selection that undercut the power of randomization
at the original point of implementation. Selection bias may also apply when students are recruited
for advising or orientation sessions scheduled outside of classes. Although randomization within
these contexts allows evaluation of treatment effects within the sample, the generalizability of the
studies is unclear. In these cases, it is imperative that researchers describe recruitment procedures
and characterize their sample relative to the targeted population. The inclusion of campus-wide
control groups (e.g., Walton & Cohen 2011, Stephens et al. 2014) can be helpful in this process.
When interventions are embedded in prematriculation activities or incorporated into class
curricula, samples are more representative of the targeted population, with fewer concerns about
selection bias. However, it is essential to track whether all students complete prematriculation
and required course assignments to evaluate treatment compliance and fidelity (O’Donnell 2008,
Hulleman & Cordray 2009). Implementation in these contexts requires close collaboration with
course instructors or deans to ensure that materials are appropriate for the context and that
randomization is carried out properly. Moreover, when working in these contexts, it is important
to design control conditions that are plausible, i.e., that have pedagogical value (in the case of
course-based interventions) or make sense as prematriculation orientation activities. For example,
in control conditions of the utility-value intervention study in biology classes (Harackiewicz et al.
2016a), students were asked to write essays summarizing course material, whereas students in the
intervention condition were asked to summarize information and then explain the relevance and
utility value of that information. Thus, the intervention had pedagogical value for all students,
which could justify its inclusion in curricula. The major disadvantage of these approaches is that it
is much more difficult to examine targeted processes. There are limited opportunities to administer
questionnaires, let alone measure physiological data. Even when possible, there are risks: The more
that data collection is added to the course or orientation, the more that it will be experienced as a
research study, reducing the authenticity and potential generalizability of the findings.
Thus, all delivery methods have benefits and disadvantages. Intervention scientists must consider the goals of their study. A study that aims to test process questions is perhaps best conducted
in the laboratory. However, a study that aims to test how the intervention works in the field
will need to be embedded in the educational context (i.e., the course, prematriculation activities,
orientation, or advising sessions, depending on the intervention). Indeed, there is an important
interplay between laboratory and context-embedded studies: Interventions tested in the lab are
430

Harackiewicz

·

Priniski

PS69CH17-Harackiewicz

ARI

14 November 2017

8:28

scaled up for field tests, which then suggest additional process questions to be tested in the lab,
so that the intervention can be refined. For example, after their analyses of values affirmation
essays from field studies, Shnabel et al. (2013) and Tibbetts et al. (2016a) returned to the lab to
manipulate writing themes to test their field-driven hypotheses.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

Implementation: Who and Why?
In the range of intervention studies reviewed above, researchers have targeted different groups
of students in different contexts—women in physics classes and engineering programs, African
American students at a selective university, students who struggle on early exams in psychology
classes, etc.—as well as broader groups of students. For example, Yeager et al. (2016) targeted
disadvantaged students, defined differently in each of three studies, based on historical achievement data in each context: In study 1, all participants were either URM or FG students; in
study 2, the disadvantaged group included all African American, Latino, and FG students; in
study 3, the disadvantaged group included all African American, Latino, Native, Pacific Islander,
and FG students. Harackiewicz et al. (2012) targeted all parents and teens with their directly communicated utility-value intervention. Other researchers targeted narrower groups of students at
the intersection of two dimensions—i.e., low-performing males in psychology classes (Hulleman
et al. 2017) and FG-URM students in biology classes (Harackiewicz et al. 2016a). The dizzying
array of populations targeted in the studies reviewed above indicates how differently problems
have been conceptualized and how difficult it is to compare results across studies.
Given that targeted interventions focus on specific educational problems for particular groups
of students, it is important to consider the individual characteristics that may predispose students
to benefit from a given intervention. For example, framing and values affirmation interventions
have proven to alleviate belonging concerns, thus promoting academic performance for underrepresented students (e.g., African American students in college, women in physics) and students
with a low sense of belonging. Utility-value interventions have been powerful in improving performance for students who struggle in a class and for students with strong helping motives by
increasing their engagement with course content and helping them to connect the material to
their own lives and goals. In order to implement an intervention with maximum effectiveness, it
is important to consider the specific processes that social-psychological interventions target and
how those processes vary across different populations.
If interventions target a general process, such as belonging concerns in the transition to college,
it may be theoretically consistent to target all disadvantaged students in that context. With other
interventions, however, hypotheses may be more specific. We recommend that researchers (continue to) conduct pilot work and use focus groups (e.g., Walton et al. 2015) to assess the problem,
population, and context. This process has two major benefits. First, baseline assessment and focus
groups can help identify which type of intervention might be appropriate in a given context and
which groups might be most responsive that intervention (e.g., Harackiewicz et al. 2016a). Second,
a deeper understanding of the context will provide insight into the ways in which intervention
materials can be customized to be most resonant with students. When assessing students’ motivational profiles, it is important to remember that students’ identities overlap and intersect, with
implications for intervention. For example, an intervention that benefits women may not benefit
FG students, and FG women may have a unique set of needs that would not be well addressed by
either interventions for women or interventions for FG students (Cole 2009).
In addition to the intersectionality of demographic categories (e.g., race and gender), it may be
fruitful to consider overlap between demographic categories and psychological variables. Layous
and colleagues’ (2017) work suggests that values affirmation interventions can be effective for
www.annualreviews.org • The Science of Targeted Intervention

431

ARI

14 November 2017

8:28

any student with belonging concerns. Does this fully explain the benefits of values affirmation for
underrepresented minorities or FG students? Likewise, interventions that target achievement gaps
may be working primarily through benefits for low performers or through other characteristics
of the group. For example, Yeager and colleagues’ (2016) definition of disadvantaged students
as groups with a history of poor performance raises the interesting possibility that the positive
effects of social belonging interventions could be indicative of positive effects for poor performers
more generally.
As a final note, we think it will be important in future work to conduct more fine-grained analyses of intervention mechanisms for different groups. Much of the work in this review investigates
mechanism in terms of psychological processes or behaviors affected by the intervention, and this
work is crucial. However, there is another, more proximal layer of mechanism that has been gaining attention in recent work. Nearly all of the interventions in this review involve some amount
of writing, and text analysis of students’ essays may offer new insights into how different groups
internalize intervention messages and what types of writing interventions have the greatest benefits for students. Indeed, work by Harackiewicz and colleagues (2016a), Beigman Klebanov and
colleagues (2017), Shnabel and colleagues (2013), and Tibbetts and colleagues (2016a) demonstrates that these words, direct from students’ pens or keyboards, can reveal underlying intervention
mechanisms.
In sum, our review suggests that targeted interventions can be powerful in improving student
outcomes in higher education. However, there are many theoretical and methodological issues
to address as we continue to build a toolbox of interventions that target critical problems in
education. We recommend that researchers and practitioners proceed with cautious optimism and
continue the arduous but crucial work of understanding how, when, and for whom motivational
interventions can improve educational outcomes.

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

PS69CH17-Harackiewicz

DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that
might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Jilana Boston, Cameron Hecht, and Yoi Tibbetts for helpful comments on earlier versions of this manuscript. This research was supported by the National Institutes of Health (grant
R01GM102703). This research was also supported by the the Institute of Education Sciences,
US Department of Education, through award R305B15003 to the University of Wisconsin–
Madison. The opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not represent the views of
the US Department of Education or the National Institutes of Health.
LITERATURE CITED
Acee TW, Weinstein CE. 2010. Effects of a value-reappraisal intervention on statistics students’ motivation
and performance. J. Exp. Educ. 78:487–512
Aronson E. 1999. The power of self-persuasion. Am. Psychol. 54:875–84
Aronson J, Fried CB, Good C. 2002. Reducing the effects of stereotype threat on African American college
students by shaping theories of intelligence. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 38:113–25
Beigman Klebanov B, Burstein J, Harackiewicz JM, Priniski SJ, Mulholland M. 2017. Reflective writing about
the utility value of science as a tool for increasing STEM motivation and retention—can AI help scale
up? Int. J. Artif. Intell. Educ. In press
432

Harackiewicz

·

Priniski

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

PS69CH17-Harackiewicz

ARI

14 November 2017

8:28

Blackwell LS, Trzesniewski KH, Dweck CS. 2007. Implicit theories of intelligence predict achievement across
an adolescent transition: a longitudinal study and an intervention. Child Dev. 78:246–63
Borman GD, Grigg J, Hanselman P. 2016. An effort to close achievement gaps at scale through self-affirmation.
Educ. Eval. Policy Anal. 38:21–42
Bowen NK, Wegmann KM, Webber KC. 2013. Enhancing a brief writing intervention to combat stereotype
threat among middle-school students. J. Educ. Psychol. 105:427–35
Brady ST, Reeves SL, Garcia J, Purdie-Vaughns V, Cook JE, et al. 2016. The psychology of the affirmed
learner: spontaneous self-affirmation in the face of stress. J. Educ. Psychol. 108:353–73
Browman AS, Destin M. 2016. The effects of a warm or chilly climate toward socioeconomic diversity on
academic motivation and self-concept. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 42:172–87
Brown E, Smith J, Thoman D, Allen J, Muragishi G. 2015. From bench to bedside: a communal utility value
intervention to enhance students’ biomedical science motivation. J. Educ. Psychol. 107:1116–35
Canning EA, Harackiewicz JM. 2015. Teach it, don’t preach it: the differential effects of directlycommunicated and self-generated utility-value information. Motiv. Sci. 1:47–71
Canning EA, Harackiewicz JM, Priniski SP, Hecht CA, Tibbetts Y, Hyde JS. 2018. Improving performance
and retention in introductory biology with a utility-value intervention. J. Educ. Psychol. In press
Cohen GL, Garcia J, Apfel N, Master A. 2006. Reducing the racial achievement gap: a social-psychological
intervention. Science 313:1307–10
Cohen GL, Garcia J, Purdie-Vaughns V, Apfel N, Brzustoski P. 2009. Recursive processes in self-affirmation:
intervening to close the minority achievement gap. Science 324:400–3
Cohen GL, Sherman DK. 2014. The psychology of change: self-affirmation and social psychological intervention. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 65:333–71
Cole ER. 2009. Intersectionality and research in psychology. Am. Psychol. 64:170–80
Cook JE, Purdie-Vaughns V, Garcia J, Cohen GL. 2012. Chronic threat and contingent belonging: protective
benefits of values affirmation on identity development. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 102:479–96
Dee TS. 2015. Social identity and achievement gaps: evidence from an affirmation intervention. J. Res. Educ.
Eff. 8:149–68
Durik AM, Hulleman CS, Harackiewicz JM. 2015. One size fits some: Instructional enhancements to promote interest don’t work the same for everyone. In Interest in Mathematics and Science Learning, ed. KA
Renninger, M Nieswandt, S Hidi, pp. 49–62. Washington, DC: Am. Educ. Res. Assoc.
Dweck CS. 1999. Self-Theories: Their Role in Motivation, Personality, and Development. Philadelphia: Psychol.
Press
Eccles J, Adler T, Futterman R, Goff S, Kaczala C, Meece J. 1983. Expectations, values and academic behaviors.
In Perspective on Achievement and Achievement Motivation, ed. JT Spence, pp. 75–146. San Francisco:
W. H. Freeman
Eccles JS, Wigfield A. 2002. Motivational beliefs, values, and goals. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 53:109–32
Gaspard H, Dicke A-L, Flunger B, Brisson BM, Häfner I, et al. 2015. Fostering adolescents’ value beliefs for
mathematics with a relevance intervention in the classroom. Dev. Psychol. 51:1226–40
Hall NC, Perry RP, Goetz T, Ruthig JC, Stupnisky RH, Newall NE. 2007. Attributional retraining and elaborative learning: improving academic development through writing-based interventions. Learn. Individ.
Differ. 17:280–90
Hanselman P, Bruch SK, Gamoran A, Borman GD. 2014. Threat in context: school moderation of the impact
of social identity threat on racial/ethnic achievement gaps. Sociol. Educ. 87:106–24
Hanselman P, Rozek CS, Grigg J, Borman GD. 2017. New evidence on self-affirmation effects and theorized
sources of heterogeneity from large-scale replications. J. Educ. Psychol. 109:405–24
Harackiewicz JM, Canning EA, Tibbetts Y, Giffen CJ, Blair SS, et al. 2014a. Closing the social class achievement gap for first-generation students in undergraduate biology. J. Educ. Psychol. 106:375–89
Harackiewicz JM, Canning EA, Tibbetts Y, Priniski SJ, Hyde JS. 2016a. Closing achievement gaps with a
utility-value intervention: disentangling race and social class. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 111:745–65
Harackiewicz JM, Hulleman CS. 2010. The importance of interest: the role of achievement goals and task
values in promoting the development of interest. Soc. Personal. Psychol. Compass 4:42–52
Harackiewicz JM, Rozek CS, Hulleman CS, Hyde JS. 2012. Helping parents to motivate adolescents in
mathematics and science: an experimental test of a utility-value intervention. Psychol. Sci. 23:899–906
www.annualreviews.org • The Science of Targeted Intervention

433

ARI

14 November 2017

8:28

Harackiewicz JM, Smith JL, Priniski SJ. 2016b. Interest matters: the importance of promoting interest in
education. Policy Insights Behav. Brain Sci. 3:220–27
Harackiewicz JM, Tibbetts Y, Canning EA, Hyde JS. 2014b. Harnessing values to promote motivation in
education. In Advances in Motivation and Achievement, ed. SA Karabenick, TC Urden, pp. 71–105. Bingley,
UK: Emerald Group Publ. Ltd.
Haynes TL, Ruthig JC, Perry RP, Stupnisky RH, Hall NC. 2006. Reducing the academic risks of overoptimism: the longitudinal effects of attributional retraining on cognition and achievement. Res. High.
Educ. 47:755–79
Hulleman CS, Cordray DS. 2009. Moving from the lab to the field: the role of fidelity and achieved intervention
strength. J. Res. Educ. Eff. 2:88–110
Hulleman CS, Godes O, Hendricks BL, Harackiewicz JM. 2010. Enhancing interest and performance with a
utility value intervention. J. Educ. Psychol. 102:880–95
Hulleman CS, Harackiewicz JM. 2009. Promoting interest and performance in high school science classes.
Science 326:1410–12
Hulleman CS, Kosovich JJ, Barron KE, Daniel DB. 2017. Making connections: replicating and extending the
utility value intervention in the classroom. J. Educ. Psychol. 109:387–404
Jamieson JP, Peters BJ, Greenwood EJ, Altose AJ. 2016. Reappraising stress arousal improves performance
and reduces evaluation anxiety in classroom exam situations. Soc. Psychol. Personal. Sci. 7:579–87
Johnson ML, Sinatra GM. 2013. Use of task-value instructional inductions for facilitating engagement and
conceptual change. Contemp. Educ. Psychol. 38:51–63
Kizilcec RF, Saltarelli AJ, Reich J, Cohen GL. 2017. Closing global achievement gaps in MOOCs: Brief
interventions address social identity threat at scale. Science 355:251–52
Landau MJ, Oyserman D, Keefer LA, Smith GC. 2014. The college journey and academic engagement: how
metaphor use enhances identity-based motivation. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 106:679–98
Layous K, Davis EM, Garcia J, Purdie-Vaughns V, Cook JE, et al. 2017. Feeling left out, but affirmed:
protecting against the negative effects of low belonging in college. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 69:227–31
Lazowski RA, Hulleman CS. 2016. Motivation interventions in education: a meta-analytic review. Rev. Educ.
Res. 86:602–40
Miyake A, Kost-Smith LE, Finkelstein ND, Pollock SJ, Cohen GL, et al. 2010. Reducing the gender achievement gap in college science: a classroom study of values affirmation. Science 330:1234–37
O’Donnell CL. 2008. Defining, conceptualizing, and measuring fidelity of implementation and its relationship
to outcomes in K-12 curriculum intervention research. Rev. Educ. Res. 78:33–84
Paunesku D, Walton GM, Romero C, Smith EN, Yeager DS, Dweck CS. 2015. Mind-set interventions are
a scalable treatment for academic underachievement. Psychol. Sci. 26:784–93
Perry RP, Chipperfield JG, Hladkyj S, Pekrun R, Hamm JM. 2014. Attribution-based treatment interventions
in some achievement settings. Adv. Motiv. Achiev. 18:1–35
Perry RP, Hamm JM. 2017. An attribution perspective on competence and motivation: theory and treatment
interventions. In Handbook of Competence and Motivation: Theory and Application, ed. AJ Elliot, CS Dweck,
DS Yeager, pp. 61–84. New York: Guilford Press. 2nd ed.
Perry RP, Stupnisky RH, Hall NC, Chipperfield JG, Weiner B. 2010. Bad starts and better finishes: attributional retraining and initial performance in competitive achievement settings. J. Soc. Clin. Psychol.
29:668–700
Pennebaker JW, Booth RJ, Francis ME. 2007. Linguistic inquiry and word count: LIWC. Software.
http://liwc.wpengine.com/
Protzko J, Aronson J. 2016. Context moderates affirmation effects on the ethnic achievement gap. Soc. Psychol.
Personal. Sci. 7:500–7
Ross L, Nisbett RE. 2011. The Person and the Situation: Perspectives of Social Psychology. London: Pinter &
Martin
Rozek CS, Svoboda RC, Harackiewicz JM, Hulleman CS, Hyde JS. 2017. Utility-value intervention with
parents increases students’ STEM preparation and career pursuit. PNAS 114:909–14
Schwartz DL, Cheng KM, Salehi S, Wieman C. 2016. The half empty question for socio-cognitive interventions. J. Educ. Psychol. 108:297–404

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

PS69CH17-Harackiewicz

434

Harackiewicz

·

Priniski

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

PS69CH17-Harackiewicz

ARI

14 November 2017

8:28

Sherman DK, Hartson KA, Binning KR, Purdie-Vaughns V, Garcia J, et al. 2013. Deflecting the trajectory and
changing the narrative: how self-affirmation affects academic performance and motivation under identity
threat. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 104:591–618
Shnabel N, Purdie-Vaughns V, Cook JE, Garcia J, Cohen GL. 2013. Demystifying values-affirmation interventions: Writing about social belonging is a key to buffering against identity threat. Personal. Soc. Psychol.
B 39:663–76
Steele CM. 1988. The psychology of self-affirmation: sustaining the integrity of the self. Adv. Exp. Soc. Psychol.
21:261–302
Stephens NM, Fryberg SA, Markus HR, Johnson CS, Covarrubias R. 2012. Unseen disadvantage:
how American universities’ focus on independence undermines the academic performance of firstgeneration college students. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 102:1178–97
Stephens NM, Hamedani MG, Destin M. 2014. Closing the social-class achievement gap: A differenceeducation intervention improves first-generation students’ academic performance and all students’ college
transition. Psychol. Sci. 25:943–53
Stephens NM, Townsend SS, Hamedani MG, Destin M, Manzo V. 2015. A difference-education intervention
equips first-generation college students to thrive in the face of stressful college situations. Psychol. Sci.
26:1556–66
Thoman DB, Brown ER, Mason AZ, Harmsen AG, Smith JL. 2015. The role of altruistic values in motivating
underrepresented minority students for biomedicine. BioScience 65:183–88
Thoman DB, Muragishi GA, Smith JL. 2017. Research microcultures as socialization contexts for underrepresented science students. Psychol. Sci. 28:760–73
Tibbetts Y, Harackiewicz JM, Canning EA, Boston JS, Priniski SJ, et al. 2016a. Affirming independence: exploring mechanisms underlying a values affirmation intervention for first-generation students. J. Personal.
Soc. Psychol. 110:635–59
Tibbetts Y, Harackiewicz JM, Priniski SJ, Canning EA. 2016b. Broadening participation in the life sciences
with social-psychological interventions. CBE Life Sci. Educ. 15:es4
Walton GM. 2014. The new science of wise psychological interventions. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 23:73–82
Walton GM, Cohen GL. 2007. A question of belonging: race, social fit, and achievement. J. Personal. Soc.
Psychol. 92:82–96
Walton GM, Cohen GL. 2011. A brief social-belonging intervention improves academic and health outcomes
among minority students. Science 331:1447–51
Walton GM, Logel C, Peach JM, Spencer SJ, Zanna MP. 2015. Two brief interventions to mitigate a “chilly
climate” transform women’s experience, relationships, and achievement in engineering. J. Educ. Psychol.
107:468–85
Weiner B. 1974. Achievement Motivation and Attribution Theory. Morristown, NJ: General Learning Press
Wilson TD. 2006. The power of social psychological interventions. Science 313:1251–52
Wilson TD. 2011. Redirect: The Surprising New Science of Psychological Change. New York: Little, Brown
Wilson TD, Linville PW. 1982. Improving the academic performance of college freshmen: attribution therapy
revisited. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 42:367–76
Wilson TD, Linville PW. 1985. Improving the performance of college freshmen with attributional techniques.
J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 49:287–93
Yeager DS, Henderson MD, Paunesku D, Walton GM, D’Mello S, et al. 2014. Boring but important: A selftranscendent purpose for learning fosters academic self-regulation. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 107:559–80
Yeager DS, Walton GM. 2011. Social-psychological interventions in education: They’re not magic. Rev. Educ.
Res. 81:267–301
Yeager DS, Walton GM, Brady ST, Akcinar EN, Paunesku D, et al. 2016. Teaching a lay theory before
college narrows achievement gaps at scale. PNAS 113:E3341–48

www.annualreviews.org • The Science of Targeted Intervention

435

ANNUAL REVIEWS
Connect With Our Experts

New From Annual Reviews:

ONLINE NOW!

Annual Review of Cancer Biology

cancerbio.annualreviews.org • Volume 1 • March 2017

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

Co-Editors: Tyler Jacks, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Charles L. Sawyers, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
The Annual Review of Cancer Biology reviews a range of subjects representing important and emerging areas in the field of cancer
research. The Annual Review of Cancer Biology includes three broad themes: Cancer Cell Biology, Tumorigenesis and Cancer
Progression, and Translational Cancer Science.

TABLE OF CONTENTS FOR VOLUME 1:

•	 How Tumor Virology Evolved into Cancer Biology and
Transformed Oncology, Harold Varmus
•	 The Role of Autophagy in Cancer, Naiara Santana-Codina,
Joseph D. Mancias, Alec C. Kimmelman
•	 Cell Cycle–Targeted Cancer Therapies, Charles J. Sherr,
Jiri Bartek
•	 Ubiquitin in Cell-Cycle Regulation and Dysregulation
in Cancer, Natalie A. Borg, Vishva M. Dixit
•	 The Two Faces of Reactive Oxygen Species in Cancer,
Colleen R. Reczek, Navdeep S. Chandel
•	 Analyzing Tumor Metabolism In Vivo, Brandon Faubert,
Ralph J. DeBerardinis
•	 Stress-Induced Mutagenesis: Implications in Cancer
and Drug Resistance, Devon M. Fitzgerald, P.J. Hastings,
Susan M. Rosenberg
•	 Synthetic Lethality in Cancer Therapeutics,
Roderick L. Beijersbergen, Lodewyk F.A. Wessels,
René Bernards
•	 Noncoding RNAs in Cancer Development, Chao-Po Lin,
Lin He
•	 p53: Multiple Facets of a Rubik’s Cube, Yun Zhang,
Guillermina Lozano
•	 Resisting Resistance, Ivana Bozic, Martin A. Nowak
•	 Deciphering Genetic Intratumor Heterogeneity
and Its Impact on Cancer Evolution, Rachel Rosenthal,
Nicholas McGranahan, Javier Herrero, Charles Swanton

•	 Immune-Suppressing Cellular Elements of the Tumor
Microenvironment, Douglas T. Fearon
•	 Overcoming On-Target Resistance to Tyrosine Kinase
Inhibitors in Lung Cancer, Ibiayi Dagogo-Jack,
Jeffrey A. Engelman, Alice T. Shaw
•	 Apoptosis and Cancer, Anthony Letai
•	 Chemical Carcinogenesis Models of Cancer: Back
to the Future, Melissa Q. McCreery, Allan Balmain
•	 Extracellular Matrix Remodeling and Stiffening Modulate
Tumor Phenotype and Treatment Response,
Jennifer L. Leight, Allison P. Drain, Valerie M. Weaver
•	 Aneuploidy in Cancer: Seq-ing Answers to Old Questions,
Kristin A. Knouse, Teresa Davoli, Stephen J. Elledge,
Angelika Amon
•	 The Role of Chromatin-Associated Proteins in Cancer,
Kristian Helin, Saverio Minucci
•	 Targeted Differentiation Therapy with Mutant IDH Inhibitors:
Early Experiences and Parallels with Other Differentiation
Agents, Eytan Stein, Katharine Yen
•	 Determinants of Organotropic Metastasis, Heath A. Smith,
Yibin Kang
•	 Multiple Roles for the MLL/COMPASS Family in the
Epigenetic Regulation of Gene Expression and in Cancer,
Joshua J. Meeks, Ali Shilatifard
•	 Chimeric Antigen Receptors: A Paradigm Shift
in Immunotherapy, Michel Sadelain

ANNUAL REVIEWS | CONNECT WITH OUR EXPERTS
650.493.4400/800.523.8635 (us/can)
www.annualreviews.org | service@annualreviews.org

PS69-FrontMatter

ARI

30 November 2017

20:46

Annual Review of
Psychology
Volume 69, 2018

Contents
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

The Properties and Antecedents of Hedonic Decline
Jeff Galak and Joseph P. Redden p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 1
How We Hear: The Perception and Neural Coding of Sound
Andrew J. Oxenham p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p27
The Psychology of Music: Rhythm and Movement
Daniel J. Levitin, Jessica A. Grahn, and Justin London p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p51
Multistable Perception and the Role of Frontoparietal Cortex
in Perceptual Inference
Jan Brascamp, Philipp Sterzer, Randolph Blake, and Tomas Knapen p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p77
Ensemble Perception
David Whitney and Allison Yamanashi Leib p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 105
Neuro-, Cardio-, and Immunoplasticity: Effects of Early Adversity
Eric Pakulak, Courtney Stevens, and Helen Neville p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 131
Prefrontal Cortex and Neurological Impairments of Active Thought
Tim Shallice and Lisa Cipolotti p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 157
Infant Statistical Learning
Jenny R. Saffran and Natasha Z. Kirkham p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 181
How Children Solve the Two Challenges of Cooperation
Felix Warneken p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 205
Linking Language and Cognition in Infancy
Danielle R. Perszyk and Sandra R. Waxman p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 231
Cognitive Foundations of Learning from Testimony
Paul L. Harris, Melissa A. Koenig, Kathleen H. Corriveau, and Vikram K. Jaswal p p p 251
Gender Stereotypes
Naomi Ellemers p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 275
Attitudes and Attitude Change
Dolores Albarracin and Sharon Shavitt p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 299

vi

PS69-FrontMatter

ARI

30 November 2017

20:46

Persuasion, Influence, and Value: Perspectives from Communication
and Social Neuroscience
Emily Falk and Christin Scholz p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 329
Social Mobilization
Todd Rogers, Noah J. Goldstein, and Craig R. Fox p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 357

Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2018.69:409-435. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by University of Texas - Austin on 01/19/18. For personal use only.

Developmental Origins of Chronic Physical Aggression:
A Bio-Psycho-Social Model for the Next Generation of Preventive
Interventions
Richard E. Tremblay, Frank Vitaro, and Sylvana M. Côté p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 383
Improving Student Outcomes in Higher Education: The Science
of Targeted Intervention
Judith M. Harackiewicz and Stacy J. Priniski p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 409
Why Social Relationships Are Important for Physical Health: A Systems
Approach to Understanding and Modifying Risk and Protection
Julianne Holt-Lunstad p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 437
Principles and Challenges of Applying Epigenetic Epidemiology
to Psychology
Meaghan J. Jones, Sarah R. Moore, and Michael S. Kobor p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 459
Psychology, Science, and Knowledge Construction: Broadening
Perspectives from the Replication Crisis
Patrick E. Shrout and Joseph L. Rodgers p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 487
Psychology’s Renaissance
Leif D. Nelson, Joseph Simmons, and Uri Simonsohn p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 511
Indexes
Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors, Volumes 59–69 p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 535
Cumulative Index of Article Titles, Volumes 59–69 p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 540
Errata
An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Psychology articles may be found at
http://www.annualreviews.org/errata/psych

Contents

vii

See	discussions,	stats,	and	author	profiles	for	this	publication	at:	https://www.researchgate.net/publication/265649028

Boring	but	Important:	A	Self-Transcendent
Purpose	for	Learning	Fosters	Academic	SelfRegulation
Article		in		Journal	of	Personality	and	Social	Psychology	·	October	2014
DOI:	10.1037/a0037637	·	Source:	PubMed

CITATIONS

READS

51

374

7	authors,	including:
Marlone	D	Henderson

Brian	Spitzer

University	of	Texas	at	Austin

New	York	University

28	PUBLICATIONS			888	CITATIONS			

3	PUBLICATIONS			102	CITATIONS			

SEE	PROFILE

SEE	PROFILE

Angela	Duckworth
University	of	Pennsylvania
74	PUBLICATIONS			6,105	CITATIONS			
SEE	PROFILE

Some	of	the	authors	of	this	publication	are	also	working	on	these	related	projects:

Online	panels	data	quality	View	project

All	content	following	this	page	was	uploaded	by	Angela	Duckworth	on	28	July	2015.
The	user	has	requested	enhancement	of	the	downloaded	file.

ATTITUDES AND SOCIAL COGNITION

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Boring but Important: A Self-Transcendent Purpose for Learning Fosters
Academic Self-Regulation
David S. Yeager and Marlone D. Henderson

David Paunesku and Gregory M. Walton

University of Texas at Austin

Stanford University

Sidney D’Mello

Brian J. Spitzer

University of Notre Dame

New York University

Angela Lee Duckworth
University of Pennsylvania
Many important learning tasks feel uninteresting and tedious to learners. This research proposed that
promoting a prosocial, self-transcendent purpose could improve academic self-regulation on such
tasks. This proposal was supported in 4 studies with over 2,000 adolescents and young adults. Study
1 documented a correlation between a self-transcendent purpose for learning and self-reported trait
measures of academic self-regulation. Those with more of a purpose for learning also persisted
longer on a boring task rather than giving in to a tempting alternative and, many months later, were
less likely to drop out of college. Study 2 addressed causality. It showed that a brief, one-time
psychological intervention promoting a self-transcendent purpose for learning could improve high
school science and math grade point average (GPA) over several months. Studies 3 and 4 were
short-term experiments that explored possible mechanisms. They showed that the self-transcendent
purpose manipulation could increase deeper learning behavior on tedious test review materials
(Study 3), and sustain self-regulation over the course of an increasingly boring task (Study 4). More
self-oriented motives for learning—such as the desire to have an interesting or enjoyable career—
did not, on their own, consistently produce these benefits (Studies 1 and 4).
Keywords: self-regulation, motivation, purpose, meaning, psychological intervention
Supplemental materials: http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0037637.supp

Many of the tasks that contribute most to the development of
valuable skills are also, unfortunately, commonly experienced as

tedious and unpleasant (Duckworth, Kirby, Tsukayama, Berstein,
& Ericsson, 2011; also see Ericsson, 2006, 2007, 2009; Ericsson &
Ward, 2007; Ericsson, Krampe, & Tesch-Romer, 1993). For example, skills in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) are in high demand, and, according to some estimates, jobs
in the STEM sector will grow by more than 20% in the next few
decades (U.S. Congress Joint Economic Committee, 2012). Yet in a

David S. Yeager and Marlone D. Henderson, Department of Psychology,
University of Texas at Austin; David Paunesku and Gregory M. Walton,
Department of Psychology, Stanford University; Sidney D’Mello, Department of Psychology and Department of Computer Science, University of
Notre Dame; Brian J. Spitzer, Department of Applied Psychology, New
York University; Angela Lee Duckworth, Department of Psychology,
University of Pennsylvania.
This research was supported by funding from the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation, the Raikes Foundation, the National Science Foundation
(HCC 0834847, DRL 1235958, to Sidney D’Mello), the National Institutes
of Health (5-K01-AG033182-02, to Angela Lee Duckworth), the New
Paths to Purpose project at the Booth Center for Decision Research, and a

University of Texas Summer Research Assignment grant. Any opinions,
findings and conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this article are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the funding
agencies. The ideas in this research benefitted from discussions with
Matthew Andrews and Matthew Bundick. The authors are grateful to the
students, teachers, and school administrators who participated in this
research. We are also grateful to Bill Swann, Christopher Hulleman, Judy
Harackiewicz, Robin Vallacher, Geoffrey Cohen, and Carol Dweck for
their helpful feedback. Any remaining errors are the authors’.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to David S.
Yeager, 108 East Dean Keeton, Stop A8000, Austin, TX 78712-104.
E-mail: dyeager@utexas.edu

It’s only when you hitch your wagon to something larger than yourself
that you realize your true potential and discover the role that you’ll
play in writing the next great chapter in the American story.
—President Barack Obama, Wesleyan University
Commencement Speech, 2008

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2014, Vol. 107, No. 4, 559 –580
© 2014 American Psychological Association 0022-3514/14/$12.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0037637

559

YEAGER ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

560

representative sample survey, over half of middle school students said
they would rather eat broccoli than do their math homework; 44%
would rather take out the trash (Raytheon Company, 2012).
To achieve longer-term aims, learners must sometimes regulate
attention, emotion, and behavior in the face of tempting alternatives
(Duckworth & Carlson, 2013; Fujita, 2011; Mischel, Shoda, & Rodriguez, 1989). Indeed, individual differences in factors such as “grit”
and self-control are predictive of eventual skill acquisition and expert
performance, controlling for cognitive ability (Duckworth, Peterson,
Matthews, & Kelly, 2007; Duckworth, Tsukayama, & Kirby, 2013;
Moffitt et al., 2011). Where do these factors come from? Individuals
are known to marshal self-discipline more when they are pursuing
personally meaningful goals (see Fishbach & Trope, 2005; Fishbach,
Zhang, & Trope, 2010; Loewenstein, 1996; Mischel, Cantor, & Feldman, 1996; Rachlin, Brown, & Cross, 2000; Thaler & Shefrin, 1981;
Trope & Fishbach, 2000; also see Eccles, 2009; Marshall, 2001). In
the present research we propose that what has been called a purpose
for learning (Andrews, 2011; Yeager, Bundick, & Johnson, 2012) can
foster greater meaning in schoolwork and promote academic selfregulation as students take on tedious learning tasks.

Defining a “Purpose for Learning”
An enormous amount of research has focused on the wide variety
of possible motives for engaging in and succeeding at learning tasks
(e.g., Ames, 1992; Atkinson, 1957; Carver & Scheier, 1981; Eccles &
Wigfield, 2002; Elliot, Conroy, Barron, & Murayama, 2010; Emmons, 1986; Ford & Nichols, 1987; Harackiewicz & Sansone, 1991;
Higgins, 2005; Lepper, Corpus, & Iyengar, 2005; Little, 1983;
Markus & Nurius, 1986; Nicholls, 1984; Oyserman & Destin, 2010;
Ryan & Deci, 2000). Here we focus on only one distinction—that
between self-interest and self-transcendence. Learners may view a
task as likely to benefit the self, believing it will be intrinsically
enjoyable or lead to a personally fulfilling career (see Eccles &
Wigfield, 1995). Learners may also have motives that transcend
self-interest. These may involve service to other individuals, to an
ideal, to a social justice cause, or to a spiritual entity (Damon, Menon,
& Bronk, 2003; Frankl, 1963; Koltko-Rivera, 2006; Maslow, 1969;
Schwartz, 1992; also see Eccles, 2009).
We define a purpose for learning as a goal that is motivated
both by an opportunity to benefit the self and by the potential to
have some effect on or connection to the world beyond the self
(Yeager & Bundick, 2009; Yeager et al., 2012; see Burrow & Hill,
2011; Damon et al., 2003). Embedded in this definition is a focus
on the motive or rationale for the goal (e.g., “helping people”)
rather than on content of a goal (e.g., “being an engineer”; Massey,
Gebhardt, & Garnefski, 2008). For example, a purpose for learning
in a high school science class might be that a student would one
day like to use the acquired knowledge to build bridges that help
people (a self-transcendent component). The same student might
also believe that engineering would be a fulfilling, interesting, and
enjoyable career (a self-oriented component). Both of these types
of motives—self-oriented and self-transcendent— can be important for learners and can motivate task persistence (Eccles, 2009;
Eccles & Wigfield, 2002). These different motives also frequently
coexist (Batson, 1998; also see Feiler, Tost, & Grant, 2012). In
fact, in a series of qualitative interviews conducted with a diverse
group of high school adolescents, it was common for teens to pair
self-transcendent motives with self-oriented motives—much more

common in fact than having only a self-transcendent motive (Yeager & Bundick, 2009; Yeager et al., 2012). Here we examine
whether adding self-transcendent motives to self-oriented ones—
what we call a “purpose for learning”— could produce benefits
that self-oriented motives alone could not achieve.

Purpose, Meaning, and Persistence
There is good reason to believe that a purpose for learning could
promote the view that a task is personally meaningful (e.g., Grant,
2007, 2013; Olivola & Shafir, 2013; also see Duffy & Dik, 2009;
Steger, 2012; Steger, Kashdan, & Oishi, 2008).1 A classic example
comes from Viktor Frankl (1963). In writing about the psychology
of surviving a concentration camp, he describes how a selftranscendent purpose in life creates a feeling that one’s actions are
important for the world, empowering a person to persist even in the
most appalling circumstances. He wrote “A [person] who becomes
conscious of the responsibility he bears toward a human being who
affectionately waits for him, or to an unfinished work, will never
be able to throw away his life” (p. 80). Channeling Neitzche,
Frankl stated “He knows the ‘why’ for his existence and will be
able to bear almost any ‘how’” (1963, p. 80).
Further support comes from observational research of people
working in “dirty” jobs—jobs with low status and requiring extremely repetitive tasks (e.g., trash collectors, hospital orderlies,
prison guards). Individuals with these jobs find their work more
meaningful and carry it out more effectively when they focus on
the benefit of these tasks for helping others or society at large
(Ashforth & Kreiner, 1999; Hughes, 1958, 1962; also see Dutton,
Roberts, & Bednar, 2010; Wrzesniewski, Dutton, & Debebe, 2003;
cf. Olivola & Shafir, 2013). Altogether, highly aversive experiences may become more bearable when they are viewed as having
consequences that transcend the self.
More directly relevant, Yeager et al. (2012) found that some high
school-aged adolescents spontaneously generated a purpose for learning during interviews—mentioning both a self-transcendent motive
and an intrinsic, self-oriented motive for their future work, such as
“being a doctor to help people and because it would be enjoyable.”
Students with a purpose rated their schoolwork in general as more
personally meaningful than adolescents with no career goal or only
extrinsic motives (making money, gaining respect), even at a
2-year follow-up (also see Lepper et al., 2005; Ryan & Deci,
2000). Other high school students discussed only typical interestbased, self-oriented motives. This group rated their schoolwork as
no more meaningful compared to students with no future work
goals or only extrinsic motives (Yeager et al., 2012). However, this
study was limited in that it did not directly assess perceptions of
tedious, skill-building tasks. Nor did it assess behavior or address
causality with experimental designs. These limitations are addressed in the present research.
Some past experiments have linked prosocial, selftranscendent motives to behavioral persistence on tasks at work,
not school. For example, telemarketers raised more money
1
A purpose is distinct from but related to personal meaning. The former
includes a person’s goal and his or her motives for pursuing it. The latter
refers to the sense that something matters and makes sense in the context
of one’s life or worldview (Steger, Kashdan, & Oishi, 2008; Yeager &
Bundick, 2009).

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION

when they were asked to focus on the benefits of their efforts
for poor children compared to benefits for the self, while
medical professionals were more likely to stop and wash their
hands when they focused on others’ health as opposed to their
own health (Grant, 2008; Grant & Hofmann, 2011; also see
Feiler et al., 2012; for findings from other workplaces see,
Grant & Rothbard, 2013; cf. Sansone, Weir, Harpster, & Morgan, 1992). Note that a self-transcendent motive makes aversive
experiences more bearable, not more enjoyable; prosocial motives diminish the correlation between feeling bad during a task
and the reduced motivation to complete it (Grant & Sonnentag,
2010; also see Grant & Campbell, 2007). Prosocial trash men do
not find trash more appealing, but they collect it more effectively (Hughes, 1958, 1962).
The present research is among the first to test whether students with more of a self-transcendent purpose for learning can
show greater persistence even on tedious learning activities that
provide a foundation for uncertain future contributions to the
world beyond the self (see Harackiewicz & Sansone, 1991).
Some past studies investigated, for instance, raising money for
poor children (Grant, 2008; also see Dunn, Aknin, & Norton,
2008) or preventing infection (Grant & Hofmann, 2011). It is
easy to see how these actions help others. But when high school
students engage in a learning task such as factoring trinomials
in algebra, or balancing stoichiometric equations in chemistry,
it can be difficult to see the steps through which deeply learning
from these tasks can help them benefit others. That is, raising
money for poor people is directly prosocial, but learning fractions must be construed as such.
Other past research has found that providing intrinsic versus
extrinsic motives for learning tasks (e.g., becoming healthy vs.
looking physically attractive) can lead to greater task persistence and deeper processing of information (e.g., Vansteenkiste, Simons, Lens, Sheldon, & Deci, 2004; also see Jang, 2008;
for a review, see Vansteenkiste, Lens, & Deci, 2006, or Patall,
Cooper, & Robinson, 2008). Similarly, some research has found
that asking students to generate reasons why a learning task
could be relevant to their daily lives and future goals could
improve course performance among low-performers, by enhancing the perceived utility value of a task (Hulleman, Godes,
Hendricks, & Harackiewicz, 2010; Hulleman & Harackiewicz,
2009). These studies were foundational to the present research.
However they were not designed to distinguish the intended
beneficiary of the learning—the self versus something that
transcends the self—as the present research seeks to do.
In addition, past studies have focused on the perceived prosocial value of completing a given task or learning objective
(Eccles & Wigfield, 1995)—for instance, learning about correlation coefficients to interpret education research (Jang, 2008),
or using the week’s science class lessons to help out on the
family farm (Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009; see Eccles,
2009; Eccles et al., 1983). However, an important skill for
self-regulation is to abstract up a level from the task at hand to
one’s motives for being involved in an educational enterprise
more generally— e.g., “science” or “math” or even “school.” It
is often uncertain whether or how one will use the knowledge
gained from a given learning objective or task. Indeed, teachers
very rarely provide any rationale for mastering a learning objective
(Stipek, 2004; also see Eccles, 2009), let alone a self-transcendent ratio-

561

nale. This is especially true in STEM courses, where many tasks are
unexplained (Carnevale & Desrochers, 2003; also see Diekman, Clark,
Johnston, Brown, & Steinberg, 2011). It may be helpful to reconstrue a
foundational task—such as practicing math facts—more generally in
terms of their relation to one’s broader, self-transcendent motives for
working hard in school or in a subject area.

The Present Research
Four studies investigated the hypothesis that a higher order,
self-transcendent purpose for learning in school would promote
academic self-regulation on tedious schoolwork. In Study 1 we
hypothesized that a self-transcendent purpose for learning would
be correlated with indicators of academic self-regulation both at
the trait level (self-reported grit and self-control) and at the behavioral level (short-term persistence on a boring math task and
longitudinal persistence in college). We further hypothesized that
these relations would be found above and beyond the effects of
more intrinsic, self-oriented motives (e.g., following one’s intellectual interests), and of cognitive ability.
Study 2 examined a possible causal effect of a self-transcendent
purpose for learning. In order to do so it was necessary to create an
exercise to adjust adolescents’ purposes for learning, which past
research has had difficulty doing (Dik, Steger, Gibson, & Peisner,
2011). Indeed, a purpose is likely to be highly personal and represent
the product of a large number of influences in life, including teachers,
parents, friends and the media, perhaps making it difficult to manipulate (e.g., Damon, 2008; Harackiewicz, Rozek, Hulleman, & Hydes,
2012; Moran, Bundick, Malin, & Reilly, 2013; Steger, Bundick, &
Yeager, 2012). Yet advances have been made in recent years in the
optimal design of psychological interventions in educational settings
(e.g., Blackwell, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2007; G. L. Cohen &
Sherman, 2014; Garcia & Cohen, 2012; Hulleman & Harackiewicz,
2009; Walton & Cohen, 2011; also see Walton, 2014; Wilson &
Linville, 1982). We were informed by these. We hypothesized that a
novel self-transcendent purpose for learning intervention could improve grades in subject areas likely to be seen as tedious, such as high
school math and science classes.
Studies 3 and 4 examined potential behavioral antecedents to
the outcomes studies in Studies 1 and 2. Specifically, Study 3
examined effects of the novel intervention on behavior on a
shorter time-course, testing the hypothesis that a selftranscendent purpose for learning could lead students to learn
more deeply from an immediate, real-world academic task.
Study 4 sought to isolate the effect of a purpose for learning
manipulation on self-regulation more precisely by administering a dependent measure that pitted a boring math activity
directly against tempting alternatives.

Study 1: An Initial Correlational Investigation
Study 1 was a correlational study among a low socioeconomic status (SES) group of high school seniors. Based on prior
research, they might have significant difficulty regulating immediate motivations in the service of long-term goals (Evans &
Rosenbaum, 2008; Vohs, 2013). We hypothesized that in this
population a self-transcendent purpose would correlate with
indicators of self-discipline— both self-reported and behavioral—assessed at the same measurement time. We further hypoth-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

562

YEAGER ET AL.

esized that, in a multiple regression controlling for more selforiented motives— even intrinsic-interest-focused ones—a
purpose for learning would continue to predict greater success
at self-regulation.
We also examined longitudinal relations with goal persistence.
This was done by collecting data on whether students were enrolled in college in the Fall semester following high school graduation, as they intended to do. Low-income students of color more
commonly drop out of the college pipeline in the summer after
college or during their first Fall semester, even when they have
successfully graduated high school and been admitted to a college
of their choice (Ryu, 2012). We hypothesized that a selftranscendent purpose would predict college persistence over
time—a potential indicator of successfully regulating competing
demands for time and attention in this low-income population. We
also hypothesized that this relation would be found when controlling for self-oriented motives in a multiple regression.

Method
Participants. Participants were N ⫽ 1,364 seniors in their
final semester at one of 17 participating urban public high schools
(eight charters and two district schools). Ninety-nine percent said
that they had applied for college and were planning on attending
college in the Fall semester. They were located in Los Angeles,
CA; Oakland, CA; New York, NY; Austin, TX; Houston, TX; or
Little Rock, AR. They were from low socioeconomic backgrounds: over 90% received free or reduced-price lunch, a measure
of low socioeconomic status, and only 9% had one parent who had
completed a 2 or 4-year degree; by contrast, 25% of parents did not
have a high school diploma. The sample overall was nearly evenly
split on gender (57% female) and had a large proportion of
students that are typically underrepresented in higher education in
the United States, 38% African American, 48% Hispanic/Latino,
5% Asian, 4% White. Some participants did not provide data on
some measures, and so degrees of freedom varied across analyses.
No other participants were excluded from analyses. There was no
stopping rule for data collection because all college-going students
in each school were invited to participate.
Procedures. Participants completed a web-based survey in the
school’s computer lab during the school day in the Spring semester
(February to May) of senior year. Teachers directed students to a
website (http://www.perts.net) that delivered the survey session,
which lasted one class period. Many months later, toward the end of
what was the Fall semester for students in college, college persistence
data were collected from the National Student Clearinghouse (NSC).
Measures.
Motives for going to college. The primary predictor variables
were self-transcendent motives, intrinsic self-oriented motives,
and extrinsic self-oriented motives. The preface for the items
assessing these motives was: “How true for you personally are
each of the following reasons for going to college?” Each was
rated on a 5-point scale (1 ⫽ Not at all true, 2 ⫽ Slightly true, 3 ⫽
Somewhat true, 4 ⫽ Very true, 5 ⫽ Completely true).
Self-transcendent motives (purpose for learning). We averaged
across the following three items to assess students’ self-transcendent
motives for going to college (a purpose for learning), operationalized
as a personally relevant desire to learn in order to make a contribution
to the world beyond the self: “I want to learn things that will help me

make a positive impact on the world,” “I want to gain skills that I can
use in a job that help others,” and “I want to become an educated
citizen that can contribute to society” (␣ ⫽ .75).
Self-oriented motives. We averaged across the following three
items adapted from Stephens, Fryberg, Markus, Johnson, and
Covarrubias’s (2012) assessment of self-oriented, interest-driven
motives for going to college: “I want to expand my knowledge of
the world,” “I want to become an independent thinker,” and “I
want to learn more about my interests” (␣ ⫽ .70). Note that these
are still personally important intrinsic motives for learning, and
might be expected to predict greater self-regulation, thus providing
a high standard of comparison for the self-transcendent motives.
Extrinsic motives. Finally, we measured typical extrinsic, selforiented motives for going to college: “I want to get a good job,”
“I want to leave my parents’ house,” “I want to earn more money,”
and “I want to have fun and make new friends.” We wrote these
items in collaboration with college counselors at the participating
high schools. They were designed to reflect the counselors’ perceptions of why students want to go to college. Although the
internal consistency reliability for these items was somewhat low
(␣ ⫽ .50), they were face-valid. Below we show that a composite
of these items produced relations with each of the constructs
measured that replicates past research (Lee, McInerney, Liem, &
Ortiga, 2010), supporting the validity of the composite despite low
internal consistency. The same findings emerged when analyzing
these items separately.
Meaningfulness of schoolwork. To assess individual differences in the meaningfulness of everyday academic tasks, we
adapted a measure commonly used in research on actionidentification theory: the Behavioral Identification Form (BIF;
Vallacher & Wegner, 1989). The standard BIF asks participants to
view a task and choose a description of it that either aligns with
personally meaningful values or goals, or with concrete actions
required to complete the task. In the present research, we treat the
choice of the former, more goal-directed description as an indication that a person is viewing it more meaningfully. Indeed, Michaels, Parkin, and Vallacher (2013) stated that “people take
meaning from their goals and values rather than the details of their
actions” (p. 109).
We created a four-item version of the BIF that was tailored to
assess whether students chronically make meaning out of boring
and uninteresting everyday academic tasks in high school. See
Figure 1 for an example. The measure presented participants with
a description of each behavior, accompanied by a picture, and
asked participants to select which of two action identifications best
matched how they thought about the behavior. The four behaviors
were “Taking the SAT,” “Doing your math homework,” “Writing
an essay,” and “Using a planner to record upcoming tasks” (for
pictures and response options, see the online supplement). In
pretesting focus groups with high school students, all four behaviors were evaluated as very tedious and very common. For each of
the behaviors (e.g., taking the SAT), we asked students whether a
2
Pilot research confirmed that the present measure indicated greater
personal meaning as expected by theory (Michaels, Parkin, & Vallacher,
2013). In a pilot survey with N ⫽ 151 high school students, our measure
correlated with the presence of meaning in life scale (e.g., “I have a good
sense of what makes my life meaningful”; Steger, Frazier, Oishi, & Kaler,
2006) at r ⫽ .30, p ⬍ .001.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION

563

Figure 1. Sample item for assessing the meaningfulness of schoolwork. Image from “File:Ti83plus.jpg,” by
Westernelectric555, 2008 (http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ti83plus.jpg). In the public domain. See the
online article for the color version of this figure.

more concrete, lower level statement (a description that emphasizes the means by which the action is performed, e.g., “Filling out
bubbles on the SAT”) or a more goal-directed, personally meaningful statement (a description emphasizing the meaning the action
can have for a person’s pursuits in life, e.g., “Taking steps toward
a college degree”) best described that behavior. The latter was our
operationalization of whether the task was seen as more personally
meaningful. We summed across the items, so that higher values
corresponded to a greater tendency to see schoolwork as meaningful (Range: 0 to 4).2
Grit scale. Participants completed an abbreviated version of
the validated grit scale (Duckworth & Quinn, 2009), a measure
that signals strong self-regulation in a number of past studies. The
scale includes the following: “I finish whatever I begin”; “I work
very hard. I keep working when others stop to take a break”; “I
stay interested in my goals, even if they take a long time (months
or years) to complete”; and “I am diligent. I never give up.”
Participants answered all items on 5-point fully labeled scales (1 ⫽
Not at all like me, 2 ⫽ Not much like me, 3 ⫽ Somewhat like me,
4 ⫽ Mostly like me, 5 ⫽ Very much like me). We averaged across
the responses, with higher values corresponding to higher levels of
grit (␣ ⫽ .78).
Self-control scale. Participants completed a validated measure of self-control when completing academic work (Patrick &
Duckworth, 2013; Tsukayama, Duckworth, & Kim, 2013).
Items were “I come to class prepared,” “I pay attention and
resist distractions in class,” “I remember and follow directions,”
and “I get to work right away rather than procrastinating” (1 ⫽
Not at all like me, 2 ⫽ Not much like me, 3 ⫽ Somewhat like me,
4 ⫽ Mostly like me, 5 ⫽ Very much like me). We averaged
across these items, with higher values corresponding to greater
academic self-control (␣ ⫽ .71). Past research has shown that

these items are correlated with other measures of self-regulation
(such as grit; e.g., Table 1) but demonstrate divergent validity
from them (Duckworth et al., 2007).
The “diligence task”: A behavioral measure of academic
self-regulation. At the end of the survey, participants completed
a novel standardized behavioral measure of self-regulation, called
“the diligence task” (Galla et al., 2014). This task was designed to
mirror the real-world choices students confront when completing
homework and being tempted by the distractions of the digital age.
Specifically, this task involved the choice of completing boring
math problems (single-digit subtraction) or consuming captivating
but time-wasting media (watching one or several entertaining,
brief, viral videos [lasting 20 – 60 s] or playing the video game
Tetris). At any time, participants could click on the left side of the
screen and complete math problems (“Do Math”) or click on the
right side of the screen and consume media (“Play game or watch
movie”). Participants were told there were no negative consequences for their choices and that they could do whatever they
preferred. See Figure 2. The software (unknown to the participant)
tracked the number of math problems completed successfully,
producing our focal dependent measure.
To make the math problems potentially meaningful in students’
eyes—and worth completing—we told participants that successfully completing the tasks could possibly help them sharpen their
math skills and stay prepared for their future careers. As a part of
this cover story, we presented participants with summaries of
actual scientific studies showing that increasingly as people rely on
technology to do simple tasks, their grasp of basic skills can
atrophy. As a result, all participants could plausibly see the successful completion of boring math problems as preparatory for a
future career, if they so desired.

YEAGER ET AL.

564
Table 1
Zero-Order Correlations for Study 1 Measures
Variable

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Self-transcendent motives
(“Purpose for learning”)
Self-oriented, intrinsic motives
Extrinsic motives
Meaningfulness of schoolwork
Self-reported grit
Self-reported self-control
No. of boring math problems solved
during the diligence task
ⴱ

p ⬍ .05.

ⴱⴱ

p ⬍ .01.

ⴱⴱⴱ

Self-transcendent motives
(“Purpose for learning”)

Self-oriented,
intrinsic motives

—
.66ⴱⴱⴱ
.61ⴱⴱⴱ
.23ⴱⴱⴱ
.39ⴱⴱⴱ
.33ⴱⴱⴱ

—
.48ⴱⴱⴱ
.20ⴱⴱⴱ
.32ⴱⴱⴱ
.26ⴱⴱⴱ

.09ⴱⴱ

.04

Extrinsic
motives

—
.19ⴱⴱⴱ
.32ⴱⴱⴱ
.21ⴱⴱⴱ
⫺.09ⴱⴱ

Meaningfulness
of schoolwork

Self-reported
grit

Self-reported
self-control

—
.26ⴱⴱⴱ
.22ⴱⴱⴱ

—
.58ⴱⴱⴱ

—

.09ⴱⴱ

.07ⴱ

.16ⴱⴱⴱ

p ⬍ .001.

The task itself involved three blocks. Block 0 was a warm-up
block to become familiar with the layout of the task. It involved a
brief (1-min) set of math problems, but without the option to play
videos or video games. It is not discussed further. Blocks 1 and 2
lasted 4 min each and involved the key behavioral choice: toggling
between the math problems and the media (videos or Tetris). See
Figure 2. We totaled the number of correct math responses in each
block. In a separate validation study, five blocks were administered and boredom was assessed after each. A large increase in
self-reported boredom occurred between the first block and the
second, a significant difference, t(1019) ⫽ 4.69, p ⬍ .001, and
boredom appeared to level-off after that. Therefore in the present
study, values from Block 2, the more boring of the two blocks,
were used in analyses. The same overall pattern of results and level
of statistical significance was found when Blocks 1 and 2 were
averaged and analyzed as a single metric.3
Finally, to ensure that the task elicited boredom as expected, one
question assessed boredom on the math problems, immediately
after Block 2: “How bored were you when working on the math
problems?” (1 ⫽ Not bored at all, 2 ⫽ A little bored, 3 ⫽
Somewhat bored, 4 ⫽ Very bored, 5 ⫽ Extremely bored).
College persistence. College enrollment data were obtained
from the NSC, which is a nonprofit database that reports on
students receiving financial aid to both private and federal loan
providers (Dynarski, Scott-Clayton, & Wiederspan, 2013). Colleges submit student names to this database, and so it allows for
objective, longitudinal assessment of student behavior with little or
no missing data. In the present study, a value of 1 indicates that
students were still enrolled at a 4-year college during the Fall of
2013 after the “census date” (the date after which students owe
tuition, normally 4 – 8 weeks into the term). A value of 0 means
that they did not have an official enrollment value in the database
at that time. Possible reasons for not being enrolled in the Fall
include students who were admitted to a college but did not ever
appear at their college in the Fall, or students who appeared at their
college but withdrew during the semester.4
Initial analyses support the interpretation that college persistence was indeed meaningfully affected by self-regulation. The
number of boring math problems solved during the diligence task
positively predicted college persistence six to 10 months later
(odds ratio [OR] ⫽ 1.006, Z ⫽ 4.05, p ⬍ .001, r ⫽ .14), and the
number of tempting videos or games consumed negatively did so
(OR ⫽ .91, Z ⫽ 2.09, p ⫽ .036, r ⫽ ⫺.08). This was true even

controlling for cognitive ability (measure described below). Thus
college persistence was at least one informative variable for assessing theory regarding longitudinal behavioral self-regulation.
Cognitive ability. To rule out the alternative hypothesis that
observed correlations between variables were due to shared variance in cognitive ability, we administered a brief (10-item) set of
moderately challenging problems from Raven’s progressive matrices (Raven, Raven, & Court, 1998). We used a subset of items
rather than the full battery due to time limitations in the school
setting. Although brief, this set of items showed substantial convergent validity with other measures of cognitive ability in a
validation study that administered a full battery of IQ measures to
a subsample of the present study’s participants (see online supplemental materials).

Results
Our primary hypothesis was that a greater endorsement of
self-transcendent motives for going to college would predict (a)
the tendency to view tedious academic tasks in a more personally
meaningful fashion and (b) the tendency to display greater academic self-regulation. Analyses focus first on the concurrently
measured variables, followed by the analysis of the longitudinal
3
There were some missing data for Block 2 because some participants
(10%) did not even begin the block and instead waited for the browser to
advance, without playing games or watching videos. Reports from teachers
administering the task suggested that this was likely because students found
Block 1 so aversive that they gave up on the task. Thus, rather than treating
these participants’ performance on Block 2 as missing data— effectively
dropping participants—they were instead coded as having completed zero
problems. We found that doing this and retaining all participants for analysis
did not sacrifice validity—for instance, the correlation of boring math problems solved and self-reported trait self-control was r ⫽ .15, p ⬍ .001, both
when we counted these students’ Block 2 performance as missing data and
when we counted the students as having completed zero problems. All conclusions about the significance of the predictors of diligence task data remained the same regardless of the missing data technique.
4
The large majority of students said that their goal was to attend and
graduate from a 4-year college (85%), while the remaining students said their
goal was to attend a 2-year college. Interestingly, many students who said in
May they would attend a 2-year college ended up at a 4-year college in the
Fall, and so, to be conservative, our primary analyses included all participants
regardless of their stated goal during senior year. However, we conducted
supplemental analyses of the college persistence outcomes that were limited
only to the subgroup who said they were planning on attending a 4-year
college. The significance tests for the focal variables were no different.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION

565

Figure 2. The “diligence task”: a behavioral measure of academic self-regulation. See the online article for the
color version of this figure.

behavioral outcome: college persistence. Our secondary hypothesis was whether individual differences in the endorsement of the
self-oriented motives showed the same pattern as the selftranscendent motives.
Concurrent measures. When inspecting zero-order correlations (Table 1), students who reported more of a selftranscendent purpose for learning also scored higher on the
meaningfulness of schoolwork measure (r ⫽ .23, p ⬍ .001),
conceptually replicating past research (Yeager & Bundick,
2009) but with a novel and more theoretically precise measure.
A self-transcendent purpose for learning also predicted more
grit (r ⫽ .39, p ⬍ .001) and more academic self-control (r ⫽
.33, p ⬍ .001) and showed a modest correlation with a greater
number of boring math problems solved in the face of tempting
media (r ⫽ .09, p ⬍ .01).
Supplemental analyses of survey questions asked after the diligence task help clarify those results. Students who endorsed a
self-transcendent purpose for learning did not perceive the single-

digit subtraction problems as less boring (r ⫽ ⫺.02, p ⫽ .47).
Furthermore, 91% of participants reported at least some boredom,
and 72% were “Extremely,” “Very,” or “Somewhat” bored. Thus
the task was indeed boring. Yet those with more of a purpose
solved somewhat more math problems despite the boredom (also
see Grant & Sonnentag, 2010).
The overall correlations with measures of self-regulation
were maintained when controlling for potential confounding
variables in a multiple regression: self-oriented, intrinsic motives for learning (e.g., exploring your interests), extrinsic motives for going to college (e.g., making more money), as well as
sex, race and ethnicity, and cognitive ability. Regression models are shown in Table 2. Inspecting the standardized regression
coefficients in Table 2 shows that a self-transcendent purpose
for learning predicted greater personal meaningfulness of⬎
schoolwork (␤ ⫽ .15, p ⬍ .001), grit (␤ ⫽ .27, p ⬍ .001),
academic self-control (␤ ⫽ .29, p ⬍ .001), and the number of
correctly solved boring math problems (␤ ⫽ .09, p ⫽ .01). In

Table 2
Ordinary Least Squares Regressions Predicting Construal and Academic Self-Regulation in Study 1
Dependent measure
Meaningfulness of
schoolwork

Grit

No. of boring math
problems solved during
the diligence task

Self-control

Predictor

␤

t

p

␤

t

p

␤

t

p

␤

t

p

Self-transcendent motives
(“Purpose for learning”)
Self-oriented, intrinsic motives
Extrinsic motives
Cognitive ability
Sex
Ethnicity
Adjusted R2
N

.15
.09
⫺.10
⫺.07
⫺.02
⫺.07

4.06
2.74
⫺3.50
2.78
⫺.76
⫺2.61
.07
1,360

.00
.01
.00
.01
.45
.01

.27
.10
⫺.09
⫺.10
⫺.10
⫺.11

7.04
2.63
⫺3.04
⫺2.49
⫺4.25
⫺4.21
.20
1,358

.00
.01
.00
.01
.00
.00

.29
.09
⫺.10
⫺.02
⫺.05
⫺.10

7.05
2.45
⫺3.47
⫺0.34
⫺1.87
⫺3.75
.13
1,358

.00
.01
.00
.73
.06
.00

.09
.01
⫺.11
⫺.02
⫺.05
⫺.10

2.59
0.41
⫺3.58
⫺0.34
⫺1.87
⫺3.75
.09
1,234

.01
.68
.00
.73
.06
.00

Note.

␤ ⫽ standardized regression coefficient. Sex: 1 ⫽ female, 0 ⫽ male. Ethnicity: 1 ⫽ Hispanic/Latino, 0 ⫽ non-Hispanic.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

566

YEAGER ET AL.

this multiple regression, a self-oriented, intrinsic motive for
learning did not significantly predict number of math problems
solved (see Row 2 in Table 2), and it was a significantly weaker
predictor of reported grit and self-control compared to a purpose for learning, Wald test of equality of coefficients, F(1,
1349) ⫽ 4.74, p ⫽ .03.
Note that these analyses do not show that self-oriented motives are unimportant. Almost all participants who reported at
least some self-transcendent motives (e.g., at or above the scale
midpoint) also expressed at least modest levels of intrinsic,
self-oriented motives (also at or above the scale midpoint; also
see Yeager et al. 2012). Nevertheless, more strongly endorsing
a self-oriented motive was not related to individual differences
self-regulation. By contrast, in a sample of adolescents with at
least some level of self-oriented motivation, greater endorsement of self-transcendent motives consistently predicted greater
self-regulation.
Finally, zero-order correlations showed that intuitively appealing extrinsic self-oriented motives such as making money in a
future job were significant positive predictors of meaningfulness
of schoolwork and trait-level self-regulation (Table 1). However,
this appeared to be due to shared variance with the other motives.
The extrinsic self-oriented items include variance both due to a
general motivation to go to college—which would be shared with
the purpose items—as well as variance due to more specific
extrinsic motives (making money, getting out of the house), which
might not be. In regression analyses that presumably remove the
former source of variance, extrinsic motives were in every case
strong negative predictors of both personal meaningfulness of
schoolwork and academic self-regulation (see Row 3 in Table 2).
That is, wanting to go to college in order to make money or get out
of the house predicted significantly worse academic selfregulation, net of other motives to go to college.
Longitudinal measure: College persistence. Many factors
are likely to affect whether high-school graduates follow through
with their college aspirations. These include academic preparation
or the need for financial aid. Yet students also face barriers that
require self-regulation, such as navigating the bureaucratic difficulties of completing the paperwork for enrollment, housing,
course and major selection, etc., as well as the need to take
entry-level, sometimes-tedious or disconnected introductory
courses (Ryu, 2012). College students also have more freedom
with their time compared to high school students, and they must
freely choose to work in service of their long-term goals even as
they face daily temptations to engage in social activities or consume entertaining media. Because self-regulation, in theory,
should help students complete these tasks and therefore persist in
college—and recall that diligence task behavior predicted college
enrollment—we hypothesized that a purpose for learning might
predict goal persistence across the socially, academically, and
bureaucratically difficult transition to college.
Consistent with this theoretical expectation, in a logistic regression with no covariates, a self-transcendent purpose for learning
significantly predicted college enrollment (OR ⫽ 1.40, Z ⫽ 4.82,
p ⬍ .001). Controlling for sex, race and ethnicity, cognitive ability,
as well as cumulative high school grade point average (GPA), did
not diminish this relation (OR ⫽ 1.40, Z ⫽ 4.62, p ⬍ .001).
Estimated values from this model are depicted in Figure 3. This
figure shows that for students with responses at the bottom of the

Figure 3. A self-transcendent purpose for learning predicts long-term
persistence toward an academic goal (enrollment at a 4-year college 6 –10
months postassessment, among college-going high school graduates) in
Study 1. Predicted values that adjusted for cognitive ability, gender, racial
minority status, and high school grade point average are depicted. All
participants were high school graduates who stated that their goal was to
graduate from college.

purpose scale (the lowest two out of five points), only 30% of
students were still enrolled at college in the Fall immediately
following high school graduation. Among students at the midpoint
of the purpose scale, 57% were still enrolled in college. For
students at the highest two out of five scale points, this number was
even greater: 64%.5 Controlling for self-oriented, intrinsic motives
for learning as well as extrinsic motives for going to college did
not diminish the significant relation between a purpose for learning
and college enrollment (OR ⫽ 1.34, Z ⫽ 2.77, p ⫽ .006).6 These
additional motives did not significantly predict college enrollment:
self-oriented, intrinsic motives (OR ⫽ 1.10, Z ⫽ .85, p ⫽ .40), and
extrinsic motives (OR ⫽ 1.11, Z ⫽ 1.05, p ⫽ .30). Wald tests
comparing the sizes of these coefficients to a self-transcendent
purpose for learning failed to reach statistical significance (ps ⫽
.35 and .22, respectively). Altogether, a self-transcendent purpose
for learning predicted persistence toward the eventual goal of
college graduation. In the full regression model, other, more selforiented motives did not.

Discussion
This research was conducted with a large sample of low-income,
mostly racial minority students, many of whom would be the first
in their families to graduate from college. In this sample, those
who expressed more of a self-transcendent purpose for learning as
they were leaving high school also viewed tedious academic
activities as more personally meaningful and both reported and
behaviorally displayed greater academic self-regulation. They
5
The relation was not exclusively driven by the low-purpose individuals. When reconducting analyses only with the sample at or above the
midpoint of the purpose scale (3, 4, or 5, excluding 1 and 2; see Figure 3),
a self-transcendent purpose for learning remained a significant predictor of
college enrollment (OR ⫽ 1.32, Z ⫽ 2.77, p ⫽ .006).
6
For a subset of students, we were able to obtain college-admissions test
scores (SATs and ACTs). When reconducting analyses with test scores as
covariates, all conclusions about the significance of each of the motives
(self-oriented and self-transcendent) were unchanged (ps ⬍ .05).

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION

were also more likely to continue toward their stated goal of
persisting in college. These effects were independent of cognitive
ability. In addition, stronger endorsement of more typical selforiented motives did not as consistently predict greater selfregulation, suggesting that there is a unique contribution of adding
more self-transcendent motives.
More generally, the results of Study 1 raise the intriguing
possibility that an intervention designed to promote a selftranscendent purpose for learning might improve adolescents’ academic performance over time. We tested this in Study 2.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Study 2: A Longitudinal Intervention Experiment
Study 1 was the first to show that a self-transcendent purpose for
learning could predict a tendency to display greater diligence and
self-regulation on academic activities as well as greater college
persistence. Although encouraging support for our theory, these
correlational analyses are limited in their ability to isolate causal
processes. We therefore created a novel purpose for learning
intervention and assessed its effects on behavior over time. This
was informed most directly by pioneering research by Hulleman
and Harackiewicz (2009; also see Hulleman, Durik, Schweigert, &
Harackiewicz, 2008; Hulleman, Godes, Hendricks, & Harackiewicz, 2010). It was also informed by past studies showing that
even brief persuasive messages that alter students’ appraisals of
recurring events in school can improve student achievement
months or years later (Aronson, Fried, & Good, 2002; Blackwell et
al., 2007; G. L. Cohen, Garcia, Purdie-Vaughns, Apfel, & Brzustoski, 2009; Sherman, Hartson, Binning, Purdie-Vaughns, Garcia,
Taborsky-Barba, Tomassetti, & Cohen, 2013; Walton & Cohen,
2011; see Garcia & Cohen, 2012; Yeager & Walton, 2011). Building on this, a one-time purpose intervention might produce a shift
in students’ thinking that buffers them from a loss in selfregulation when confronted with uninteresting tasks on a daily
basis (cf. Grant & Sonnentag, 2010). Specifically, we hypothesized that an intervention promoting a self-transcendent purpose
for learning could improve GPA in STEM courses several months
later, compared to a control group that completed a neutral exercise.

Method
Participants. Participants were 338 ninth grade students at a
middle class suburban high school in the Bay Area of Northern
California. Exactly half were male and half were female; 60%
were Asian, 28% were White, 9% were Hispanic/Latino, and 1%
were African American. The present study’s population adds to
Study 1’s, which showed the importance of a purpose for learning
among predominately low-income students of color attending urban public schools. In the present study, poverty and poor quality
instruction were not common barriers for students; only 8% percent were eligible for free or reduced-price lunch and over 85%
were considered proficient in math and science on state tests. Thus
it was possible to examine whether the effects of a selftranscendent purpose could generalize beyond the type of sample
employed in Study 1. There was no stopping rule for data collection in the present study because all students in the school were
invited to participate.
Procedures. The intervention was delivered in the school’s
computer lab during the school day. Teachers directed students to

567

a website (http://www.perts.net) that delivered the session via a
computer. All that was required of the teachers was to keep the
class orderly. The materials took less than one class period (20 –30
min) to complete.
The school has four grading periods in the year, each producing
independent grades, and each lasting one fourth of the school year.
In the first week of the fourth grading period of the year (in
March), students completed Study 2’s web-based self-transcendent
purpose intervention or a control intervention (see below). This
allowed for a test of the intervention on grades in the final quarter
of the year, controlling for prior grades in the third quarter.
The intervention was delivered during an elective period, not in
a math or science class. This provides a strict test of the hypothesis
that students themselves could create a purposeful framework that
they could apply even with no explicit associations between the
intervention content and STEM course learning objectives. We
made no mention to students that the purpose intervention was
designed to affect their thinking or behavior—instead, it was a
framed as a student survey requiring their input. No teacher at the
school had access to the intervention materials (so they could not
reinforce it knowingly), and they were unaware of treatment and
control assignments.
Purpose for learning intervention. A number of insights informed our intervention design. First, in past qualitative research
(Moran et al., 2013; Yeager & Bundick, 2009; Yeager et al., 2012)
many high school students spontaneously named both self-oriented
motives and self-transcendent motives. Students who did so
showed the greatest improvements in terms of the meaning of their
schoolwork over a 2-year period (Yeager et al., 2012; for analogous research in the workplace, see Grant, 2008). Almost no
adolescents (8%), however, mentioned only self-transcendent motives. We therefore expected that teens would find it implausible to
only focus on the world beyond the self, especially because high
school is transparently a preparation for one’s future personal
academic and professional goals. Therefore the intervention asked
students to connect self-transcendent aims to self-relevant reasons
for learning, rather than asking them to be completely altruistic.
Next, a premise of our approach is that it is either not possible
or extremely difficult to tell a teenager what his or her purpose for
learning should be. Doing this could threaten autonomy, a key
concern for adolescents (Erikson, 1968; Hasebe, Nucci, & Nucci,
2004; Nucci, 1996). Indeed, teens commonly express reactance in
response to adults’ attempts to influence their personal goals
(Brehm, 1966; Erikson, 1968), rejecting adult’s suggestions— or
even endorsing their opposite—to reassert autonomy (see Lapsley
& Yeager, in press). Furthermore, Vansteenkiste et al. (2004)
showed that autonomy-supportive framing was especially important when providing intrinsic motives for a learning task. At the
same time, it may be possible to lead a teenager to reflect on and
construct motives in a certain direction, in a way that leads them
to develop their own self-transcendent purposes for learning (see
Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009). In past research on service
learning activities with adolescents, reflecting on the personal
meaning of one’s past prosocial behaviors led to changes in
beliefs, attitudes, and thinking styles (Eyler, 2002; Eyler & Giles,
1999). Informed by these insights, our intervention did not seek to
give a personally relevant, self-transcendent purpose to a student.
Instead it sought to serve as an “enzyme” to catalyze students’

568

YEAGER ET AL.

reflections about their own self-transcendent purposes for learning
and facilitate connections to self-oriented motives.
More concretely, the intervention first primed students’ selftranscendent thoughts by asking them to write an open-ended
essay response to a question about social injustices they found
particularly egregious. The prompt was,

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

How could the world be a better place? Sometimes the world isn’t fair,
and so everyone thinks it could be better in one way or another. Some
people want there to be less hunger, some want less prejudice, and
others want less violence or disease. Other people want lots of other
changes. What are some ways that you think the world could be a
better place?

Student responses dealt with issues such as war, poverty, or
politics. Some examples were “Without discrimination, there
would be much less violence and war in this world” or “The
hunger problem can be solved if we have proper energy sources.”
With those prosocial concerns in mind, students next completed a
structured reading and writing exercise.
In doing so, the intervention drew on a variety of strategies
designed to be maximally persuasive without threatening autonomy (Yeager & Walton, 2011; see Aronson et al., 2002; Walton &
Cohen, 2011). The intervention conveyed the social norm that
“many students like you” have a self-transcendent purpose for
learning. Such descriptive norms can motivate behavior change
(Cialdini, Reno, & Kallgren, 1990; Goldstein, Cialdini, &
Griskevicius, 2008; see Cialdini, 2003), especially during adolescence (G. L. Cohen & Prinstein, 2006). To create a descriptive
norm, we presented results of a survey that communicated that, in
addition to common motives like making money or having freedom, most students also (sometimes secretly) are motivated to do
well in school in order to gain skills that can be used for prosocial
ends. Survey statistics presented to participants indicated that most
students were motivated to do well in high school at least in part
“to gain knowledge so that they can have a career that they
personally enjoy” and “to learn so they can make a positive
contribution to the world.” These statistics were also designed to
counteract pluralistic ignorance about the norm that people are
purely self-interested (also see Grant & Patil, 2012; Miller, 1999).
As in similar social-psychological interventions (e.g., Walton &
Cohen, 2011), summary statistics were accompanied by representative quotes purportedly from upperclassmen at the school that
reinforced the focal message. One such quote stated,
For me, getting an education is all about learning things that will help
me do something I can feel good about, something that matters for the
world. I used to do my schoolwork just to earn a better grade and look
smart. I still think doing well in school is important, but for me it’s
definitely not just about a grade anymore. I’m growing up, and doing
well in school is all about preparing myself to do something that
matters, something that I care about.

Finally, building on self-perception and cognitive dissonance
(Bem, 1972; Festinger, 1957), past research finds that when a
person freely chooses to advocate for a message this can lead a
person to internalize it (Aronson, 1999; Aronson et al., 2002).
Therefore, students next wrote brief testimonials to future students
about their reasons for learning. Specifically, students explained
how learning in high school would help them be the kind of person
they want to be or help them make the kind of impact they want

on the people around them or society in general. Participants on
average wrote two to four sentences. In this way, rather than being
passive recipients of the intervention, students themselves authored it. This allowed students to make the message both personal
and persuasive to the self (Yeager & Walton, 2011).
We conducted a pilot experiment to confirm that the selftranscendent purpose intervention could indeed promote personal
meaning in school as expected by theory (Yeager & Bundick,
2009; also see Study 1). This pilot involved N ⫽ 451 high school
students from 13 different high schools across the United States
(extensive detail is presented in the online supplemental material).
In the pilot, students were randomized to the purpose intervention
or a neutral control activity (see below). Students then completed
a more extended version of the Study 1 meaningfulness of schoolwork measure—the academically oriented BIF (Figure 1; cf. Vallacher & Wegner, 1989). As expected, in this pilot the purpose
manipulation led to greater personal meaningfulness of tedious
academic tasks compared to a neutral control, t(446) ⫽ 2.67, p ⫽
.007, d ⫽ 0.25 (Control raw M ⫽ 4.78, SD ⫽ 2.53 vs. Purpose raw
M ⫽ 5.39, SD ⫽ 2.41). This confirms that the purpose intervention
can operate as expected, at least in the short term in the pilot
sample.
Control exercise. In a control condition, participants read
about and then explained how high school was different from
middle school. As in the purpose condition, participants saw
summary statistics, read messages purportedly from helpful upperclassman (e.g., statements discussing the differences in the number
of teachers or difficulty of time management), and wrote essays
about how their lives were different now compared to when they
were in middle school. Thus the control exercise was ageappropriate, social, and engaging but was devoid of the focus on
motives for learning. It primarily rules out the alternative explanation that any positive and friendly message about school from
older students could create a sense of connection with others and
facilitate prosocial motivation.
Measures.
STEM GPA. The primary dependent variable was grades in
STEM courses (math and science) for the fourth grading period of
the year. As is common, we scored grades from individual courses
on a 4-point GPA scale (i.e., A ⫽ 4, A⫺ ⫽ 3.67, B⫹ ⫽ 3.33, etc.)
and then averaged them. We did the same for the preintervention
grading periods. Math courses were Algebra 1, Algebra 2, or
geometry (depending on where guidance counselors placed students); all students took biology, although some students were in
more advanced biology classes than others.

Results
Preliminary analyses. The two conditions did not differ in
terms of word count of their written responses, t(319) ⫽ ⫺0.10,
p ⫽ .92, suggesting that, at least along this index, the two interventions elicited similar levels of engagement with the activity.
Next, students successfully responded to the prompt. Some examples for the purpose intervention condition were:
I would like to get a job as some sort of genetic researcher. I would
use this job to help improve the world by possibly engineering crops
to produce more food, or something like that.

or

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION
I believe learning in school will give me the rudimentary skills to
survive in the world. Science will give me a good base for my career
in environmental engineering. I want to be able to solve our energy
problems.

or

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

I think that having an education allows you to understand the world
around you. It also allows me to form well-supported, well-thought
opinions about the world. I will not be able to help anyone without
first going to school.

GPA analyses. Did the purpose intervention improve overall
grades in STEM-related courses (math and science)? It did, as
shown in Figure 4. In an OLS regression, there was a full-sample
effect of the one-time intervention on STEM-course GPA in the
months following the experiment (Control covariate-adjusted M ⫽
2.93, SD ⫽ 1.03; Purpose covariate-adjusted M ⫽ 3.04, SD ⫽
0.89), t(337) ⫽ 3.20, p ⫽ .001, d ⫽ 0.11.7 As is standard procedure in analyses of psychological intervention effects on GPA
(Blackwell et al., 2007; G. L. Cohen et al., 2009; Walton & Cohen,
2011; Yeager et al., 2014), this analysis was conducted controlling
for prior performance (in the present case, third grading period
grades; the same findings emerged controlling for all prior grading
periods). Indeed, doing so reduced the standard errors associated
with the condition variable, allowing for more precise estimates of
treatment effects and maximization of statistical power.8 Additional models that added controls for race, gender, age and level of
math course did not change the finding of a main effect of
condition on GPA (p ⫽ .001). These control variables also did not
moderate treatment effects (all interaction effect ps ⬎ .15).9
Under the assumption that low-achieving math and science
students might be more likely to be disinterested (see, e.g., Skinner, Kindermann, & Furrer, 2009; also see Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009), we tested whether the purpose for learning would
have the greatest effect on students who were earning the lowest
math and science grades preintervention. Indeed, there was a
significant Purpose Intervention ⫻ Preintervention GPA interaction, t(338) ⫽ ⫺2.92, p ⫽ .004, such that lower performing
students benefitted more. To illustrate this interaction, which was
tested using the continuous preintervention GPA variable, it is

569

possible to examine simple effects within meaningful subgroups of
lower performers (students with a GPA ⬍ 3.0) and higher performers (GPA of 3.0 or higher). A cut-point of a GPA of 3.0 was
selected for this illustration because an analysis of high school
transcripts and college enrollment statistics identified this as the
best GPA threshold for college readiness (Roderick, Nagaoka, &
Allensworth, 2006). Among lower performers, who are typically
less likely to successfully complete college on the basis of their
high school GPAs, there was a significant treatment effect of 0.2
grade points, t(119) ⫽ 2.90, p ⫽ .005, d ⫽ 0.21. This is shown in
Figure 4. Among higher performers, there was a nonsignificant
effect of 0.05 grade points, t(207) ⫽ 1.38, p ⫽ .17, d ⫽ 0.06.
Thus, the self-transcendent purpose for learning increased
STEM-course grades for students overall, but especially so for
low-performers who were on track for being underprepared for
higher education. This result mirrors past intervention studies,
which have found that lower performing students tend to benefit
most from activities that redirect their thinking about academic
work in a positive way (e.g., G. L. Cohen et al., 2009; Hulleman
& Harackiewicz, 2009; also see Wilson & Linville, 1982). It is of
course possible that this moderation by baseline grades is a statistical issue; indeed, A, A⫺, and B ⫹ students have less room to
improve. At the same time, to the extent that lower grades could be
caused by disinterest and disengagement (see, e.g., Skinner et al.,
2009), the present moderation is consistent with the theory that the
purpose intervention would confer the greatest benefits when
disinterest and disengagement are greatest.

Discussion
Extending the Study 1 correlational findings, Study 2 showed
that a self-transcendent purpose intervention could affect overall
achievement in STEM courses several months into the future. How
could a brief purpose intervention increase official GPA? In the
next two studies we sought to illuminate some of the behavioral
processes that might be set in motion by the self-transcendent
purpose manipulation.

Study 3: Deeper Learning During Tedious
Multiple-Choice Questions
Study 2 was a contribution in showing a causal effect of a
one-time self-transcendent purpose intervention on accumulated
behavior over time—specifically, GPA in high school STEM
classes. It provides causal evidence for the kinds of achievement
effects that may have produced the Study 1 correlational finding
that purpose for learning predicted college persistence. However, a

Figure 4. A self-transcendent purpose for learning intervention raises
grades in math and science for all students but especially for poor performers in Study 2 (students with a GPA below 3.0 in the preintervention
quarter). Error bars indicate 1 standard error. STEM ⫽ science, technology, engineering, and mathematics.

7
Cohen’s d effect sizes were calculated by dividing the covariateadjusted treatment effect by the raw, pooled standard deviation.
8
Even without controlling for baseline performance—which reduced the
standard error for the treatment effect by more than 250%—the treatment
effect on final grades was marginally significant (p ⫽ .06).
9
While our primary focus was on STEM course GPA, the participating
school also provided students’ English grades. Supplemental analyses
showed that there was a full-sample effect of the purpose intervention on
fourth grading period English grades of .15 grade points, t(329) ⫽ 2.18,
p ⫽ .03, including the same covariates noted above. Perhaps this was
because students found freshman year English to be boring, or perhaps this
is because the intervention led to a general increase in engagement in
school that spilled over to English class.

YEAGER ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

570

number of issues remain. Study 2 did not document which shortterm behaviors were affected by the intervention and that subsequently added up to the long-term treatment effect. For instance,
we do not know if a self-transcendent purpose increased overall
grades by making students more likely to truly learn from their
academic experiences, as opposed to moving as quickly as possible
through their academic work without trying to retain the information for future use (see Jang, 2008).
Study 3 was a naturalistic field experiment conducted among
undergraduates preparing for one of their final exams in their
psychology course. A few days before the exam, the instructor
e-mailed students a survey link that randomized them to a purpose
intervention or a control exercise. The survey then directed students to complete a tedious (⬎100-question) web-based test review. Our hypothesis was that the self-transcendent purpose intervention would increase students’ attempts to seriously review the
material, operationalized as the average amount of time spent on
each question. Notably, the materials were presented as an actual
extra-credit exercise, not as a study, in order to more closely
recreate the real-world choices students might have been making
in Study 2.

Method
Participants. A total of 89 second- through fifth-year students
in an undergraduate psychology course received an e-mail inviting
them to access a test review and receive extra credit. A total of 71
(80%) completed the intervention materials and provided any data
on dependent measures. Of these, 78% were women. There was no
stopping rule because all students in the class were invited. No data
were excluded.
Note that in this study (and Study 4), participants are college
students, not high school students. In part this is because of our
interest in understanding the processes that lead to the attainment
of long-term educational goals such as college graduation (e.g.,
Study 1). This sample was also convenient. This difference in
sample provides the benefit of possibly generalizing the prior
results. It would be informative if a self-transcendent purpose for
learning intervention produced analogous effects among high
school freshmen (Study 2), high school seniors (Study 1), and
college students (Studies 3 and 4).
Procedure. Near the end of the term, students completed the
online purpose intervention and exam review activity. During the
review activity, the survey software tracked students’ behavior
(e.g., time spent on each practice problem), and this constituted the
primary dependent measure.
More specifically, 2 days before an exam, students were sent the
following e-mail from their professor:
Hello class. I’m currently working on an online activity to help the
students in my class do better. This online activity involves two
things. First, it helps you think about how our psychology class fits
into the context of your lives. Second, I’ve created an online activity
to help you study the course material and prepare for your next exam,
which involves showing you several sample multiple-choice questions
that are similar to the kinds of questions that you will be tested on
during EXAM 3. Since this online tool is still a work in progress, I’m
offering you 2 points extra credit (to be applied to your lowest exam
score) if you decide to go through it and help refine it. . . . [It] will take
as long as you’d like–you can answer as many or as few questions as
you want.

Purpose and control exercises. The self-transcendent purpose
materials were highly similar to those used in Study 2. They were
edited slightly to refer to reasons for learning psychology, so that
the materials could conceivably be seen as related to the psychology course. The normative quotes were also framed as coming
from former students in the course, as opposed to upperclassmen
in general. The control exercise was highly similar to the Study 2
control group, only it discussed how learning in college is different
from learning in high school. Both of these changes were made
because the experiment was conducted as institutional research,
which means that the goal of the study was to improve instructional practice, although the data could also be used for generalizable knowledge. And in fact the review boosted grades, dramatically so for the lowest performers across conditions (see online
supplemental materials). This ethics arrangement also had implications for random assignment. Because the research team already
possessed evidence that the intervention could benefit students
(e.g., Study 2) and because there were real-world grades at stake
for students, for ethical reasons 75% of students received the
purpose intervention and 25% received the control. Furthermore,
no self-report attitudes or other psychological measures were assessed. Only students’ postmanipulation behaviors on the review
materials were measured.
Measures. As a dependent measure, we created a situation
that was tedious: reviewing for a test by answering over 100
multiple-choice questions. We then measured behavior that could
signify an intention to truly learn from it: time spent on each
review question. All questions were taken from a psychology test
bank. On average, students answered 90 questions and spent 40
min doing so. Review questions were programmed so that students
could not proceed to the next question until they answered it
correctly, and task instructions clearly stated that spending more
time on each question—rather than just guessing randomly until
they got it right and could move on—signaled a desire for deeper
learning. The instructions were,
IMPORTANT: HOW TO ACTUALLY LEARN FROM THESE
QUESTIONS
New cognitive psychology research shows that simply guessing on
multiple-choice questions does not promote deep learning on the
activity, because it doesn’t force you to retrieve the information. . . .
So, if you want to deeply learn from this activity, it is best to look
through your notes and the textbook and try to recall the information
while answering the questions, as if you were really taking an important exam.

Students were also given web links to actual published empirical
articles showing that memory is improved only by earnest retrieval
behaviors. Thus, we created a situation in which the longer students thought about each question before trying to answer it, and
the longer they spent clarifying their understanding before moving
on, the more they were choosing to “learn deeply” from the
activity. We conducted a number of additional analyses to confirm
this theoretical interpretation of the data, and they are reported in
the online supplement.
The survey software recorded the number of milliseconds that
each question was displayed before students ultimately submitted
a correct answer. These values were summed and then divided by
the number of questions attempted, to produce an average time per

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION

question per person. Treatment versus control students did not
differ in terms of the number of questions students completed (p ⫽
.38), but the effect was in the direction of treated students completing more problems (see online). As is common in analyses of
time, our measure showed significant skew and kurtosis (joint test
p ⬍ .00001). We therefore conducted a “ladder of powers” analysis (Tukey, 1977) to identify the transformation that best reduced
deviation from normality (it was one divided by the square root of
the number of seconds). The ladder analysis and subsequent transformation were done blind to the effect of the transformations on
the significance of the intervention effect. The transformed measure had no significant skew or kurtosis (joint test p ⫽ .90). Time
was ultimately coded so that higher numbers corresponded to more
time on average on each page, and then z-scored to have a mean of
zero and a standard deviation of 1. All analyses are from regressions that control for prior test performance, which significantly
predicted time per page and reduced standard errors associated
with treatment effects.

Results
Results showed that a self-transcendent purpose for learning
increased the tendency to attempt to deeply learn from the tedious
academic task. Students who completed the self-transcendent purpose intervention spent more time working on each review question (Z-scored time per question: Control M ⫽ ⫺0.43, SD ⫽ 1.11;
Purpose M ⫽ 0.13, SD ⫽ 0.93), t(69) ⫽ 2.11, p ⫽ .038, d ⫽ 0.56.
In the untransformed data, this corresponded to spending roughly
twice as much time on each question (Control M ⫽ 25 s per
question vs. Treatment M ⫽ 49 s per question).10

Discussion
Study 3 investigated one of the short-term behaviors that might
have led to the long-term effects of a purpose in Study 2: deeper
learning on a tedious exam review. Students spent twice as long on
their review questions when they had just written about how truly
understanding the subject area could allow them to contribute to
the world beyond the self, compared to controls. Importantly, this
was done in a naturalistic setting—that is, looking at real world
student behavior on an authentic examination review. Perhaps the
purpose intervention increased grades over time in Study 2 because it led students to complete their academic work in a qualitatively distinct fashion— one that privileged learning and retention over “getting through it.”

Study 4: Working Hard in the Face of Temptations
The findings from Study 3 suggest one way in which a one-time
self-transcendent purpose intervention might have increased overall grades in STEM courses in Study 2: deeper learning during
review activities. However we have not shown that the purpose
manipulation altered students’ abilities to regulate their competing
desires. That is, we have not shown effects in situations that clearly
require self-regulation. To begin to answer this, a more precise
behavioral test is required— one that pits the desire to meet one’s
learning goals against the desire to give up and engage in a
tempting alternative.
Therefore Study 4 examined behavior on the “diligence task”
described in Study 1 (also see Figure 2). This task simulates a

571

common experience for students: having to complete problem sets
for math and science classes while being tempted to consume
entertaining media on the Internet. Thus, the present study allowed
for a face-valid test of our hypothesis that a self-transcendent
purpose for learning could lead students to continue to solve math
problems and eschew tempting alternatives even as boredom is
increasing.
Second, it would be helpful to know if a self-transcendent
purpose could benefit all learners, but especially when a task is
most uninteresting. Therefore, instead of examining betweenperson differences that might moderate treatment effects, as in
Study 2, Study 4 focused on within-person differences. That is,
Study 4 examined whether the purpose manipulation would lead to
more math problems solved on the later trials of the diligence task,
when boredom is greatest.
Study 4 was primarily designed to address these two research
questions. However a third objective was to test whether simply
emphasizing the self-oriented benefits of learning in school
would be sufficient to promote academic self-regulation. Recall
that Studies 2 and 3 compared the purpose manipulation to a
neutral control exercise, something that has often been done in
many past social-psychological interventions that have affected
long-term educational outcomes (e.g., Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009; Walton & Cohen, 2011). Yet it is unknown whether
an analogous self-oriented manipulation would show the same
benefits as the purpose manipulation. While Study 1 is helpful
in showing the unique correlational effect of a self-transcendent
purpose, an analogous experimental study has not been conducted. To address this, in the second of the two samples
included in the present study we added a self-oriented condition, making it a three-cell design. We hypothesized that the
self-oriented condition would not be sufficient to lead to higher
numbers of math problems solved when boredom was greatest,
compared to controls. We did not have a strong prediction about
the comparison between the self-oriented condition and the
purpose condition, however, because the former was intentionally designed to share much of the same content, and because
past research has found these two groups do not differ significantly (Yeager et al., 2012; also recall the inconsistent Wald
test results in Study 1).

Method
Participants. Participants (total N ⫽ 429) were two samples
of students taking introductory psychology at the University of
Texas at Austin in consecutive semesters. They participated in
exchange for partial course credit. Forty-eight percent were male,
and 52% were female. Race and ethnicity information was not
collected from these students; however, the freshmen cohort at the
university (which historically closely mirrors introductory psychology) is 57% White, 18% Asian, 17% Hispanic/Latino, and 5%
African American. Students were predominately first- or secondyear students: 37% were 18 years old, 36% were 19 years old, and
10
It was also possible to explore treatment effects on actual scores on
the final exam administered a few days after the study. Exploratory
analyses found that the large majority of students showed greater improvement in test scores in the purpose condition compared to the control.
Analyses are presented in the online supplemental materials.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

572

YEAGER ET AL.

15% were 20 years old. Data were collected during daytime hours
in the last few days of the semester, a time when self-regulation
might have been precarious due to final exams.
Sample 1 had no stopping rule. We sought to collect as much
data as possible (final n ⫽ 117) before the end of the term, and data
were not analyzed until after the term was over. Sample 2 was
collected the following semester and so it was possible to conduct
a power analysis based on the results of Sample 1 before collecting
data. This led to a target sample size of 300 for Sample 2, because
a power analysis revealed that roughly 95 participants per cell
would be required to have 80% power to detect an effect of d ⫽
0.41 between any two conditions (the effect size estimate for the
purpose intervention from Sample 1). Ultimately Sample 2 involved usable data from a maximum of n ⫽ 312 students (data
collection was stopped at the end of the first day on which more
than 300 complete responses had been collected). Some students
did not provide data for some measures, and so degrees of freedom
varied across analyses. No data were excluded except for those
mentioned here or in the online supplement.
Procedures. The intervention procedures were nearly identical to those used in Study 3. Immediately after completing the
intervention materials, participants completed the diligence task as
described in Study 1.
Purpose and control exercises. These were nearly identical to
those used in Study 2.
Self-oriented control exercise. Sample 2 had a three-cell design that added a self-oriented (and intrinsic) condition to the
control and self-transcendent purpose conditions. The self-oriented
manipulation was similar to the purpose manipulation in nearly
every way except for the elimination of self-transcendent prompts
in the stimuli. It was future-oriented, goal-directed, and highly
focused on learning and on developing skills—all things expected
by theory to promote a commitment to learning (e.g., Lepper et al.,
2005; Ryan & Deci, 2000; Vansteenkiste et al., 2006). This is a
highly conservative test in that the manipulations shared much of
the same content—approximately 90% of the text was the same.
Also recall that Study 1 indicated that self-transcendent and selforiented motives were strongly correlated (r ⫽ .66). The present
self-oriented control group was designed to rule out the alternative
explanation that any manipulation involving reading and writing
about intrinsic personal motives for learning would be sufficient to
lead to greater self-regulation on an uninteresting task.
In the self-oriented exercise, an initial essay question asked
about changes in the world. This held time-perspective and counterfactual thinking constant, both shown to affect level of construal, which could promote self-regulation (Trope & Liberman,
2010, 2011). However, this prompt asked how the world might be
changed to benefit the self, rather than to address an injustice in the
world:
How could the world be better for you? Sometimes the world isn’t
what you want it to be, and so everyone thinks it could be better for
them in one way or another. Some people want more fun, some want
it to be less stressful, and others want to be more interested in what
they’re doing. Other people want lots of other changes. What are some
ways that you think the world could be better for you?

All but one of the summary statistics and all but one of the
representative quotes were identical across conditions. For the one
quote that was not the same, we removed self-transcendent infor-

mation without sacrificing a focus on building skills, so that it
read,
For me, getting an education is all about learning things that will help
me do something I can be good at—something that I can be the best
at. I used to do my homework just to earn a better grade and look
smart. I still think doing well in school is important, but for me it’s
definitely not just about a grade anymore. I’m growing up, and doing
well in school is all about preparing myself to do a job that I can be
good at. That seems really rewarding to me— knowing that at the end
of the day you completed an important job, and you did an awesome
job at it. [Differences from the quotation in Study 2 shown in italics.]

Next, participants were asked to share their own testimonials.
The prompt closely mirrored the purpose condition and strongly
emphasized the acquisition of skills (rather than the accumulation
of extrinsic benefits). It asked “Why is learning important to your
goals,” and “How will learning in school help you be the kind of
person you want to be and help you have a career in life that you
enjoy or are interested in?” It was designed to promote a suite of
self-oriented motives, including task value (i.e., personal interest)
and utility value (i.e., gaining a fulfilling career; Eccles & Wigfield, 1995, 2002). Supplementing this was a clear invocation of
mastery goals for learning (Elliot & McGregor, 2001). All of these
motives, on their own, might be expected to promote persistence.
Yet this manipulation lacks explicit mention of the potential to use
that mastery to benefit others, allowing for a test of our theory
regarding the benefits of adding self-transcendent motives, above
and beyond this suite of more self-oriented motives.
Measures. Participants completed the same behavioral measure of academic self-regulation (i.e., the diligence task) that was
used in Study 1 (see Figure 2). As in Study 1, we analyzed the total
number of correct math responses.11 Performance on each of the
two blocks was analyzed separately to allow for a test of whether
self-regulatory benefits would be greatest when boredom had
increased. To verify the extent to which the task was boring for
participants in all conditions, at the end we asked participants
whether the task was in fact boring, using the same item described
in Study 1.

Results
Analytic plan. The primary theoretical interest was in
whether the purpose for learning condition differed from the
control condition in terms of behavior on the diligence task.
Because, as will be shown, this focal comparison was significant
independently within Samples 1 and 2, we primarily analyze a
stacked data set and in statistical models we include a dummy
variable for sample (and of course the self-oriented condition data
are excluded in those analyses).
A secondary question was whether the self-oriented manipulation produced the same or a different pattern of results as the
purpose for learning manipulation. Therefore we next conducted
analyses of the self-oriented manipulation using only data from
Sample 2. We hypothesized that the self-oriented condition would
11
As in Study 1, we treated people who stopped the task altogether after
the first block as a “0,” as in Study 1, to avoid dropping data. The statistical
significance levels of the focal analyses (Block 2 math problems successfully answered) were no different when omitting participants who did not
begin Block 2.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION

not differ from controls. We did not have strong hypotheses about
differences from the purpose condition, given the overlap between
the two manipulations and the strong endorsement of learning
goals in the self-oriented condition.
Preliminary analyses. The experimental manipulations again
appeared to elicit similar levels of thinking and writing about their
respective topics; there were no differences across conditions in
terms of the word count on the open-ended essay prompts: Sample
1 t(116) ⫽ 0.50, ns; Sample 2 F(2, 282) ⫽ 0.13, ns. Next, the
diligence task was experienced as truly boring. Fully 73% of
participants said they were “Extremely,” “Very” or “Somewhat”
bored when working on the math problems, while only 4% said
they were “not bored at all.” Ratings of boredom did not differ by
condition: Sample 1 t(116) ⫽ 0.47, ns; Sample 2: F(2, 282) ⫽
1.27, ns. Thus, this study was a test of whether participants would
display greater self-regulation on a task that was experienced as
equally boring across conditions.
Primary analyses. Did the self-transcendent purpose manipulation affect the number of math problems correctly solved? On
the first block in the stacked data set, the purpose manipulation had
no effect compared to the control, t(310) ⫽ 0.18, p ⫽ .86 (or in
either sample): Sample 1 t(116) ⫽ 0.19, p ⫽ .85; Sample 2 F(2,
283) ⫽ 0.57, p ⫽ .56). However recall from the methods of Study
1 that the second block in the diligence task is experienced as
much more tedious and aversive compared to the first block (and
significantly so). Therefore differences were predicted to emerge
precisely when participants became most bored, in Block 2.
This is what the data showed, as depicted in Figure 5. Specifically, for participants in the control condition, the number of math
problems solved dropped precipitously from the first to the second
block. Control participants completed 44% fewer problems in
Block 2 compared to Block 1 (Control Block 1 raw M ⫽ 66.47,
SD ⫽ 46.29; Control Block 2 raw M ⫽ 37.12, SD ⫽ 45.10), a
significant difference, paired t(164) ⫽ 7.51, p ⬍ .001, d ⫽ 0.65.
However, for participants who completed the purpose manipulation, the drop in math problems solved from the first to the second
block was mitigated. Purpose condition participants completed
only 26% fewer problems in Block 2 (Purpose Block 1 M ⫽ 68.62,
SD ⫽ 45.11; Purpose Block 2 M ⫽ 50.56, SD ⫽ 49.00), still a
significant difference, paired t(165) ⫽ 4.21, p ⬍ .001, d ⫽ 0.38.
Importantly, an OLS regression analysis comparing difference
scores (Block 2 problems solved minus Block 1 problems solved,
by condition) showed that the decline experienced by the purpose

573

condition was significantly smaller than that experienced by participants in the control condition, b ⫽ 12.45, t(309) ⫽ 2.10, p ⫽
.03, d ⫽ 0.28. Thus, by the second block, there was a significant
effect of the purpose manipulation compared to the control,
t(309) ⫽ 2.81, p ⫽ .005, d ⫽ 0.32, such that purpose condition
participants completed 36% more boring math problems compared
to controls in the second block. This condition difference in Block
2 was significant independently within Sample 1, t(115) ⫽ 2.14,
p ⫽ .03, d ⫽ 0.40, and Sample 2, t(192) ⫽ 2.13, p ⫽ .03, d ⫽ 0.31,
and did not differ across samples, interaction t(308) ⫽ 0.11, p ⫽
.90. Hence, it was a reproducible finding (see Figure 5).
Comparison to the self-oriented control group. By contrast,
the highly similar self-oriented control group— emphasizing intrinsic motives for learning— did not appear to improve selfregulation on the boring math task compared to controls. Recall
that these analyses could only be conducted with data from Sample
2, which is the sample that involved the three-cell experiment. The
self-oriented condition did not differ from the control in terms of
number of math problems solved, either in Block 1, t(287) ⫽ 0.90,
p ⫽ .39, d ⫽ 0.11, or Block 2, t(287) ⫽ 0.92, p ⫽ .38, d ⫽ 0.11,
although comparisons were in the direction of more math problems
solved for the self-oriented group versus the control. Note that this
nonsignificant difference is not likely due to limited statistical
power; the purpose condition showed a significant difference from
control on Block 2 in Sample 2 (see Figure 5). The self-oriented
condition did not differ from the purpose condition in either block,
Block 1, t(285) ⫽ 1.37, p ⫽ .17, d ⫽ 0.16, Block 2,
t(285) ⫽ ⫺0.99, p ⫽ .32, d ⫽ 0.11.
Also informative is an analysis of changes across blocks. Participants in the self-oriented condition showed a decline in the
number of math problems solved that mirrored the control condition, as shown in Figure 5. Participants in the self-oriented manipulation condition solved 32% fewer problems in Block 2 than in
Block 1 (Self-oriented Block 1 M ⫽ 82.43, SD ⫽ 73.52; Block 2
M ⫽ 55.63, SD ⫽ 45.65), t(86) ⫽ 6.00, p ⬍ .001, d ⫽ 0.45. An
analysis of difference scores found that this change across blocks
did not differ from the same changes seen in the control condition,
t(286) ⫽ 0.35, p ⫽ .73. However the change score did differ
significantly from the changes seen in the purpose condition,
t(286) ⫽ ⫺2.17, p ⫽ .03, d ⫽ 0.26, showing that the purpose
manipulation was significantly better at warding off a decline in
math problems solved across blocks compared to the highly similar self-oriented manipulation.

Figure 5. A self-transcendent purpose for learning intervention sustains self-regulation on the “diligence task”
in Study 4. Error bars indicate 1 standard error.

YEAGER ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

574

Inspecting Figure 5, it is interesting that students in the selforiented manipulation condition showed an initial, nonsignificant
boost in Block 1 problems solved compared to controls. This may
have been contributing to the significant comparison between the
purpose and self-oriented conditions in terms of difference scores
across blocks. It is possible that the self-oriented manipulation led
individuals to try harder initially, on Block 1, but this effort sapped
their self-regulatory ability on the subsequent trial, Block 2. This
will be important to investigate in future research. Regardless,
simply reading and writing about intrinsic self-relevant motives for
learning did not lead to significant differences from controls when
the task became most boring. By contrast, a highly similar activity
that added self-transcendent motives was effective at sustaining
self-regulation.

Discussion
Study 4 extended the evidence about the effects of a selftranscendent purpose on academic self-regulation. It put learners in
a situation in which they were asked to complete a tedious,
low-level task that had only a tenuous relationship to future work
goals, and they were told they could quit at any time and entertain
themselves online. In many regards this is the modern dilemma:
With ubiquitous entertainment at our fingertips, learners must
exercise self-discipline even when they do not know whether they
themselves or someone else will benefit from their hard work in
the long term. We showed that learners could be helped in such
situations when they reflected on how their future role in society
might contribute in some ways to the world beyond the self. These
individuals were better able to maintain their level of persistence
and overcome temptation even when boredom was growing.

General Discussion
Many repetitive, foundational, skill-building math and science
tasks are experienced as tedious or boring (Raytheon Company,
2012; Stigler & Hiebert, 1999). Our research found that when it is
difficult to make a task interesting it can be helpful to focus on
creating personal meaning by promoting a prosocial, selftranscendent purpose for learning (see Brophy, 2008).
In correlational, experimental, and longitudinal studies involving roughly 2,000 high school and college students, a purpose for
learning predicted or caused more effective academic selfregulation in the immediate term and over time. A selftranscendent purpose was correlated with more diligence in the
face of tempting alternatives and also greater college persistence
rates among low-income, urban, predominantly minority students
(Study 1). A brief experimental intervention to promote a selftranscendent purpose increased overall STEM-course grades several months later (Study 2). Studies 3 and 4 clarified the nearerterm effects of this manipulation. A self-transcendent purpose
doubled the amount of time students spent on tedious exam review
questions (Study 3) and increased by 35% the number of boring
math problems students solved compared to controls, even when
they had the option to consume entertaining Internet media at any
time (Study 4). Adolescents with more of a self-transcendent
purpose for learning also literally saw learning tasks differently.
They were more likely to say that pictures and descriptions of
quotidian academic tasks were linked to important and personally

meaningful academic goals (Study 1; for causal evidence, also see
the pilot randomized experiment reported in the online supplement
and referenced in Study 2). All told, it seems that when adolescents
had a personally important and self-transcendent “why” for learning they were able to bear even a tedious and unpleasant “how” (cf.
Frankl, 1963).
Previous research has shown that having a prosocial, selftranscendent motive for engaging in a behavior can lead to
greater persistence on repetitive and uninteresting tasks at work
(see Grant, 2007, 2013). The present research extended this by
examining situations in which a person was completing skillbuilding tasks that have no immediate payoff for others but may
prepare one to make a contribution in the future—such as doing
single-digit subtraction or completing tedious multiple-choice
questions. We found that a self-transcendent purpose for learning could alter a person’s self-regulation in such circumstances.
This type of result might well generalize to nonschool settings. Do armed forces cadets engage in more vigorous physical
exercise when they see themselves as preparing to protect
civilians from harm versus protecting themselves from harm?
Do computer hackers spend more hours learning syntax when
they anticipate using it to resist an oppressive government
versus stealing money or content for personal consumption? We
believe the findings here might offer a perspective on the causes
of persistence on foundational skill-development tasks in a
number of settings.
The present research is also an advance because it documents
the development of a new research tool to examine the causal
impact of a self-transcendent purpose for learning. Unlike research
that has developed psychological interventions to undo the belief
that academic struggle might mean you are “dumb” (Aronson et
al., 2002; Blackwell et al., 2007; Wilson & Linville, 1982), or that
you might not belong or be valued in a setting (G. L. Cohen et al.,
2009; G. L. Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Harackiewicz et al., 2014;
Walton & Cohen, 2011), research on youth purpose has to date
been limited mostly to correlational survey analyses or qualitative
interviews, preventing strong causal inferences (Bronk, 2012; Burrow & Hill, 2011; Yeager & Bundick, 2009; see Hill, Burrow, &
Sumner, 2013; but see Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009). The
intervention developed here has the advantage of web-based scalability and replicable effects in different populations using different outcomes. It will hopefully spawn future experimental investigations on the effect of a purpose for learning and perhaps,
eventually, improvements to educational practice.
Another innovation of this research stems from the fact that the
self-transcendent purpose predicted or affected consequential educational behaviors, even among disengaged students or students
attending urban public high schools. Behavioral economic strategies to reduce inequality such as paying low-income students for
completing their homework have been applied broadly and found
to have no consistent positive effects on overall achievement
(Fryer, 2011). Yet a free, roughly 20-min, web-based intervention
led students to choose to persist on unpleasant academic tasks and
also earn higher grades. This is a testament to the power of
psychological theory (e.g., Damon et al., 2003; Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009), to lead to behavior change in situations where
more traditional economic efforts fail (also see Ross & Nisbett,
1991). Furthermore, this research counteracts potential stereotypes
about how to motivate low-income students attending urban public

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION

schools. Many of the students in Study 1 said that they wanted to
contribute to the world beyond themselves, not just make money.
And when they said this, they were more likely to demonstrate
self-control and make progress toward long-term goals. This suggests that telling these students to focus on how they can make
more money if they go to college may not give them the motives
they need to actually make it to college graduation. Instead,
perhaps cultivating motives that transcend the self could provide
them with the personal meaning they need to sustain selfregulation.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Understanding Long-Term Effects
Social psychology has a long history of documenting counterintuitive but reproducible effects of brief interventions that affect
health, stress, or achievement months or years later, even though
the mechanisms for these effects have remained obscure (e.g.,
G. L. Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Wilson & Linville, 1982; see
Pennebaker, 2004). In these past studies and in the present research, it is often easier to understand why a manipulation would
affect immediate outcomes than it is to understand why the intervention would “stick” over time, resulting in effects on overall
GPA (G. L. Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Yeager & Walton, 2011).
High school students undoubtedly receive many messages from
valued adults entreating them to pay greater attention to their
schoolwork. Why would the brief message delivered over the
Internet in Study 2 stand out?
Extant theory and some of the present data speak to this issue,
but more research is needed. Specifically, theory has pointed to the
fact that school is an environment in which recursive processes
abound. Later knowledge builds on prior knowledge, later interactions with peers or teachers depend on relationships and reputations built in prior interactions, and later self-views and goals
depend on prior thoughts and experiences (G. L. Cohen et al.,
2009; G. L. Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Yeager & Walton, 2011).
When a social-psychological intervention redirects a key motive
for doing well in school, then it is possible for a “virtuous cycle”
to gain momentum and affect diverse outcomes. A social psychological intervention might add up to accumulated effects via small
adjustments in the probabilities of exerting self-control or deeply
learning during tedious tasks (Abelson, 1985; also see G. L. Cohen
& Sherman, 2014; Garcia & Cohen, 2012; Walton, 2014). Studies
3 and 4 speak to this possibility directly, but the full mediational
process remains undocumented.

Limitations and Future Directions
One limitation of our research is that we did not investigate
participants’ strategies for self-regulation. Did participants with
more of a self-transcendent purpose engage in mental actions to
make uninteresting tasks more appealing or were they simply
better at suppressing the urge to quit and engage in the tempting
alternative? Past research suggests that both are possible (e.g.,
Fishbach & Shah, 2006; Fishbach et al., 2010; Fishbach, Zhang, &
Koo, 2009). For instance, Sansone et al. (1992) showed that when
participants were asked to complete an uninteresting task and were
given a rationale for why it might be personally important, participants implemented ways to make it feel subjectively more interesting. They randomly varied their method of completing the task

575

(also see Sansone, Wiebe, & Morgan, 1999). Meanwhile, Mischel,
Ebbensen, and Zeiss (1972) found that self-regulation on a delay of
gratification task was facilitated through cognitive strategies to
mentally transform the tempting alternative into something that
felt less appealing. Unpacking which of these alternative strategies
emerge from the self-transcendent purpose for learning could shed
light on the underlying psychological processes in the present
research.
A crucial caveat is that our research does not definitively
show that intrinsic interest-driven motives are unimportant for
self-regulation. Instead, what we showed was that with the same
statistical power the self-transcendent purpose manipulation—
which also invoked self-oriented motives–was more reliably
different from the control manipulation that focuses exclusively
on self-oriented motives (Study 4; also see the Study 2 pilot
reported in the online supplement). Self-transcendent motives
were sometimes but not always stronger predictors than selforiented ones in a multiple regression (Study 1). The finding
that the intrinsic-interest-driven motives were “in the middle”
mirrors past longitudinal research (Yeager et al., 2012) and has
some intuitive appeal. If learners are seeking tasks that interest
them or have some other intrinsic benefit to them, then they
may show a general boost in motivation on school-related tasks.
However, those only seeking benefits for the self may not
persist on aversively tedious, low-level learning tasks in the
face of alternatives that more readily satisfy their desire for
interesting activities.
The present research has focused on the role of a purpose for
learning in skill-building activities. However when expert performance is of interest, then the belief that others are counting on you
to perform well may not be beneficial. Such worries may interfere
with working memory and increase the chance that a person will
“choke” due to heightened anxiety (Beilock, 2011). Indeed, experimental procedures designed to induce anxiety and undermine
performance sometimes explicitly involve telling participants that
others’ outcomes will be negatively affected if they fail (e.g., see
Beilock, Kulp, Holt, & Carr, 2004). Perhaps a self-transcendent
purpose would undermine high-stakes performance. Thus, an important avenue for future research will be to illuminate whether a
self-transcendent purpose is as effective in performance contexts
as it appears to be in learning contexts.
Finally, it is crucial to underscore that the self-transcendent
purpose intervention is not a “magic bullet” for underachievement.
Rather, it is a context-dependent solution to a particular psychological barrier (G. L. Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Yeager & Walton,
2011)—in this case, the feeling that tedious academic tasks are
meaningless and school has no connection to one’s purposes in
life. In settings or among individuals where this belief is not
prominent— or in settings that are not quite as recursive—then the
type of intervention tested here would not be predicted to have a
lasting effect. We think of the present results as an existence proof,
not a guaranteed effect size across all settings. Research designed
to understand the moderating mechanisms of brief interventions
and likely boundary conditions for them is a high priority in social
and developmental psychology (G. L. Cohen & Sherman, 2014;
Garcia & Cohen, 2012; Walton, 2014; Yeager & Walton, 2011;
also see Wilson, 2011).

YEAGER ET AL.

576

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Conclusion
In a recent nationally representative survey, 69% of American
K–12 teachers reported that students’ lack of interest in learning
was a problem in their classrooms. In fact, this was the classroom
problem most frequently cited by teachers (Bridgeland, Bruce, &
Hariharan, 2013). Of course, sometimes low motivation can be
addressed by simply making coursework more interesting. Yet not
all assignments can be made interesting at all times. If a teacher
connects the day’s lesson to the idiosyncratic interest of one
student (e.g., emphasizing the relevance of math for understanding
sports) it may disengage another student (e.g., a student who does
not like sports). Even when relevant connections can be made for
large groups of students, it can be difficult, logistically and convincingly, to do this for all tasks every day.
In such instances a higher order, self-transcendent purpose for
working hard and learning in school might effectively lead to
self-regulation. Strikingly, however, there is little or no focus on
promoting self-transcendent aims in expert guides for educational
practitioners (e.g., Mitchell et al., 2005; National Research Council, 2000; National Research Council & the Institute of Medicine,
2004; Pintrich & Schunk, 2002). We hope the present experimental interventions, combined with past experimental research (e.g.,
Grant, 2007, 2013), can begin to encourage a shift in thinking
toward beyond-the-self aims. Of course, encouraging a selftranscendent motive is not a replacement for other motivational
strategies, especially not self-oriented, interest-based ones. But the
data presented here show that a self-transcendent motive can in
some cases serve as an important addition to interest-based approaches.

References
Abelson, R. P. (1985). A variance explanation paradox: When a little is a
lot. Psychological Bulletin, 97, 129 –133. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.97.1
.129
Ames, C. (1992). Classrooms: Goals, structures, and student motivation.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 84, 261–271. doi:10.1037/00220663.84.3.261
Andrews, M. C. (2011). Meaningful engagement in educational activity
and purposes for learning (Doctoral dissertation, Stanford University).
Retrieved from https://stacks.stanford.edu/file/druid:qp476bx9339/
Andrews_PurposesforLearning_6-1-11-augmented.pdf
Aronson, E. (1999). The power of self-persuasion. American Psychologist,
54, 875– 884. doi:10.1037/h0088188
Aronson, J., Fried, C., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the effects of stereotype threat on African American college students by shaping theories of
intelligence. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 113–125.
doi:10.1006/jesp.2001.1491
Ashforth, B. E., & Kreiner, G. E. (1999). “How can you do it?” Dirty work
and the challenge of constructing a positive identity. Academy of Management Review, 24, 413– 434. doi:10.5465/AMR.1999.2202129
Atkinson, J. W. (1957). Motivational determinants of risk taking behavior.
Psychological Review, 64, 359 –372. doi:10.1037/h0043445
Batson, C. D. (1998). Altruism and prosocial behavior. In D. T. Gilbert,
S. T. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), The handbook of social psychology
(4th ed., Vol. 2, pp. 282–316). Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill.
Beilock, S. (2011). Choke: What the secrets of the brain reveal about
getting it right when you have to. New York, NY: Free Press.
Beilock, S. L., Kulp, C. A., Holt, L. E., & Carr, T. H. (2004). More on the
fragility of performance: Choking under pressure in mathematical prob-

lem solving. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 133, 584 –
600. doi:10.1037/0096-3445.133.4.584
Bem, D. J. (1972). Self-perception theory. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances
in experimental social psychology (Vol. 6, pp. 1– 62). New York, NY:
Academic Press.
Blackwell, L., Trzesniewski, K., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Implicit theories
of intelligence predict achievement across an adolescent transition: A
longitudinal study and an intervention. Child Development, 78, 246 –
263. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2007.00995.x
Brehm, J. W. (1966). A theory of psychological reactance. In W. W. Burke,
D. G. Lake, & W. Paine (Eds.), Organization change: A comprehensive
reader (pp. 337–390). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Bridgeland, J., Bruce, M., & Hariharan, A. (2013). The missing piece: A
national teacher survey on how social and emotional learning can
empower children and transform schools. Retrieved from http://
www.civicenterprises.net/MediaLibrary/Docs/CASEL-Report-lowres-FINAL.pdf
Bronk, K. C. (2012). A grounded theory of youth purpose. Journal of
Adolescent Research, 27, 78 –109. doi:10.1177/0743558411412958
Brophy, J. (2008). Developing students’ appreciation for what is taught
in school. Educational Psychologist, 43, 132–141. doi:10.1080/
00461520701756511
Buhrmester, M., Kwang, T., & Gosling, S. D. (2011). Amazon’s Mechanical Turk: A new source of inexpensive, yet high-quality, data? Perspectives on Psychological Science, 6, 3–5. doi:10.1177/
1745691610393980
Burrow, A. L., & Hill, P. L. (2011). Purpose as a form of identity capital
for positive youth adjustment. Developmental Psychology, 47, 1196 –
1206. doi:10.1037/a0023818
Carnevale, A. P., & Desrochers, D. M. (2003). Standards for what? The
economic roots of K–16 reform. Princeton, NJ: Communication and
Public Affairs, Office of Assessment, Equity, and Careers, Educational
Testing Service.
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (1981). Attention and self-regulation: A
control-theory approach to human behavior. New York, NY: SpringerVerlag. doi:10.1007/978-1-4612-5887-2
Cialdini, R. B. (2003). Crafting normative messages to protect the environment. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 12, 105–109.
doi:10.1111/1467-8721.01242
Cialdini, R. B., Reno, R. R., & Kallgren, C. A. (1990). A focus theory of
normative conduct: Recycling the concept of norms to reduce littering in
public places. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 1015–
1026. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.58.6.1015
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Apfel, N., & Brzustoski, P.
(2009). Recursive processes in self-affirmation: Intervening to close the
minority achievement gap. Science, 324, 400 – 403. doi:10.1126/science
.1170769
Cohen, G. L., & Prinstein, M. J. (2006). Peer contagion of aggression and
health risk behavior among adolescent males: An experimental investigation of effects on public conduct and private attitudes. Child Development, 77, 967–983. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2006.00913.x
Cohen, G. L., & Sherman, D. (2014). The psychology of change: Selfaffirmation and social psychological intervention. Annual Review of
Psychology, 65, 333–371. doi:10.1146/annurev-psych-010213-115137
Cohen, J., Cohen, P., West, S. G., & Aiken, L. S. (2003). Applied multiple
regression/correlation analysis for the behavioral sciences (3rd ed.).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Damon, W. (2008). The path to purpose: Helping our children find their
calling in life. New York, NY: Free Press.
Damon, W., Menon, J., & Bronk, K. C. (2003). The development of
purpose during adolescence. Applied Developmental Science, 7, 119 –
128. doi:10.1207/S1532480XADS0703_2
Diekman, A. B., Clark, E. K., Johnston, A. M., Brown, E. R., & Steinberg,
M. (2011). Malleability in communal goals and beliefs influences at-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION
traction to stem careers: Evidence for a goal congruity perspective.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 101, 902–918. doi:
10.1037/a0025199
Dik, B. J., Steger, M. F., Gibson, A., & Peisner, W. (2011). Make your
work matter: Development and pilot evaluation of a purpose-centered
career education intervention. New Directions for Youth Development,
2011, 59 –73. doi:10.1002/yd.428
Duckworth, A. L., & Carlson, S. M. (2013). Self-regulation and school
success. In B. W. Sokol, F. M. E. Grouzet, & U. Müller (Eds.), Selfregulation and autonomy: Social and developmental dimensions of
human conduct (pp. 208 –230). New York, NY: Cambridge University
Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139152198.015
Duckworth, A., Kirby, T., Tsukayama, E., Berstein, H., & Ericsson, K.
(2011). Deliberate practice spells success: Why grittier competitors
triumph at the National Spelling Bee. Social Psychological and Personality Science, 2, 174 –181. doi:10.1177/1948550610385872
Duckworth, A. L., Peterson, C., Matthews, M. D., & Kelly, D. R. (2007).
Grit: Perseverance and passion for long-term goals. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 1087–1101. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.92
.6.1087
Duckworth, A. L., & Quinn, P. D. (2009). Development and validation of
the Short Grit Scale (GRIT–S). Journal of Personality Assessment, 91,
166 –174. doi:10.1080/00223890802634290
Duckworth, A. L., Tsukayama, E., & Kirby, T. (2013). Is it really selfcontrol? Examining the predictive power of the delay of gratification
task. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 39, 843– 855. doi:
10.1177/0146167213482589
Duffy, R. D., & Dik, B. J. (2009). Beyond the self: External influences in
the career development process. The Career Development Quarterly, 58,
29 – 43. doi:10.1002/j.2161-0045.2009.tb00171.x
Dunn, E. W., Aknin, L. B., & Norton, M. I. (2008). Spending money on
others promotes happiness. Science, 319, 1687–1688. doi:10.1126/
science.1150952
Dutton, J. E., Roberts, L. M., & Bednar, J. (2010). Pathways for positive
identity construction at work: Four types of positive identity and the
building of social resources. The Academy of Management Review, 35,
265–293. doi:10.5465/AMR.2010.48463334
Dynarski, S., Scott-Clayton, J., & Wiederspan, M. (2013). Simplifying tax
incentives and aid for college: Progress and prospects. In J. R. Brown
(Ed.), Tax policy and the economy (Vol. 27, pp. 161–202). Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press. doi:10.1086/671247
Eccles, J. S. (2009). Who am I and what am I going to do with my life?
Personal and collective identities as motivators of action. Educational
Psychologist, 44, 78 – 89. doi:10.1080/00461520902832368
Eccles, J. S., Adler, T. F., Futterman, R., Goff, S. B., Kaczala, C. M.,
Meece, J. L., & Midgley, C. (1983). Expectancies, values, and academic
behaviors. In J. T. Spence (Ed.), Achievement and achievement motivation (pp. 75–146). San Francisco, CA: Freeman.
Eccles, J. S., & Wigfield, A. (1995). In the mind of the actor: The structure
of adolescents’ achievement task values and expectancy-related beliefs.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 21, 215–225. doi:10.1177/
0146167295213003
Eccles, J. S., & Wigfield, A. (2002). Motivational beliefs, values, and
goals. Annual Review of Psychology, 53, 109 –132. doi:10.1146/annurev
.psych.53.100901.135153
Elliot, A. J., Conroy, D. E., Barron, K. E., & Murayama, K. (2010).
Achievement motives and goals: A developmental analysis. In R. M.
Lerner, M. E. Lamb, & A. M. Freund (Eds.), The handbook of life-span
development (Vol. 2, pp. 474 –510). New York, NY: Wiley. doi:
10.1002/9780470880166.hlsd002013
Elliot, A. J., & McGregor, H. A. (2001). A 2 ⫻ 2 achievement goal
framework. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 501–519.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.80.3.501

577

Emmons, R. A. (1986). Personal strivings: An approach to personality and
subjective well-being. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51,
1058 –1068. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.51.5.1058
Ericsson, K. A. (2006). The influence of experience and deliberate
practice on the development of superior expert performance. In K. A.
Ericsson, N. Charness, P. J. Feltovich, & R. R. Hoffman (Eds.), The
Cambridge handbook of expertise and expert performance (pp. 683–
704). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/
CBO9780511816796.038
Ericsson, K. A. (2007). An expert-performance perspective of research on
medical expertise: The study of clinical performance. Medical Education, 41, 1124 –1130. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2923.2007.02946.x
Ericsson, K. A. (Ed.). (2009). Development of professional expertise:
Toward measurement of expert performance and design of optimal
learning environments. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511609817
Ericsson, K. A., Krampe, R. T., & Tesch-Römer, C. (1993). The role of
deliberate practice in the acquisition of expert performance. Psychological Review, 100, 363– 406. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.100.3.363
Ericsson, K. A., & Ward, P. (2007). Capturing the naturally occurring
superior performance of experts in the laboratory toward a science of
expert and exceptional performance. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 16, 346 –350. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8721.2007.00533.x
Erikson, E. H. (1968). Identity: Youth and crisis. New York, NY: Norton.
Evans, G. W., & Rosenbaum, J. (2008). Self-regulation and the incomeachievement gap. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 23, 504 –514.
doi:10.1016/j.ecresq.2008.07.002
Eyler, J. (2002). Reflection: Linking service and learning-linking students
and communities. Journal of Social Issues, 58, 517–534. doi:10.1111/
1540-4560.00274
Eyler, J., & Giles, D. E., Jr. (1999). Where’s the learning in servicelearning? San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Feiler, D. C., Tost, L. P., & Grant, A. M. (2012). Mixed reasons, missed
givings: The costs of blending egoistic and altruistic reasons in donation
requests. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48, 1322–1328.
doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2012.05.014
Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Fishbach, A., & Shah, J. Y. (2006). Self-control in action: Implicit dispositions toward goals and away from temptations. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 90, 820 – 832. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.90.5.820
Fishbach, A., & Trope, Y. (2005). The substitutability of external control
and self-control. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 41, 256 –
270. doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2004.07.002
Fishbach, A., Zhang, Y., & Koo, M. (2009). The dynamics of selfregulation. European Review of Social Psychology, 20, 315–344. doi:
10.1080/10463280903275375
Fishbach, A., Zhang, Y., & Trope, Y. (2010). Counteractive evaluation:
Asymmetric shifts in the implicit value of conflicting motivations.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 29 –38. doi:10.1016/j
.jesp.2009.09.008
Ford, M. E., & Nichols, C. W. (1987). A taxonomy of human goals and
some possible applications. In M. E. Ford & D. H. Ford (Eds.), Humans
as self-constructing living systems: Putting the framework to work (pp.
289 –311). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Frankl, V. E. (1963). Man’s search for meaning. New York, NY: Washington Square Press.
Fryer, R. G. (2011). Financial incentives and student achievement: Evidence from randomized trials. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126,
1755–1798. doi:10.1093/qje/qjr045
Fujita, K. (2011). On conceptualizing self-control as more than the effortful
inhibition of impulses. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 15,
352–366. doi:10.1177/1088868311411165

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

578

YEAGER ET AL.

Galla, B., Plummer, B., White, R., Meketon, D., D’Mello, S. K., &
Duckworth, A. (2014). Development and validation of the diligence
task: A behavioral measure of individual differences in academic diligence. Unpublished manuscript, Department of Psychology, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (2012). A social-psychological approach to
educational intervention. In E. Shafir (Ed.), Behavioral foundations of
policy (pp. 329 –350). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Goldstein, N. J., Cialdini, R. B., & Griskevicius, V. (2008). A room with
a viewpoint: Using social norms to motivate environmental conservation
in hotels. Journal of Consumer Research, 35, 472– 482. doi:10.1086/
586910
Grant, A. M. (2007). Relational job design and the motivation to make a
prosocial difference. The Academy of Management Review, 32, 393–
417. doi:10.5465/AMR.2007.24351328
Grant, A. M. (2008). Does intrinsic motivation fuel the prosocial fire?
Motivational synergy in predicting persistence, performance, and productivity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 93, 48 –58. doi:10.1037/00219010.93.1.48
Grant, A. M. (2013). Rethinking the extraverted sales ideal: The ambivert
advantage. Psychological Science, 24, 1024 –1030. doi:10.1177/
0956797612463706
Grant, A. M., & Campbell, E. M. (2007). Doing good, doing harm, being
well and burning out: The interactions of perceived prosocial and antisocial impact in service work. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 80, 665– 691. doi:10.1348/096317906X169553
Grant, A. M., & Hofmann, D. A. (2011). It’s not all about me: Motivating
hospital hand hygiene by focusing on patients. Psychological Science,
22, 1494 –1499. doi:10.1177/0956797611419172
Grant, A. M., & Patil, S. V. (2012). Challenging the norm of self-interest:
Minority influence and transitions to helping norms in work units. The
Academy of Management Review, 37, 547–568. doi:10.5465/amr.2010
.0437
Grant, A. M., & Rothbard, N. P. (2013). When in doubt, seize the day?
Security values, prosocial values, and proactivity under ambiguity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 98, 810 – 819. doi:10.1037/a0032873
Grant, A. M., & Sonnentag, S. (2010). Doing good buffers against feeling
bad: Prosocial impact compensates for negative task and selfevaluations. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
111, 13–22. doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2009.07.003
Harackiewicz, J. M., Canning, E. A., Tibbetts, Y., Giffen, C. J., Blair, S. S.,
Rouse, D. I., & Hyde, J. S. (2014). Closing the social class achievement
gap for first-generation students in undergraduate biology. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 106, 375–389. doi:10.1037/a0034679
Harackiewicz, J. M., Rozek, C. R., Hulleman, C. S., & Hydes, J. S. (2012).
Helping parents to motivate adolescents in mathematics and science: An
experimental test of a utility-value intervention. Psychological Science,
23, 899 –906. doi:10.1177/0956797611435530
Harackiewicz, J. M., & Sansone, C. (1991). Goals and intrinsic motivation:
You can get there from here. In M. L. Maehr & P. R. Pintrich (Eds.),
Advances in motivation and achievement: Goals and self-regulatory
processes (Vol. 7, pp. 21– 45). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Hasebe, Y., Nucci, L., & Nucci, M. S. (2004). Parental control of the
personal domain and adolescent symptoms of psychopathology: A crossnational study in the United States and Japan. Child Development, 75,
815– 828. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2004.00708.x
Higgins, E. T. (2005). Value from regulatory fit. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 14, 209 –213. doi:10.1111/j.0963-7214.2005
.00366.x
Hill, P. L., Burrow, A. L., & Sumner, R. (2013). Addressing important
questions in the field of adolescent purpose. Child Development Perspectives, 7, 232–236. doi:10.1111/cdep.12048
Hughes, E. C. (1958). Men and their work. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.

Hughes, E. C. (1962). Good people and dirty work. Social Problems, 10,
3–11. doi:10.2307/799402
Hulleman, C. S., Durik, A. M., Schweigert, S. B., & Harackiewicz, J. M.
(2008). Task values, achievement goals, and interest: An integrative
analysis. Journal of Educational Psychology, 100, 398 – 416. doi:
10.1037/0022-0663.100.2.398
Hulleman, C. S., Godes, O., Hendricks, B. L., & Harackiewicz, J. M.
(2010). Enhancing interest and performance with a utility value intervention. Journal of Educational Psychology, 102, 880 – 895. doi:
10.1037/a0019506
Hulleman, C. S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2009). Promoting interest and
performance in high school science classes. Science, 326, 1410 –1412.
doi:10.1126/science.1177067
Jang, H. (2008). Supporting students’ motivation, engagement, and learning during an uninteresting activity. Journal of Educational Psychology,
100, 798 – 811. doi:10.1037/a0012841
Kane, M. J., Hambrick, D. Z., Tuholski, S. W., Wilhelm, O., Payne, T. W.,
& Engle, R. W. (2004). The generality of working memory capacity: A
latent variable approach to verbal and visuospatial memory span and
reasoning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 133, 189 –
217. doi:10.1037/0096-3445.133.2.189
Kaufman, A. S., & Kaufman, N. L. (1990). Manual for the Kaufman Brief
Intelligence Test. Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service.
Koltko-Rivera, M. E. (2006). Rediscovering the later version of Maslow’s
hierarchy of needs: Self-transcendence and opportunities for theory,
research, and unification. Review of General Psychology, 10, 302–317.
doi:10.1037/1089-2680.10.4.302
Lapsley, D., & Yeager, D. (in press). Moral-character education. In I.
Weiner (Ed.), Handbook of psychology (pp. 1– 42). New York, NY:
Wiley.
Lee, J. Q., McInerney, D. M., Liem, G. A. D., & Ortiga, Y. P. (2010). The
relationships between future goals and achievement goal orientations:
An intrinsic-extrinsic motivation perspective. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 35, 264 –279. doi:10.1016/j.cedpsych.2010.04.004
Lepper, M. R., Corpus, J. H., & Iyengar, S. S. (2005). Intrinsic and
extrinsic motivational orientations in the classroom: Age differences and
academic correlates. Journal of Educational Psychology, 97, 184 –196.
doi:10.1037/0022-0663.97.2.184
Little, B. (1983). Personal projects: A rationale and method for investigation. Environment and Behavior, 15, 273–309. doi:10.1177/
0013916583153002
Loewenstein, G. (1996). Out of control: Visceral influences on behavior.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 65, 272–292.
doi:10.1006/obhd.1996.0028
Markus, H., & Nurius, P. (1986). Possible selves. American Psychologist,
41, 954 –969. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.41.9.954
Marshall, S. K. (2001). Do I matter? Construct validation of adolescents’
perceived mattering to parents and friends. Journal of Adolescence, 24,
473– 490. doi:10.1006/jado.2001.0384
Maslow, A. H. (1969). The farther reaches of human nature. Journal of
Transpersonal Psychology, 1, 1–9.
Massey, E. K., Gebhardt, W. A., & Garnefski, N. (2008). Adolescent goal
content and pursuit: A review of the literature from the past 16 years.
Developmental Review, 28, 421– 460. doi:10.1016/j.dr.2008.03.002
Michaels, J. L., Parkin, S. S., & Vallacher, R. R. (2013). Destiny is in the
details: Action identification in the construction and destruction of
meaning. In J. Hicks & C. Routledge (Eds.), The experience of meaning
in life: Emerging themes and controversies (pp. 103–115). New York,
NY: Springer Press. doi:10.1007/978-94-007-6527-6_8
Miller, D. T. (1999). The norm of self-interest. American Psychologist, 54,
1053–1060. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.54.12.1053
Mischel, W., Cantor, N., & Feldman, S. (1996). Principles of self-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION
regulation: The nature of willpower and self-control. In E. T. Higgins &
A. W. Kruglanski (Eds.), Social psychology: Handbook of basic principles (pp. 329 –360). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Mischel, W., Ebbensen, E. B., & Zeiss, A. R. (1972). Cognitive and
attentional mechanisms in delay of gratification. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 21, 204 –218. doi:10.1037/h0032198
Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., & Rodriguez, M. L. (1989). Delay of gratification
in children. Science, 244, 933–938. doi:10.1126/science.2658056
Mitchell, K., Shkolnik, J., Song, M., Uekawa, K., Murphy, R., Garet, M.,
& Means, B. (2005). Rigor, relevance and results: The quality of teacher
assignments and student work in new and conventional high schools.
Washington, DC: American Institute for Research.
Moffitt, T. E., Arseneault, L., Belsky, D., Dickson, N., Hancox, R. J.,
Harrington, H., . . . Caspi, A. (2011). A gradient of childhood selfcontrol predicts health, wealth, and public safety. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 108,
2693–2698. doi:10.1073/pnas.1010076108
Moran, S., Bundick, M. J., Malin, H., & Reilly, T. S. (2013). How
supportive of their specific purposes do youth believe their family and
friends are? Journal of Adolescent Research, 28, 348 –377. doi:10.1177/
0743558412457816
National Research Council. (2000). How people learn: Brain, mind, and
school. Washington, DC: The National Academic Press.
National Research Council & the Institute of Medicine. (2004). Engaging
schools: Fostering high school students’ motivation to learn. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Nicholls, J. G. (1984). Achievement motivation: Conceptions of ability,
subjective experience, task choice, and performance. Psychological Review, 91, 328 –346. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.91.3.328
Nucci, L. (1996). Morality and the personal sphere of actions. In E. S.
Reed, E. Turiel, & T. Brown (Eds.), Values and knowledge (pp. 41– 60).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Olivola, C. Y., & Shafir, E. (2013). The martyrdom effect: When pain and
effort increase prosocial contributions. Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making, 26, 91–105. doi:10.1002/bdm.767
Oyserman, D., & Destin, M. (2010). Identity-based motivation: Implications for intervention. The Counseling Psychologist, 38, 1001–1043.
doi:10.1177/0011000010374775
Patall, E., Cooper, H., & Robinson, J. (2008). The effects of choice on
intrinsic motivation and related outcomes: A meta-analysis of research
findings. Psychological Bulletin, 134, 270 –300. doi:10.1037/0033-2909
.134.2.270
Patrick, S. D., & Duckworth, A. L. (2013, May). Empirical support for a
tripartite taxonomy of character in adolescents. Poster presented at the
25th annual convention of the Association for Psychological Science,
Washington, DC.
Pennebaker, J. W. (2004). Theories, therapies, and taxpayers: On the
complexities of the expressive writing paradigm. Clinical Psychology:
Science and Practice, 11, 138 –142. doi:10.1093/clipsy.bph063
Pintrich, P. R., & Schunk, D. H. (2002). Motivation in education: Theory,
research, and applications (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice
Hall Merrill.
Rachlin, H., Brown, J., & Cross, D. (2000). Discounting in judgments of
delay and probability. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 13,
145–159. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1099-0771(200004/06)13:2⬍145::AIDBDM320⬎3.0.CO;2-4
Raven, J., Raven, J. C., & Court, J. H. (1998). Manual for Raven’s
Progressive Matrices and Vocabulary scales. Section 3: The standard
progressive matrices. Oxford, England: Oxford Psychologists Press.
Raytheon Company. (2012). Math relevance to U.S. middle school students. Retrieved from http://www.raytheon.com/newsroom/rtnwcm/
groups/corporate/documents/content/rtn12_studentsmth_results.pdf
Roderick, M., Nagaoka, J., & Allensworth, E. (2006). From high school to
the future: A first look at Chicago Public School graduates’ college

579

enrollment, college preparation, and graduation from four-year colleges. Chicago, IL: Consortium on Chicago School Research.
Ross, L., & Nisbett, R. E. (1991). The person and the situation: Perspectives of social psychology. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Self-determination theory and the
facilitation of intrinsic motivation, social development, and well-being.
American Psychologist, 55, 68 –78. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.55.1.68
Ryu, M. (2012). The education gap: Understanding African American and
Hispanic attainment disparities in higher education. Washington, DC:
American Council on Education.
Sansone, C., Weir, C., Harpster, L., & Morgan, C. (1992). Once a boring
task always a boring task? Interest as a self-regulatory mechanism.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 379 –390. doi:
10.1037/0022-3514.63.3.379
Sansone, C., Wiebe, D. J., & Morgan, C. (1999). Self-regulating interest:
The moderating role of hardiness and conscientiousness. Journal of
Personality, 67, 701–733. doi:10.1111/1467-6494.00070
Schwartz, S. H. (1992). Universals in the content and structure of values:
Theoretical advance and empirical tests in 20 countries. Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology, 25, 1– 65. doi:10.1016/S00652601(08)60281-6
Sherman, D. K., Hartson, K. A., Binning, K. R., Purdie-Vaughns, V.,
Garcia, J., Taborsky-Barba, S., . . . Cohen, G. L. (2013). Deflecting the
trajectory and changing the narrative: How self-affirmation affects academic performance and motivation under identity threat. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 104, 591– 618. doi:10.1037/
a0031495
Simmons, J. P., Nelson, L. D., & Simonsohn, U. (2011). False-positive
psychology: Undisclosed flexibility in data collection and analysis allows presenting anything as significant. Psychological Science, 22,
1359 –1366. doi:10.1177/0956797611417632
Skinner, E. A., Kindermann, T. A., & Furrer, C. J. (2009). A motivational
perspective on engagement and disaffection conceptualization and assessment of children’s behavioral and emotional participation in academic activities in the classroom. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 69, 493–525. doi:10.1177/0013164408323233
Steger, M. F. (2012). Experiencing meaning in life: Optimal functioning at
the nexus of spirituality, psychopathology, and well-being. In P. T. P.
Wong (Ed.), The human quest for meaning (2nd ed., pp. 165–184). New
York, NY: Routledge.
Steger, M. F., Bundick, M., & Yeager, D. S. (2012). The development of
meaning during adolescence. In R. J. Levesque (Ed.), Encyclopedia of
adolescence (pp. 1666 –1777). New York, NY: Springer Press.
Steger, M. F., Frazier, P., Oishi, S., & Kaler, M. (2006). The Meaning in
Life Questionnaire: Assessing the presence of and search for meaning in
life. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 53, 80 –93. doi:10.1037/00220167.53.1.80
Steger, M. F., Kashdan, T. B., & Oishi, S. (2008). Being good by doing
good: Daily eudaimonic activity and well-being. Journal of Research in
Personality, 42, 22– 42. doi:10.1016/j.jrp.2007.03.004
Stephens, N. M., Fryberg, S. A., Markus, H. R., Johnson, C., & Covarrubias, R. (2012). Unseen disadvantage: How American universities’ focus
on independence undermines the academic performance of firstgeneration college students. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102, 1178 –1197. doi:10.1037/a0027143
Stigler, J. W., & Hiebert, J. (1999). The teaching gap: Best ideas from the
world’s teachers for improving education in the classroom. New York,
NY: Free Press.
Stipek, D. J. (2004). Motivation to learn: Integrating theory and practice.
Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Thaler, R. H., & Shefrin, H. M. (1981). An economic theory of self-control.
Journal of Political Economy, 89, 392– 406. doi:10.1086/260971

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

580

YEAGER ET AL.

Trope, Y., & Fishbach, A. (2000). Counteractive self-control in overcoming temptation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 493–
506. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.79.4.493
Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2010). Construal-level theory of psychological
distance. Psychological Review, 117, 440 – 463. doi:10.1037/a0018963
Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2011). Construal level theory. In P. Van Lange,
A. W. Kruglanski, & E. T. Higgins (Eds.), Handbook of theories of
social psychology (pp. 118 –134). London, England: Sage. doi:10.4135/
9781446249215.n7
Tsukayama, E., Duckworth, A. L., & Kim, B. E. (2013). Domain-specific
impulsivity in school-age children. Developmental Science, 16, 879 –
893. doi:10.1111/desc.12067
Tukey, J. W. (1977). Exploratory data analysis. Reading, MA: AddisonWesley.
U.S. Congress Joint Economic Committee. (2012). STEM education: Preparing jobs for the future. Retrieved from http://www.jec.senate.gov/
public//index.cfm?a⫽Files.Serve&File_id⫽6aaa7e1f-9586-47be-82e7326f47658320
Vallacher, R. R., & Wegner, D. M. (1989). Levels of personal agency:
Individual variation in action identification. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 57, 660 – 671. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.57.4.660
Vansteenkiste, M., Lens, W., & Deci, E. L. (2006). Intrinsic versus extrinsic goal contents in self-determination theory: Another look at the
quality of academic motivation. Educational Psychologist, 41, 19 –31.
doi:10.1207/s15326985ep4101_4
Vansteenkiste, M., Simons, J., Lens, W., Sheldon, K. M., & Deci, E. L.
(2004). Motivating learning, performance, and persistence: The synergistic effects of intrinsic goal contents and autonomy-supportive contexts. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87, 246 –260.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.87.2.246
Vohs, K. D. (2013). The poor’s poor mental power. Science, 341, 969 –970.
doi:10.1126/science.1244172
Walton, G. M. (2014). The new science of wise psychological interventions. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 23, 73– 82. doi:
10.1177/0963721413512856

View publication stats

Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A brief social-belonging intervention improves academic and health outcomes among minority students.
Science, 331, 1447–1451. doi:10.1126/science.1198364
Westernelectric555. (2008). File: Ti83plus.jpg [Image file]. Retrieved from
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ti83plus.jpg
Wilson, T. D. (2011). Redirect: The surprising new science of psychological change. New York, NY: Little, Brown and Company.
Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. (1982). Improving the academic performance of college freshmen: Attribution therapy revisited. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 42, 367–376. doi:10.1037/00223514.42.2.367
Wrzesniewski, A., Dutton, J. E., & Debebe, G. (2003). Interpersonal
sensemaking and the meaning of work. In B. M. Staw & R. Kramer
(Eds.), Research in organizational behavior (Vol. 25, pp. 93–135). New
York, NY: Elsevier Science. doi:10.1016/S0191-3085(03)25003-6
Yeager, D. S., & Bundick, M. J. (2009). The role of purposeful work
goals in promoting meaning in life and in schoolwork during adolescence. Journal of Adolescent Research, 24, 423– 452. doi:10.1177/
0743558409336749
Yeager, D. S., Bundick, M. J., & Johnson, R. (2012). The role of future
work goal motives in adolescent identity development: A longitudinal
mixed-methods investigation. Contemporary Educational Psychology,
37, 206 –217. doi:10.1016/j.cedpsych.2012.01.004
Yeager, D. S., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., Brzustoski, P.,
Master, A., . . . Cohen, G. L. (2014). Breaking the cycle of mistrust:
Wise interventions to provide critical feedback across the racial divide.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 143, 804 – 824. doi:
10.1037/a0033906
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological interventions
in education: They’re not magic. Review of Educational Research, 81,
267–301. doi:10.3102/0034654311405999

Received September 16, 2013
Revision received March 10, 2014
Accepted March 31, 2014 䡲

RUNNING HEAD: LAY THEORIES OF SELF-CONTROL

In: C. Zedelius, B. C. N. Muller, & J. Schooler (in press). The Science of Lay Theories: How
Beliefs Shape Our Cognition, Behavior, and Health. Springer.

Lay Theories of Self-Control

Veronika Job
University of Zurich

Gregory M. Walton
Stanford University

Veronika Job (corresponding author)
Department of Psychology, University of Zurich, Binzmuehlestrasse 14/11, 8050 Zurich,
Switzerland
Phone: +41 (0)44 635 72 83 or +41(0)78 633 56 61, Fax: +41 (0) 44 635 75 19
Email: v.job@psychologie.uzh.ch
Gregory M. Walton
Department of Psychology, Stanford University, 450 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305

	

1	

Abstract
Why do people sometimes fail to regulate their behavior effectively to accomplish their goals?
How can they do better? This chapter explores the role of prominent beliefs in society about the
nature of willpower, and how these beliefs shape self-regulation. Social factors can convey, and
people can believe, that self-control relies on a limited resource and, when this resource is
drawn down, so too is the capacity to exert self-control (limited-resource theory). Or people can
reject this idea, and believe instead that exerting self-control can become self-energizing and
even boost later performance (nonlimited-resource theory). Longitudinal and experimental
studies show that these beliefs or lay theories causally affect how people strive toward goals
and ultimately their well-being. The belief that willpower relies on a limited resource
undermines self-control in the laboratory and in everyday life, especially as demands
accumulate. This theory sensitizes people to cues about the availability of mental resources,
such as feelings of tiredness and the consumption of sugar long before any actual lack of
resources, and facilitates the goal to rest following self-control efforts. By contrast, the belief
that willpower is not so dependent helps people maintain their self-control and make progress
on valued personal goals, and increases well-being.

Keywords: lay theories, self-control, self-regulation, ego depletion, goal-striving, well-being,
rest goal, self-efficacy

	

2	

People sometimes fail to behave as they intend. Children who participated in the famous
marshmallow experiments wanted to wait and not to eat a tempting marshmallow placed on the
plate before them. They knew that they would get a second marshmallow if they managed to
wait until the experimenter came back. Still, many children ate the one marshmallow losing the
chance to get a second one (Mischel, Shoda, & Rodriguez, 1989). Often people give in to
temptations and immediate impulses at the cost of their long-term goals. Aggression and
violence, over-eating, impulsive spending and sexual behavior, as well as drug addiction are
examples of failures in self-control (Baumeister & Heatherton, 1996; Gottfredson & Hirschi,
1990; Vohs & Faber, 2007). They can have disastrous consequences for an individual and high
costs for society as a whole. Therefore, considerable psychological research has aimed to
understand self-control failures and investigate ways to improve self-control. The research
reviewed in this chapter focused on people’s beliefs about the availability of self-control
capacity as an important predictor of their self-control.
During the last few decades, social-psychological research on self-control has been
dominated by a model that uses a simple metaphor to explain self-control failures: the strength
model of self-control (Baumeister, Bratslavsky, Muraven, & Tice 1998; Muraven, Tice, &
Baumeister, 1998). This model suggests that self-control relies on a limited resource. Engaging
in self-control draws down this resource, leaving the individual with reduced capacity to exert
further self-control. In support for this theory, studies have found that after people have exerted
self-control on one task subsequent self-control performance is impaired, even on a very
different kind of task. This is termed the ego depletion effect. The strength model of selfcontrol stimulated an impressive array of empirical research. Ego depletion effects were
documented for outcomes as diverse as intellectual performance (Schmeichel, Vohs, &
Baumeister, 2003), information processing (Fischer, Greitemeyer, & Frey, 2008), impression
management (Vohs, Baumeister, & Ciarocco, 2005), and resisting violent responses to a

	

3	

partner’s provocation (Finkel, DeWall, Slotter, Oaten, & Foshee, 2009) (for meta-analytic
summaries and controversies, see Carter, Kofler, Forster, McCullough, 2015; Hagger, Wood,
Stiff, & Chatzisarantis, 2010). Indeed, ego depletion has been described as a universal
phenomenon based in physiology (Gailliot & Baumeister, 2007).
However, increasing evidence questions this model. New research finds that the ego
depletion effect is not inevitable but is affected by motivation (e.g., Inzlicht & Schmeichel,
2012; Inzlicht, Schmeichel, & Macrae, 2014; Molden et al., 2012) and other moderators (for
overviews see Loschelder & Friese, in press; Masicampo, Martin, & Anderson, 2014). For
instance, monetary incentives, autonomy, and positive mood can prevent ego depletion effects
(Moller, Deci, & Ryan, 2006; Muraven & Slessareva, 2003; Tice, Baumeister, Shmueli, &
Muraven, 2007). Further, people’s expectancies about their ability to exert self-control
following the exertion of self-control can moderate ego depletion. People were told that
performing an effortful task (controlling their emotions) could either improve or harm
performance on a subsequent task (Martijn, Tenbült, Merckelbach, Dreezens, & de Vries,
2002). Participants’ subsequent self-control performance confirmed their expectations: Those
who expected self-control depletion performed worse, while those who expected a self-control
boost performed better.
We ask a more general question. Perhaps it is not just that motivation helps people
overcome depletion. Perhaps lay theories about self-control in general give rise to ego depletion
in the first place (see also Mukhopadhyay & Johar, 2005). People may draw from society’s
general theories about the nature of self-control capacity. These general theories are expressed,
for example, in cultural products like movies or advertisements that echo and promulgate a
specific belief (“You’re not you when you’re hungry”). Holding a global theory that difficult
tasks deplete one, making it difficult to sustain self-control efforts, may make people feel
depleted, exhausted, and in need of rest and replenishment when they face high demands. We

	

4	

expected that people who do not endorse this limited theory on self-control—who instead
believe that self-control efforts can even become self-energizing—may not experience
depletion.
In this chapter we provide an overview of research on lay theories of self-control.
Laboratory research shows that these theories, both measured as an individual difference and
manipulated to examine causality, predict performance as people take on a series of self-control
tasks. The theory that self-control does not rely on a limited resource helps people sustain selfcontrol performance. Further, theories of self-control matter in everyday life settings. They
predict self-regulatory success as well as well-being, specifically when people face high
demands.
Measuring Lay Theories of Willpower
A first step to investigating people’s lay theories on self-control was to develop a
measure. Previous research showed that lay theories (e.g., of the malleability of personal
attributes) are typically domain specific (Dweck, 1999). Since we expected the same for lay
theories of self-control, we decided to begin by focusing on strenuous mental activities. We
developed a scale containing six items that reflected the belief that self-control, for which we
also use the colloquial term willpower, relies on a limited and easily depleted resource (limitedresource theory; e.g., “After a strenuous mental activity your energy is depleted and you must
rest to get it refueled again”). Reverse-coded items (e.g., “After a strenuous mental activity,
you feel energized for further challenging activities”) referred to the opposite belief: They
reject the idea that willpower is highly constrained and, instead, suggest that exerting willpower
can be energizing. We called this belief a nonlimited theory about willpower (Table 1). People
with a nonlimited theory do not necessarily believe that self-control capacity is infinite or that
they can exert self-control endlessly, never needing to rest or sleep. It is not an “unlimited”
belief. However, they reject the view that willpower is readily depleted by acts of self-control.

	

5	

Depending on the research question and the purpose of a study, we have developed
additional scales assessing lay theories in other domains, like resistance to temptation, emotion
control, and physical exertion (Bernecker & Job, 2015a, in press). The domain-specific scales
represent distinct factors that best predict specific behavior when matched to the behavior in
question. For example, in a study conducted with Type 2 diabetes patients, only willpower
theories in the domain of resisting temptations predicted junk food eating and only willpower
theories in the domain of strenuous physical activity predicted physical activity (Bernecker &
Job, 2015a).
The willpower theories scales we have developed so far are certainly not exhaustive and
future research may well develop measures in other self-control domains.
Do People Experience Ego-Depletion Only if They Believe that Willpower Relies on a
Limited Resource?
Our first set of studies tested whether ego depletion is “all in your head,” that is,
whether if occurs only if people believe that willpower relies on a limited resource (Job,
Dweck, & Walton, 2010).
In a first study, we tested the hypothesis that peoples’ habitual lay theories about
willpower, as assessed with the “strenuous mental activity” scale, would moderate the ego
depletion effect. After filling out the scale, participants completed a difficult self-control task
that has been used in previous research to induce a state of depletion, or an easier version of the
task that does not require self-control. We then assessed a classic laboratory measure of selfcontrol: Stroop performance. Color words (red, green, yellow, and blue) appeared on a
computer screen in one of the four colors. Participants were instructed to indicate the color of
the font, which either matched or did not match the meaning of the word. This task requires
self-control because on incongruent trials (e.g., the word “red” displayed in green) people have
to suppress the meaning of the word. Previous research has found ego depletion effects on

	

6	

performance on these trials (Inzlicht, McKay, & Aronson, 2006; Webb & Sheeran, 2003).
Participants who held a limited-resource theory showed the same pattern. After completing the
difficult rather than easy initial task, they made more mistakes on incongruent trials on the
Stroop task. But participants who held a non-limited theory performed equally well whether
they had completed a difficult “depleting” or nondepleting task first. These results have been
replicated several times; by us (Job, Walton, Bernecker, & Dweck, 2013) and independently
(Chow, Hui, & Lau, 2015; Salmon, Adriaanse, De Vet, Fennis, & De Ridder, 2014).
Research also extends these findings to other self-control domains, including resistance
to temptation (Bernecker & Job, in press). In one study, participants who had to resist a
tempting food (freshly baked buns) (see Baumeister et al., 1998) later showed poor Stroop
performance to the extent that they endorsed the theory that people have a limited capacity to
resist temptations. Illustrating the domain-specificity of willpower theories, people’s theories
about whether strenuous mental activities depend on a limited resource did not predict
performance in this study (the two scales were only modestly correlated). Another study
examined theories about emotion control (Bernecker & Job, in press, Study 2). We manipulated
whether people had to suppress their emotions during a funny video (see Brown & McConnell,
2011). Lay theories about emotion control (but not strenuous mental activity) predicted how
long people persisted on a subsequent frustrating task. People who thought that their capacity to
control emotions depends on a limited resource persisted less long when they had had to
suppress their emotions than when they had not. But people who thought the capacity to control
emotions does not depend on a limited resource showed no decrement in persistence when they
had had to suppress their emotions.
Taken together, these studies suggest that people who hold nonlimited willpower
theories do not experience ego depletion in a wide range of self-control domains. Moreover,
they illustrate that theories of willpower are domain specific. If people think that strenuous

	

7	

mental activity drains a limited resource, they become depleted after such a task and show
impaired self-control even in other domains (e.g., Stroop). However, they do not necessarily
feel depleted after resisting a temptation, since they do not necessarily believe the resistance to
temptations depends on a limited and depletable resource. To matter, the implicit theory
assessed in a research study has to match the initial, “depleting” task.
In the studies described so far, theories about willpower were only measured. They thus
do not demonstrate their causal effect. Perhaps people who actually have greater self-control in
a domain see this self-control as less limited, and this is why they can maintain their selfcontrol performance as self-control demands accumulate. To address possibilities like this and
test the causal effects of willpower theories, we manipulated theories about willpower using
two biased questionnaires containing easy-to agree-with items that endorsed either a limited or
a nonlimited resource theory (e.g., “Working on a strenuous mental task can make you feel
tired such that you need a break before accomplishing a new task” vs. “Sometimes, working on
a strenuous mental task can make you feel energized for further challenging activities”, see
Table 2). This procedure evokes thoughts consistent with a specific theory. Manipulation
checks consistently show that in each condition participants agreed with the suggested theory.
As predicted, in the context of strenuous mental activity, participants led to endorse the limited
resource theory showed ego depletion (Job et al., 2010). They performed worse after they had
completed a “depleting” task as compared to the nondepleting control task. In contrast,
participants led to endorse the nonlimited theory showed no drop in self-control performance
following the initial “depleting” task as compared to an undemanding task. Thus, manipulated
theories about willpower showed parallel effects on self-control performance as measured
theories.
An artificial aspect of most laboratory research on self-control including the abovementioned studies is that they assess performance on a single self-control task rather than

	

8	

sustained effort and success over time. A further study tested whether willpower theories might
predict people’s sustained efforts over the course of a challenging learning task (Miller,
Walton, Dweck, Job, Trzesniewski, & McClure, 2012). Participants completed the biased
questionnaire that manipulated their theory about willpower. They then engaged for 20 minutes
with a demanding task widely used to improve working memory. Although all participants
learned effectively at the beginning of the task, improving their performance over the first half
of the task, participants led to think of willpower as a limited resource stalled over the second
half of the task, whereas those in the nonlimited theory condition sustained their learning and
improvements in performance over the full task.
These laboratory experiments indicate that reduced performance after previous selfcontrol exertion (i.e., “ego depletion”) results not from a true lack of resources but from
people’s beliefs about their self-control capacity. They raise important questions. First, many
goals in the real world demand sustained self-control. Can implicit theories about willpower
affect the extent to which people accomplish their goals and flourish in their daily lives? And
second, what mechanisms underlie the effects of willpower theories on sustained self-control?
Effects of Lay Theories About Willpower in Everyday Life
The strength model of self-control suggests that understanding the limits of self-control
capacity should help people use their limited resources wisely and therefore predict better selfregulation and well-being. People with a nonlimited theory, by contrast, may overuse their
resources and suffer from severe depletion when high demands accumulate (Vohs, Baumeister,
& Schmeichel, 2012). However, in contrast to this view, we hypothesized that a limited
resource theory leads people to let up on self-control efforts long before they have reached any
actual limit. If so, they may reduce their effort on everyday tasks and fail to accomplish their
goals, especially when they face high demands. But people with a nonlimited theory might
better sustain their efforts, improving their everyday self-regulation.

	

9	

Everyday self-regulation
In a first longitudinal study (Job et al., 2010, Study 4), we tracked college students
across three time points over an academic term, the last of which was during final exams. The
results showed that only students who endorsed a limited-resource theory (assessed with the
strenuous mental activity and the resisting temptations scale) self-regulated less effectively at
the stressful final time point, for instance reporting procrastinating more and eating more junk
food controlling for baseline self-regulation.
This study simply assumed that self-regulatory demands were high for all students as
final exams approached. A second study examined the level of self-regulatory demands each
student reported on a week-by-week basis so as to distinguish students who faced high
demands from those who faced lower demands (Job, Walton, Bernecker, & Dweck, 2015). As
predicted, although students with limited and nonlimited willpower theories faced similar levels
of self-regulatory demands, only those with a limited theory showed increasing self-regulation
failures (e.g., procrastination, junk food eating, bad time management) as demands increased.
In addition, this study assessed students’ end-of-term grade point average (GPA). Among
students who took a heavy course load, students with the nonlimited theory earned higher
grades than students with the limited theory.
A recent study extended these findings to people with diabetes, who face particularly
high and significant self-control challenges (Bernecker & Job, 2015a). To control their blood
sugar levels, people with diabetes have to adhere to a complex regimen involving regular blood
sugar testing, medication, a low-glycemic diet, and exercise throughout their entire life (Boule,
Haddad, Kenny, Wells, & Sigal, 2001; Brand-Miller, Petocz, Hayne, & Colagiuri, 2003).
Would lay theories about willpower predict how well patients adhere to their therapy? In a
correlational study, type 2 diabetes patients completed three theories about willpower scales
(resisting temptations, physical activity, strenuous mental activity) and measures assessing

	

10	

therapy adherence (i.e., blood glucose monitoring, diet, exercise) and psychological adjustment
(i.e., emotional distress, well-being, life quality). As predicted, participants with a limited
theory reported fewer self-care activities (full scale), a less healthy diet (resisting temptations
scale), and less physical activity (physical activity scale) than people with a nonlimited theory.
They also reported more emotional distress from the disease and experienced less subjective
well-being and reported a worse life quality. The belief that willpower is nonlimited seems to
be more adaptive for coping with the demands that arise from managing diabetes than the belief
that willpower is limited.
Personal goal-striving and well-being
Another important context of self-regulation involves the personal goals people set for
themselves, and their success in accomplishing them. For instance, a person may have the goal
to be admitted to a specific college or to lose ten pounds of weight. Personal goals are
conscious representations of anticipated end-states. They represent what people strive for and
want to achieve in life (Emmons, 1986; Klinger, 1977; Little, 1983). Several theorists propose
that having goals and striving for and achieving them is crucial for the development and
maintenance of well-being, because goals provide meaning, structure, and direction to a
person’s life as well as, when completed, a sense of accomplishment (Brunstein, 1993; Diener,
Suh, Lucas, & Smith, 1999; Emmons, 1986; Maier & Brunstein, 2001).
In early research on personal goal-striving, Mukhopadhyay and Johar (2005) showed
that measured and manipulated beliefs about self-control as depending on a limited or a
nonlimited resource and as either malleable versus fixed affected the number of New Years’
resolutions people set. People who thought that self-control is not limited set more New Years’
resolutions. Moreover, a second study showed that manipulating lay theories about willpower
affected people’s success in the keeping of their resolutions. Participants led to view willpower
as dependent on a limited resource were less likely to succeed four months later, especially if

	

11	

they had set difficult goals. It seems that they were more likely to give up in the face of
difficulties or setbacks.
To examine more directly whether lay theories of self-control predict goal attainment
most when demands accumulate, one of the above-mentioned longitudinal studies (Job et al.,
2010, Study 4) assessed self-regulation with respect to a personal achievement goal. At the first
assessment period, students listed a personal goal that involved challenge and achievement.
People were asked at each subsequent time point over the term how well they had regulated
themselves in pursuing this goal (e.g., “I was often not in the mood to do something for this
goal”). As predicted, during the demanding final exam week, students who had a limited theory
about willpower reported worse goal-related self-regulation than students with a nonlimited
theory. Another study found that with a limited resource theory even demands experienced on a
day-to-day basis can undermine self-regulatory efforts toward personal goals (Bernecker & Job,
2015b).
If people with a nonlimited theory make more progress toward to their personal goals,
do they experience greater well-being? In another set of studies, we first found a strong
relationship between theories about willpower and life-satisfaction as well as affective wellbeing (Bernecker, Herrmann, Brandstätter, & Job, 2015). The more people endorsed a
nonlimited theory about willpower the greater was their subjective well-being. Next, a
longitudinal study tested whether willpower theories predicted change in subjective well-being
over students’ first year in college. As expected, a limited theory about willpower predicted a
decline in subjective well-being from a period with low demands (i.e., the beginning of the first
year) to a period with high demands (i.e., final exams at the end of the first year). Another
longitudinal study replicated this finding using a daily diary method and, moreover, showed
that the gains in well-being for people with a nonlimited theory of willpower were mediated by
more effective goal striving and more progress toward personal goals over the course of the

	

12	

term (Bernecker et al., 2015, Study 3). These findings show that a nonlimited theory of
willpower does not just help people accomplish tasks in the face of demands. It does not just
make people better workers. It helps people accomplish goals—people’s own priorities for their
lives—and this improves their well-being.
Mechanisms
How does a limited theory about willpower undermine people’s efforts at self-control,
especially as demands accumulate? So far, several potential mechanisms have been explored:
perceived exhaustion, sensitivity to cues about the availability of resources, activation of the
goal to rest, and self-efficacy.
Perceived exhaustion
The first evidence that perceived exhaustion may play an important factor came from a
series of experiments conducted by Clarkson and colleagues, which found that a manipulation
of the exhaustion people perceived in a previous task affected subsequent self-control
performance, whereas actual self-control exertion did not (Clarkson, Hirt, Jia, & Alexander,
2010). Does a limited theory about willpower make people experience self-control exertion as
more exhausting, and is this what reduces subsequent performance? To test this question, we
assessed perceived exhaustion (“How exhausting was the task?”) in a study manipulating
implicit theories about willpower (Job et al., 2010, Study 3). Even though the manipulation
affected subsequent self-control performance, it had no effect on the degree to which people
perceived the “depleting” task as exhausting (see also Job, Bernecker, Miketta, & Friese, 2015).
Instead, willpower theories affected how people responded to the experience of exhaustion.
People in the limited willpower theory condition responded to feelings of exhaustion with
decrements in their subsequent self-control performance. The more exhausting they found the
first task, the worse they performed on the second task. This was not the case for people in the
nonlimited theory condition. Although they found the “depleting” task just as exhausting, for

	

13	

them, feelings of exhaustion were not a reason to let up on their self-control efforts. A limitedresource theory seems to attune people to experiences of exhaustion, and to take this as a sign
to let up.
Sensitivity to cues about the availability of resources
If people with a limited-resource theory are sensitive to perceived exhaustion, are they
sensitive to cues about the availability of mental resources more generally? This resource
sensitivity hypothesis is supported by another set of studies, which link theories about
willpower to the finding that ingested glucose, too, buffers the ego depletion effect (Job et al.,
2013).
Previous research showed that ingesting glucose can improve self-control performance
and buffer ego depletion (DeWall, Baumeister, Gailliot, & Maner, 2008; Gailliot et al., 2007).
Research suggests, however, that ingested glucose does not simply restore depleted energy
resources and directly fuel performance (Kurzban, 2010). In contrast, peripheral sensory
receptors in the mouth and digestive system, which are sensitive to glucose, can activate reward
regions in the brain and increase motivation (Chambers, Bridge, & Jones, 2009; Kringelbach,
2004; Kurzban, 2010). Merely rinsing the mouth with glucose, as compared to a sugarsubstitute, improves physical performance and mitigates ego depletion (Hagger &
Chatzisarantis, 2013; Molden et al., 2012; Sanders, Shirk, Burgin, & Martin, 2012). Thus,
people who have ingested glucose may perform better because these peripheral cues signal the
availability of energy, motivating them to sustain effort on difficult tasks. If a limited resource
theory sensitizes people to cues about the availability of resources, then theories about
willpower may moderate the effect of glucose on subsequent self-control performance.
Three experiments found evidence for this hypothesis (Job et al., 2013). Replicating
past research, people who reported holding a limited resource theory, or who were induced to
hold this theory, showed improved self-control performance following an initial demanding

	

14	

task when they had consumed glucose (lemonade with sugar) rather than a substitute (lemonade
with a sugar substitute). Yet, people with a nonlimited theory showed no such benefit. They
performed well regardless of whether they consumed the sugar or the nonsugar drink. This was
the case even though participants could not reliably distinguish the sugar from the nonsugar
drink in their self-reports. The results provide further evidence that self-control does not rely on
a limited physiological resource that is depleted by even brief acts of self-control and is
restored by glucose consumption (Gailliot & Baumeister, 2007; Gailliot et al., 2007; see
Kurzban, 2010; Molden et al., 2012). Instead, a limited-resource theory attunes people to cues
about the availability of resources, including cues below conscious awareness. They further
document how top down beliefs interact with bottom-up physiological information to influence
people’s self-regulatory success.
Activation of a rest goal
If a limited resource theory attunes people to cues to their internal states (perceived
exhaustion) and the availability of self-control resources (glucose), does it also activate the goal
to rest following self-control exertion? This hypothesis is consistent with the process model of
self-control (Inzlicht & Schmeichel, 2012; Inzlicht et al., 2014), which proposes that after
people exert self-control, they are no longer motivated to exert themselves and this is why
people perform worse on subsequent self-control tasks.
Because it is well documented that people possess limited introspective abilities that
often lead to invalid self-reports about inner motivational states (e.g., Silvia & Gendolla, 2001;
Wilson & Dunn, 2004) a series of studies assessed motivational shifts after “depletion” using
indirect implicit and behavioral indicators, including reaction times (RTs), object evaluations,
and actual resting (Job et al., 2015).
In one study, we tested whether people with a limited-resource theory would value
means to reach the goal to rest more strongly once they were “depleted.” We assumed that after

	

15	

engaging in a self-control task they would evaluate objects that are helpful for resting (bed,
sofa, hammock, cup of tea, bathtub, TV screen) more positively (see Ferguson & Bargh, 2004;
Fishbach, Shah, & Kruglanski, 2004). After reporting their theories about willpower and
completing the depletion manipulation, participants were asked how much they liked both
objects relevant to rest and objects relevant to physical or mental exertion (barbell, racing
bicycle, punching bag, treadmill, sneakers, Sudoku puzzles). As predicted, in the high“depletion” condition, the more people endorsed the limited-resource theory the more highly
they evaluated rest-conducive objects, and the more they devalued objects conducive to
physical and mental exertion. Willpower theories were not related to evaluations in the low
depletion condition. After self-control exertion, a limited-resource theory both inclines people
to value rest and recovery and disinclines activities that involve effort and exertion. A second
study found the same result after manipulating theories about willpower, confirming their
causal effect (Job et al., 2015, Study 3).
If people with a limited resource theory want to rest, do they rest more if given the
chance? In additional studies, a limited-resource theory—both measured and manipulated—led
people to rest longer following a “depleting” experience before continuing with another task. In
one study, only participants randomly assigned to a limited-theory condition and to a high
depletion condition took an excessively long time to complete an ostensible “product-tasting”
task in which they could lounge in comfortable chairs following the depletion task (Job et al.,
2015, Study 5).
These data show that the belief that willpower depends on a limited resource causes a
motivational shift toward rest following the exertion of self-control. The findings are consistent
with the process model of self-control, which denies the existence of a specialized self-control
resource and explains ego depletion effects through shifts in motivation and attention (Inzlicht
& Schmeichel, 2012; Inzlicht et al., 2014). That model postulates that after having expended

	

16	

effort in a strenuous task, people are less motivated to expend further effort. Our research adds
an important specification: Only people who think, or are led to think, that self-control relies on
a limited resource show the motivational shift toward rest.
Changes in self-efficacy
A recent line of research suggests changes in self-efficacy as a further mechanism
underpinning the effects of lay theories of willpower on self-control. Self-efficacy is the
“judgment of how well one can execute courses of action required to deal with prospective
situations” (Bandura, 1982, p. 122). People tend to prefer to engage effort in tasks that they
perceive themselves to be good at and to withdraw from tasks that seem difficult to them.
Chow and colleagues (2015) proposed that when people exert self-control their self-efficacy for
upcoming tasks is temporarily reduced, which impairs further performance. Moreover, they
suggest, this reduction in self-efficacy occurs only in people with a limited-resource theory.
People with a nonlimited theory about willpower should not react to self-control exertion with
reduced self-efficacy because for them exerting self-control does not imply a lack of available
resources (Chow, Hui, & Lau, 2015).
Three experiments supported this theorizing. First, they showed that people depleted by
an initial challenging self-control task reported reduced self-efficacy to exert further selfcontrol. A second study confirmed that this reduction in self-efficacy mediated the effect of
depletion on subsequent self-control performance. Finally, a third experiment confirmed that
only people with a limited theory about willpower showed this drop in self-efficacy following
self-control exertion. Moreover, the drop in self-efficacy mediated the moderating effect of a
limited willpower theory on subsequent self-control performance (Chow et al., 2015).
Relations among mechanisms
So far different research lines explored three different mechanisms explaining why a
limited theory about willpower leads to reduced self-control when demands accumulate. It is

	

17	

likely that these processes interact. For instance, the inference that cues (e.g., feelings of
exhaustion, lack of sleep, time since last snack) signal a lack of needed resources sets off two
motivational shifts: 1) a feeling of reduced self-efficacy (“I can’t do more”) and the activation
of a rest goal (“I want to rest”). Thus there may be a reciprocal relationship between these
processes dragging down people’s willingness and perceived ability to exert self-control. It is a
task for future research to examine these concurring processes and to integrate them into a
comprehensive model.
Boundaries and Possible Negative Consequences
The findings we have presented thus far suggest that a nonlimited theory about
willpower is more beneficial than a limited theory about willpower, both in laboratory selfcontrol tasks and in everyday self-regulation, goal-striving, and well-being. Could a nonlimited
theory be counterproductive in some circumstances?
Overuse of resources
Vohs and colleagues (2012) hypothesized that a nonlimited theory may lead people to
“overuse” resources, temporarily compensating for depleted resources, and thus improve selfcontrol performance in the face of mild or moderate self-control demands but not in the face of
high demands. In a laboratory experiment, they compared a “no depletion” condition (no initial
self-control tasks), a “mild depletion” condition (two initial self-control tasks), and a “severe
depletion” condition (four initial self-control tasks). Theories about willpower were
manipulated with the biased questionnaire. First, the study replicated our previous findings: In
the “mild depletion” condition participants led to think of willpower as a nonlimited resource
sustained a high level of performance. But in the “severe depletion” condition, there was no
positive effect of a nonlimited theory. Moreover, on one of two measures of self-control
performance the effect reversed. Participants in the severe depletion condition performed worse
when they had been led to think of willpower as nonlimited. Vohs and colleagues concluded

	

18	

that a nonlimited theory can be counterproductive. Thinking that willpower is nonlimited, they
suggest, “might undermine the normal tendency to conserve resources so that people find
themselves severely depleted after multiple tasks” (Muraven, Shmueli, & Burkley, 2006, p.
186).
As a laboratory session wears on, however, many factors beyond people’s self-control
capacity may affect their willingness to exert further effort on tasks of little personal relevance.
People in the severe depletion condition may simply have been unwilling to exert further effort
on such tasks, regardless of their willpower theory. Indeed, a nonlimited theory about
willpower would not be functional if it led people to engage on a high level with every task that
came along regardless of its value or purpose. Future research may distinguish the capacity to
exert self-control from the value or meaning of a task to the self, for instance by comparing
tasks of personal relevance to those without. However, from our perspective the critical test of
the functionality of willpower theories comes from field studies examining people’s efforts to
accomplish their own goals in their daily lives. As discussed earlier, examining students’ selfregulatory success in a demanding academic environment was predicted by a non-limited
theory, especially when they faced the greatest demands (Job et al., 2015). Further, among
people with type 2 diabetes who face high and significant self-regulatory demands, the nonlimited theory predicted greater therapy adherence (Bernecker & Job, 2015a).
Of course, it is possible that alternative processes may arise when people face extreme
physical or psychological circumstances (e.g., torture). As we have emphasized, a non-limited
theory is not an unlimited theory. The belief that willpower is not limited does not imply that
people think they can continue to control themselves and exert effort indefinitely without
needing to rest, sleep, or eat. What research on implicit theories shows is that, as compared to
the belief that willpower relies on a limited resource, the belief that willpower does not rely on
a limited resource simply helps people stay engaged for longer during the normal range of

	

19	

challenges they face in their daily lives. Put the other way: the limited-resource theory
undermines people’s self-control success by leading people to reduce effort and conserve their
“resources” long before they reach any true limits.
Interpersonal consequences
Most research on theories of willpower has examined people’s efforts to accomplish
their own goals. But if a person believes that willpower does not rely on a limited resource, do
they expect more not only from themselves but also from others? If other people fail to meet
these expectations, are nonlimited theorists less understanding and harsher in their judgments?
Although not examining limited-resource beliefs, one line of research found that peoples’
beliefs about willpower as either malleable or a fixed trait (measured and manipulated)
predicted harsher judgments of people with salient self-regulatory failures (e.g., to quit
smoking, to lose weight; Freeman, Shmueli, & Muraven, 2013). However, high expectations
can also be helpful in promoting people’s performance—when these expectations are
communicated in positive, growth-oriented ways (e.g., Cohen, Steele, & Ross, 1999; Lepper,
Woolverton, Mumme, & Gurtner, 1993). Future research can examine how individuals can
communicate a nonlimited theory about willpower in ways that support and improve other
people’s self-control.
Consequences for parenting
Mukhopadhyay and Yeung (2010) examined how lay theories about self-control affect
parenting. They theorized that parents who think of willpower as not reliant on a limited
resource would not sufficiently prioritize the development of self-control skills in their
children. They reasoned that “the belief that reserves of self-control are already large may
lessen the value of further developing these reserves” (p. 242). Accordingly, they expected that
parents with a limited theory about willpower, who in addition believe that the limited capacity
can be enlarged (limited, but malleable theorists), would engage more in behaviors that help

	

20	

develop children’s self-control as compared to parents with a nonlimited theory. Indeed, a
series of studies showed that parents who believed that willpower relies on a limited resource
but is malleable were more likely to restrict unhealthy snacking and fast-food consumption in
their children as compared to nonlimited-malleable theorists. They were further more likely to
choose educational television programs for their children. A manipulation of theories about
self-control (nonlimited vs. limited/fixed vs. limited/malleable) further confirmed their causal
effect. Adults led to believe that self-control does not rely on a limited resource were more
likely to choose gifts for a child that provided instant pleasure. But adults led to believe that
self-control is limited but malleable chose gifts that were more educational. They were further
convinced that their choice would have a positive effect on the child’s development. People
with a nonlimited theory did not emphasize the development of children’s self-control in their
choice. Apparently, they did not think it necessary to foster the development of self-control.
An important question concerns whether these behaviors, which were showed by
parents with a limited-malleable theory, are effective in promoting improved self-control in
children. Specifically, it is not clear whether restricting children’s food and toy related choices,
promotes the development of self-control. Could restricting a child’s freedom give the child
fewer opportunities to learn to restrain him or herself and, hence, rather undermine the
development of self-control?
An additional question involves the transmission of beliefs about willpower from
parents to children, and whether specific kinds of acts or ways of talking about willpower in
parents foster harmful beliefs in children about willpower (see Gunderson et al., 2013;
Haimovitz & Dweck, 2016). It is also important to keep in mind that the nonlimited willpower
theory helps people exert self-control especially in the face of challenge, and this predicts better
interpersonal outcomes (e.g., Moffitt et al., 2011; Tangney, Baumeister, & Boone, 2004).
Indeed, being able to control one’s impulses and regulate one’s emotions in the face of high

	

21	

demands may be particularly crucial in challenging parenting situations and therefore
contribute to relationship quality and functional parenting (Deater-Deckard, 2014; Valiente,
Lemery-Chalfant, & Reiser, 2007).
Future Directions: Exploring the Antecedents of Willpower Theories
So far, most research on implicit theories about willpower has focused on their
behavioral consequences in the laboratory and the field and mechanisms that explain these
effects. Yet little is known about their cultural, social, and developmental antecedents. Where
do willpower theories come from?
Social learning
Previous theoretical and empirical work suggests that one factor that shapes children’s
motivational beliefs, expectations, and values are their parent’s beliefs (Eccles, 1993;
Haimovitz & Dweck, 2016; Simpkins, Fredricks, & Eccles, 2012). For example, Simpkins and
colleagues (2012) showed that when parents value a certain domain, like sports or literature,
their children are more likely to develop an interest in that domain, too. How do parents’ beliefs
about willpower affect their children’s beliefs?
According to social learning theory (Bandura, 1971; Bandura & Walters, 1963; Olson &
Dweck, 2008), learning is a cognitive process that is tied to the social context of a person. One
crucial element of this process is the observation of other people’s behavior. Accordingly,
children acquire knowledge about social norms by observing what their parents and other
adults do, when they do it, and what consequences arise from this behavior. With regard to
children’s beliefs about willpower, we would assume that being raised by a person with a
limited theory about willpower exposes a child to numerous adult behaviors implying that the
capacity to exert effort is limited and that periods of hard work have to be followed by rest and
recovery. As described above, we have found that people with a limited-resource theory strive
for rest and recovery once they have exerted self-control (Job et al., 2015). Do parents with a

	

22	

limited theory rest more after they have exerted themselves as compared to parents with a
nonlimited theory? Do they talk more about the need to rest after they have worked hard?
Previous research further shows that parents communicate their theories of intelligence
in what they say to a child and by praise and feedback they provide to a child’s performance
(Gunderson et al., 2013; Haimovitz & Dweck, 2016; Mueller & Dweck, 1998).	Do parents with
a limited theory communicate to their child, explicitly or implicitly, that their child needs to
rest after having worked hard (“You deserve a break!”)? If so, do children of parents who have
a limited theory infer that one has to rest after (demanding) work before being able to function
well again?
Cultural background
A recent series of studies (Savani & Job, 2017) explored cross-cultural differences in
willpower theories, which might inform their cultural roots. We found that in the United States,
people tend to endorse a limited theory about willpower. Interestingly, in India, a country with
a strong self-control tradition, we found the opposite—people tended to believe that completing
strenuous mental tasks is energizing. Moreover, Indians exhibit a reversed ego-depletion effect.
They performed better after an initial demanding task, especially if they endorsed a nonlimited
theory of willpower—that is, who believed that exerting self-control is energizing.
These cultural differences could have their roots in philosophical traditions. Numerous
religious traditions originating in India, including Hinduism, Jainism, and Buddhism, advocate
the frequent exertion of self-control not just for monks and nuns but for lay people in their daily
lives (Bronkhorst, 1993; Mosher, 2005; Walsh & Shapiro, 2006). Characteristics of the Indian
schooling system as compared to the US might further contribute to the cross-cultural
differences in theories about willpower. The workload of students in India is considerably
higher than in the US putting less emphasis on breaks and times for recovery (Larson & Verma,

	

23	

1999; Verma, Sharma, & Larson, 2002). Such a practice communicates to students that
sustained mental effort is possible.
Future research should systematically investigate cultural differences in willpower
beliefs and the socio-cultural mechanisms that perpetuate them. An interdisciplinary approach,
including sociological and/or historical perspectives may generate knowledge of both
theoretical and practical relevance. Indeed, research on the origins of willpower beliefs could
inform, for instance, educational reforms and social policies on how to promote the
development of nonlimited willpower theories in children and adults.
Interventions
Although a limited-resource theory might be functional in some situations, the
accumulated evidence documents its costs. When people face high self-control demands those
with a limited theory show impaired self-regulation, goal-attainment, and well-being. An
important direction for future research is to develop interventions that can help people adopt a
nonlimited theory about willpower and self-regulate more effectively when they face high
demands, such as in challenging academic programs or when a chronic disease requires a
careful lifestyle change). Indeed, how to improve people’s self-regulatory outcomes is a
pressing issue (Diamond, 2012; Duckworth, Grant, Loew, Oettingen, & Gollwitzer, 2011).
Previous field-experiments show that it is possible to change people’s implicit theories
about intelligence and personality in field settings, with beneficial consequences including for
academic performance (Aronson, Fried, & Good, 2002; Blackwell, Trzesniewski, & Dweck,
2007; Paunesku et al., 2015; Yeager, Romero, et al., 2016) and social outcomes (e.g., Yeager,
Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2013). Such interventions give people information (e.g., scientific
reports) about the nature of human qualities and help them internalize this information using
powerful persuasive techniques, such as “saying-is-believing” exercises in which people

	

24	

advocate for the intervention message to others (see Aronson, 1999; Yeager & Walton, 2011).
Could this approach change people’s beliefs about willpower?
An important caution is that it would not be fruitful for people to infer that self-control
is easy—that they have ample resources to resist temptation, say, and thus need not take normal
steps to make self-regulation easier (e.g., putting the cookies on a high shelf). Ironically, simply
learning that willpower is stronger than one might have supposed could backfire. People could
feel encouraged to put themselves in situations they are ill-equipped to deal with (e.g., keeping
temptations close at hand in the belief that they will be able to resist them indefinitely).
In a currently ongoing project, we have started to develop such an intervention. In a first
study, participants did not learn that willpower is ample. Instead, materials emphasized that
how you think about willpower matters, and you can choose how you think about it. They then
thought of a person who struggles with willpower, and wrote a letter of advice to this person
describing these ideas. In a first randomized field experiment with students enrolled in their
first year at the university, we found that, for students who faced high academic demands, the
intervention improved their academic self-regulation (i.e., time spent on academic tasks) and
semester grades (Job, Flückiger, Bernecker, Lieb, & Mata, 2017). This gain was found relative
to a control group exposed to parallel but psychologically neutral (in terms of theories about
willpower) material that addressed time-management. Thus, when confronted with high
demands, students in the nonlimited willpower theory condition were able to scale up their
academic effort to achieve greater success. Although these results are promising, many
questions remain. Can such an intervention produce long-term change in people’s willpower
theories and self-regulatory success? If so, what recursive processes contribute to lasting
change? Can such an intervention be scaled-up to benefit a wide population? Can it be adapted
to help non-student populations that face specific challenges, such as people trying to make
lifestyle changes to manage a chronic disease?

	

25	

Conclusion
Research on lay theories on self-control suggests that one reason people may fail to
control themselves or have trouble reaching their personal goals involves their beliefs about
self-control resources, not a true lack of resources. This approach does not deny that a person is
in part an energy-based system. Obviously, people need food to function well, they get tired,
and they need sleep. But in the normal range of self-regulatory demands people face in
everyday life there is not a narrow energy-based constraint on self-control capacity. However,
in a social and cultural context that promulgates the belief that willpower depends on a highly
limited resource—including in the strength model of self-control itself—people can easily
believe in such a constraint, and thus attend and respond to minor fluctuations in their available
resources. This belief then itself limits people’s willpower.
Although research on willpower theories began as an alternative view of self-control, it
extends beyond a mere critique of the strength model. Not only does it suggest that ego
depletion is not an inevitable state determined by basic physiological processes. It further
informs our understanding of processes, including self-efficacy and rest-goal activation, which
contribute to self-regulatory performance, personal goal striving, and well-being when selfregulatory demands arise. Thus, it brings top-down processes back into focus in self-regulation
research, and shows that seemingly fixed, physiological principles can, at least in part, be
created and modulated by people’s beliefs and expectations.

	

26	

References
Aronson, E. (1999). The power of self-persuasion. American Psychologist, 54, 584–588.
Aronson, J., Fried, C. B., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the effects of stereotype threat on
African American college students by shaping theories of intelligence. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 113–125.
Bandura, A. (1971). Social learning theory. New York, NY: General Learning Press.
Bandura, A. (1982). Self-efficacy mechanism in human agency. American Psychologist, 37,
122–147.
Bandura, A., & Walters, R. H. (1963). Social learning and personality development (Vol. 14).
New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Baumeister, R. F., Bratslavsky, E., Muraven, M., & Tice, D. M. (1998). Ego depletion: Is the
active self a limited resource? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 1252–
1265.
Baumeister, R. F., & Heatherton, T. F. (1996). Self-regulation failure: An overview.
Psychological Inquiry, 7, 1-15.
Bernecker, K., Hermann, M., Brandstätter, V., & Job, V. (2015). Implicit theories about
willpower predict subjective well-being. Journal of Personality.
Bernecker, K., & Job, V. (2015a). Beliefs about willpower are related to therapy adherence and
psychological adjustment in patients with type 2 Diabetes. Basic and Applied Social
Psychology, 37, 188–195.
Bernecker, K., & Job, V. (2015b). Beliefs about willpower moderate the effect of previous day
demands on next day’s expectations and effective goal striving. Frontiers in
Psychology, 6, 1496.
Bernecker, K., & Job, V. (in press). Implicit theories about willpower in resisting temptations
and emotion control. Journal of Psychology.

	

27	

Blackwell, L. S., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Implicit theories of intelligence
predict achievement across an adolescent transition: A longitudinal study and an
intervention. Child Development, 78, 246–63.
Boule, N. G., Haddad, E., Kenny, G. P., Wells, G. A., & Sigal, R. J. (2001). Effects of exercise
on glycemic control and body mass in type 2 diabetes mellitus: A meta-analysis of
controlled clinical trials. Journal of the American Medical Association, 286, 1218–1227.
Brand-Miller, J., Petocz, P., Hayne, S., & Colagiuri, S. (2003). Low-glycemic index diets in the
management of diabetes: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Diabetes
Care, 26, 2261–2267.
Bronkhorst, J. (1993). The two traditions of meditation in ancient India. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass.
Brown, C. M., & McConnell, A. R. (2011). Discrepancy-based and anticipated emotions in
behavioral self-regulation. Emotion, 11, 1091–5.
Brunstein, J. C. (1993). Personal goals and subjective well-being: A longitudinal study. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 1061–1070.
Carter, E. C., Kofler, L. M., Forster, D. E., & McCullough, M. E. (2015). A series of metaanalytic tests of the depletion effect: Self-control does not seem to rely on a limited
resource. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 144, 796-815.
Chambers, E. S., Bridge, M. W., & Jones, D. A. (2009). Carbohydrate sensing in the human
mouth: Effects on exercise performance and brain activity. The Journal of Physiology,
587, 1779–1794.
Chow, J. T., Hui, C. M., & Lau, S. (2015). A depleted mind feels inefficacious: Ego-depletion
reduces self-efficacy to exert further self-control. European Journal of Social
Psychology, 45, 754-768.

	

28	

Clarkson, J. J., Hirt, E. R., Jia, L., & Alexander, M. B. (2010). When perception is more than
reality: The effects of perceived versus actual resource depletion on self-regulatory
behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 98, 29–46.
Cohen, G. L., Steele, C. M., & Ross, L. D. (1999). The Mentor’s Dilemma: Providing Critical
Feedback Across the Racial Divide. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25,
1302–1318.
Deater-Deckard, K. (2014). Family matters: Intergenerational and interpersonal processes of
executive function and attentive behavior. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
23, 230-236.
DeWall, C. N., Baumeister, R. F., Gailliot, M. T., & Maner, J. K. (2008). Depletion Makes the
Heart Grow Less Helpful: Helping as a Function of Self-Regulatory Energy and Genetic
Relatedness. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 34, 1653-1662.
Diamond, A. (2012). Activities and programs that improve children’s executive functions.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 21, 335–341.
Diener, E., Suh, E. M., Lucas, R. E., & Smith, H. L. (1999). Subjective well-being: Three
decades of progress. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 276–302.
Duckworth, A. L., Grant, H., Loew, B., Oettingen, G., & Gollwitzer, P. M. (2011). Selfregulation strategies improve self-discipline in adolescents: Benefits of mental
contrasting and implementation intentions. Educational Psychology, 31, 17–26.
Dweck, C. S. (1999). Self-theories: Their role in motivation, personality and development.
Philadelphia, PA: Taylor & Francis.
Eccles, J. S. (1993). School and family effects on the ontogeny of children’s interests, selfperceptions, and activity choices. In R. Dienstbier (Series Ed.) & J. E. Jacobs (Vol. Ed.),
Nebraska Symposium on Motivation: 1992. Developmental perspectives on motivation
(Vol. 40, pp. 145–208). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.

	

29	

Emmons, R. A. (1986). Personal strivings: An approach to personality and subjective wellbeing. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 1058-1068.
Ferguson, M. J., & Bargh, J. A. (2004). Liking is for doing: The effects of goal pursuit on
automatic evaluation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87, 557–572.
Finkel, E. J., DeWall, C. N., Slotter, E. B., Oaten, M., & Foshee, V. A. (2009). Self-regulatory
failure and intimate partner violence perpetration. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 97, 483-499.
Fischer, P., Greitemeyer, T., & Frey, D. (2008). Self-regulation and selective exposure: The
impact of depleted self-regulation resources on confirmatory information processing.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 94, 382-395.
Fishbach, A., Shah, J. Y., & Kruglanski, A. W. (2004). Emotional transfer in goal systems.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 40, 723– 738.
Freeman, N., Shmueli, D., & Muraven, M. (2013). Lay theories of self-control influence
judgments of individuals who have failed at self-control. Journal of Applied Social
Psychology, 43, 1418–1427.
Gailliot, M. T., & Baumeister, R. F. (2007). The physiology of willpower: Linking blood
glucose to self-control. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 11, 303–327.
Gailliot, M. T., Baumeister, R. F., DeWall, C. N., Maner, J. K., Plant, E. A., Tice, D. M,
Brewer, L. E., & Schmeichel, B. J. (2007). Self-control relies on glucose as a limited
energy source: Willpower is more than a metaphor. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 92, 325–336.
Gottfredson, M. R., & Hirschi, T. (1990). A general theory of crime. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.

	

30	

Gunderson, E. A., Gripshover, S. J., Romero, C., Dweck, C. S., Goldin-Meadow, S., & Levine,
S. C. (2013). Parent Praise to 1-3 Year-Olds Predicts Children’s Motivational
Frameworks 5 Years Later. Child Development, 84, 1526–1541.
Hagger, M. S., Wood, C., Stiff, C., & Chatzisarantis, N. L. (2010). Ego depletion and the
strength model of self-control: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 136, 495-525.
Hagger, M. S., & Chatzisarantis, N. L. D. (2013). The sweet taste of success: The presence of
glucose in the oral cavity moderates the depletion of self-control resources. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 39, 28–42.
Haimovitz, K., & Dweck, C. S. (2016). What predicts children’s fixed and growth intelligence
mind-sets? Not their parents’ views of intelligence but their parents’ views of failure.
Psychological Science, 27, 859-869.
Inzlicht, M., & Schmeichel, B. J. (2012). What is ego depletion? Toward a mechanistic revision
of the resource model of self-control. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7, 450–
463.
Inzlicht, M., Schmeichel, B. J., & Macrae, C. N. (2014). Why self-control seems (but may not
be) limited. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 18, 127–133.
Inzlicht, M., McKay, L., & Aronson, J. (2006). Stigma as ego depletion: How being the target
of prejudice affects self-control. Psychological Science, 17, 262–269.
Job, V., Bernecker, K., Miketta, S., & Friese, M. (2015). Implicit theories about willpower
predict the activation of a rest goal following self-control exertion. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 109, 694-706.
Job, V., Dweck, C. S., & Walton, G. M. (2010). Ego depletion—Is it all in your head? Implicit
theories about willpower affect self-regulation. Psychological Science, 21, 1686–1693.

	

31	

Job, V., Flückiger, L., Bernecker, K., Lieb, R. & Mata, J. (2017). An implicit theories about
willpower intervention helps students to deal with demands: Effects on academic selfregulation and grades. Manuscript in preparation.
Job, V., Walton, G. M., Bernecker, K., & Dweck, C. S. (2013). Beliefs about willpower
determine the impact of glucose on self-control. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 110, 14837–14842.
Job, V., Walton, G. M., Bernecker, K., & Dweck, C. S. (2015). Implicit theories about
willpower predict self-regulation and grades in everyday life. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 108, 637–647.
Klinger, E. (1977). Meaning and void: Inner experience and the incentive in people’s lives.
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Kringelbach, M. L. (2004). Food for thought: Hedonic experience beyond homeostasis in the
human brain. Neuroscience, 126, 807–819.
Kurzban, R. (2010). Does the brain consume additional glucose during self-control tasks?
Evolutionary Psychology, 8, 244–259.
Larson, R. W., & Verma, S. (1999). How children and adolescents spend time across the world:
Work, play, and developmental opportunities. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 701-736.
Lepper, M. R., Woolverton, M., Mumme, D. L., & Gurtner, J. (1993). Motivational techniques
of expert human tutors: Lessons for the design of computer-based tutors. In S. P. Lajoie
& S. J. Derry (Eds.), Computers as cognitive tools (pp. 75-105). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Little, B. (1983). Personal projects: A rationale and method for investigation. Environment and
Behavior, 15, 273-309.
Loschelder, D. D., & Friese, M. (in press). Moderators of the ego depletion effect. In E. R. Hirt
(Ed.), Self-regulation and ego control. San Diego, CA: Elsevier.

	

32	

Maier, G. W., & Brunstein, J. C. (2001). The role of personal work goals in newcomers’ job
satisfaction and organizational commitment: A longitudinal analysis. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 86, 1034-1042.
Masicampo, E. J., Martin, S. R., & Anderson, R. A. (2014). Understanding and Overcoming
Self-control Depletion. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 8, 638–649.
Martijn, C., Tenbült, P., Merckelbach, H., Dreezens, E., & De Vries, N. K. (2002). Getting a
grip on ourselves: Challenging expectancies about loss of energy after self-control.
Social Cognition, 20, 441–460.
Miller, E. M., Walton, G. M., Dweck, C. S., Job, V., Trzesniewski, K. H., & McClure, S. M.
(2012). Theories of willpower affect sustained learning. PLoS ONE, 7, e38680.
Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., & Rodriguez, M. I. (1989). Delay of gratification in children. Science,
244, 933–938.
Moffitt, T. E., Arseneault, L., Belsky, D., Dickson, N., Hancox, R. J., & Harrington, H. (2011).
A gradient of childhood self-control predicts health, wealth, and public safety.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108, 2693–2698.
Molden, D. C., Hui, C. M., Scholer, A. A., Meier, B. P., Noreen, E. E., D’Agostino, P. R., &
Martin, V. (2012). Motivational versus metabolic effects of carbohydrates on selfcontrol. Psychological Science, 23, 1137–1144.
Moller, A. C., Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2006). Choice and ego-depletion: The moderating
role of autonomy. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 32, 1024-1036.
Mosher, L. (2005). Praying: The Rituals of Faith (Vol. 2). New York, NY: Seabury Books.
Mueller, C. M., & Dweck, C. S. (1998). Praise for intelligence can undermine children's
motivation and performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 33-52.

	

33	

Mukhopadhyay, A., & Johar, G. V. (2005). Where there is a will, is there a way? Effects of lay
theories of self-control on setting and keeping resolutions. Journal of Consumer
Research, 31, 779–786.
Mukhopadhyay, A., & Yeung, C. W. (2010). Building character: Effects of lay theories of selfcontrol on the selection of products for children. Journal of Marketing Research, 47,
240–250.
Muraven, M., Shmueli, D., & Burkley, E. (2006). Conserving self-control strength. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 91, 524–537.
Muraven, M., & Slessareva, E. (2003). Mechanisms of self-control failure: Motivation and
limited resources. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29, 894–906.
Muraven, M., Tice, D. M., & Baumeister, R. F. (1998). Self-control as limited resource:
Regulatory depletion patterns. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 774–
789.
Olson, K. R., & Dweck, C. S. (2008). A blueprint for social cognitive development.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 3, 193–202.
Paunesku, D., Walton, G. M., Romero, C., Smith, E. N., Yeager, D. S., & Dweck, C. S. (2015).
Mind-set interventions are a scalable treatment for academic underachievement.
Psychological Science, 26, 784-793.
Salmon, S. J., Adriaanse, M. A., De Vet, E., Fennis, B. M., & De Ridder, D. T. D. (2014).
“When the going gets tough, who keeps going?” Depletion sensitivity moderates the
ego-depletion effect. Frontiers in Psychology, 5, 647.
Sanders, M. A., Shirk, S. D., Burgin, C. J., & Martin, L. L. (2012). The gargle effect: Rinsing
the mouth with glucose enhances self-control. Psychological Science, 23, 1470–1472.

	

34	

Savani, K., & Job, V. (2017). Is ego-depletion a cultural phenomenon? Acts of self-control
improve subsequent performance in cultures in which willpower exertion is believed to
be energizing. Manuscript in preparation.
Schmeichel, B. J., Vohs, K. D., & Baumeister, R. F. (2003). Intellectual performance and ego
depletion: Role of the self in logical reasoning and other information processing.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 33-64.
Silvia, P. J., & Gendolla, G. H. E. (2001). On introspection and self- perception: Does selffocused attention enable accurate self-knowledge? Review of General Psychology, 5,
241–269.
Simpkins, S. D., Fredricks, J. A., & Eccles, J. S. (2012). Charting the Eccles’ expectancy-value
model from mothers' beliefs in childhood to youths' activities in adolescence.
Developmental Psychology, 48, 1019–1032.
Tangney, J. P., Baumeister, R. F., & Boone, A. L. (2004). High self-control predicts good
adjustment, less pathology, better grades, and interpersonal success. Journal of
Personality, 72, 271–324.
Tice, D., Baumeister, R., Shmueli, D., & Muraven, M. (2007). Restoring the self: Positive
affect helps improve self-regulation following ego depletion. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 43, 379–384.
Valiente, C., Lemery-Chalfant, K., & Reiser, M. (2007). Pathways to problem behaviors:
chaotic homes, parent and child effortful control, and parenting. Social Development,
16, 249-267.
Verma, S., Sharma, D., & Larson, R. W. (2002). School stress in India: Effects on time and
daily emotions. International Journal of Behavioral Development, 26, 500-508.
Vohs, K. D., Baumeister, R. F., & Ciarocco, N. J. (2005). Self-regulation and self-presentation:
Regulatory resource depletion impairs impression management and effortful self-

	

35	

presentation depletes regulatory resources. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 88, 632–657.
Vohs, K. D., Baumeister, R. F., & Schmeichel, B. J. (2012). Motivation, personal beliefs, and
limited resources all contribute to self-control. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 48, 943–947.
Vohs, K. D., & Faber, R. J. (2007). Spent resources: Self-regulatory resources availability
affects impulse buying. Journal of Consumer Research, 33, 537-547.
Walsh, R., & Shapiro, S. L. (2006). The meeting of meditative disciplines and Western
psychology: A mutually enriching dialogue. American Psychologist, 61, 227-239.
Webb, T. L., & Sheeran, P. (2003). Can implementation intentions help to overcome egodepletion? Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 53, 5–13.
Wilson, T. D., & Dunn, E. W. (2004). Self-knowledge: Its limits, value, and potential for
improvement. Annual Review of Psychology, 55, 493–518.
Yeager, D. S., Romero, C., Paunesku, D. Hulleman, C. S., Schneider, B., Hinojosa, C., Lee, H.
Y., O’Brien, J., Flint, K., Roberts, A., Trott, J., Greene, D., Walton, G. M., & Dweck, C.
S. (2016). Using design thinking to improve psychological interventions: The case of
the growth mindset during the transition to high school. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 108, 374-391.
Yeager, D. S, Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2013). An implicit theories of personality
intervention reduces adolescent aggression in response to victimization and exclusion.
Child Development, 84, 970–988.
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological interventions in education:
They’re not magic. Review of Educational Research, 81, 267–301.

	

36	

Table	1.	Items	to	measure	implicit	theories	about	willpower	for	strenuous	mental	activity	
(Job	et	al.,	2010)	
	
Strenuous	mental	activity	
1. Strenuous	mental	activity	exhausts	your	resources,	which	you	need	to	refuel	
afterwards	(e.g.	through	taking	breaks,	doing	nothing,	watching	television,	eating	
snacks).	
2. After	a	strenuous	mental	activity,	your	energy	is	depleted	and	you	must	rest	to	
get	it	refuelled	again.	
3. When	you	have	been	working	on	a	strenuous	mental	task,	you	feel	energized	and	
you	are	able	to	immediately	start	with	another	demanding	activity.		
4. Your	mental	stamina	fuels	itself.	Even	after	strenuous	mental	exertion,	you	can	
continue	doing	more	of	it.	
5. When	you	have	completed	a	strenuous	mental	activity,	you	cannot	start	another	
activity	immediately	with	the	same	concentration	because	you	have	to	recover	
your	mental	energy	again.	
6. After	a	strenuous	mental	activity,	you	feel	energized	for	further	challenging	
activities.	

	
R	
R	
	
	
R	
	

Note.	R	=	reversed	items	

	

37	

Table	2.	Biased	questionnaires	to	manipulate	implicit	theories	about	willpower	(Job	et	al.,	
2010)		
	
Induction	of	limited-resource	theory	
1. When	you	think	over	a	matter	with	great	concentration,	it	can	be	sometimes	tiring.	
2. Working	on	a	strenuous	mental	task	can	make	you	feel	tired	much	so	that	you	need	a	break	
before	accomplishing	a	new	task.	
3. When	you	have	to	do	many	demanding	activities	for	a	while,	you	eventually	get	exhausted	
and	less	productive.	
4. Sometimes,	when	you	completely	focus	your	attention	on	a	demanding	mental	activity,	you	
feel	tired	and	you	need	a	break	sooner	or	later	since	your	resources	have	to	be	refilled.	
5. After	you	have	been	working	on	a	strenuous	mental	task	for	several	hours	you	can	get	
fatigued	so	that	you	need	to	rest	before	taking	on	the	next	challenging	activity.	
6. Strenuous	mental	activity	sometimes	exhausts	your	resources,	which	you	need	to	refuel	
afterwards	(e.g.	through	breaks,	doing	nothing,	watching	television,	eating….).	
7. After	a	strenuous	mental	activity	your	energy	can	be	depleted	and	you	sometimes	must	rest	
to	get	it	refuelled	again.	
8. Sometimes,	when	you	have	completed	a	very	exhausting	mental	activity,	you	have	to	recover	
your	mental	energy	again	before	starting	with	the	same	concentration	on	a	new	difficult	task.	
Resisting	temptations	
1. Sometimes,	it	can	be	very	inspiring	to	think	over	a	matter	with	great	concentration.	
2. When	situations	accumulate	that	challenge	you	with	temptations,	it	gets	more	and	more	
difficult	to	resist	the	temptations.	
3. It	can	be	energizing	to	be	completely	focused	on	a	demanding	mental	activity,	so	that	you	are	
able	to	remain	concentrated	for	a	while.	
4. Sometimes,	it	is	energizing	to	be	fully	absorbed	with	a	demanding	mental	task.	
5. It	can	be	energizing	to	be	completely	focused	on	a	demanding	mental	activity,	so	that	you	can	
remain	concentrated	for	a	long	time.	
6. Sometimes,	your	mental	stamina	fuels	itself.	After	a	strenuous	mental	exertion	you	can	
continue	doing	more	of	it.	
7. It	is	possible	to	be	in	such	a	productive	work	mode	that	you	don’t	need	much	recreation	
between	different	mentally	strenuous	tasks.	
8. Working	on	a	strenuous	mental	task	can	activate	your	mental	resources	and	you	become	
even	better	at	accomplishing	subsequent	demanding	tasks.	

	

	

38	

INAUGURAL ARTICLE

Beliefs about willpower determine the impact of
glucose on self-control
Veronika Joba,1, Gregory M. Waltonb, Katharina Berneckera, and Carol S. Dweckb,1
a

Department of Psychology, University of Zurich, 8050 Zurich, Switzerland; and bDepartment of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305

This contribution is part of the special series of Inaugural Articles by members of the National Academy of Sciences elected in 2012.

Past research found that the ingestion of glucose can enhance selfcontrol. It has been widely assumed that basic physiological
processes underlie this effect. We hypothesized that the effect
of glucose also depends on people’s theories about willpower.
Three experiments, both measuring (experiment 1) and manipulating (experiments 2 and 3) theories about willpower, showed
that, following a demanding task, only people who view willpower as limited and easily depleted (a limited resource theory)
exhibited improved self-control after sugar consumption. In contrast, people who view willpower as plentiful (a nonlimited resource theory) showed no beneﬁts from glucose—they exhibited
high levels of self-control performance with or without sugar
boosts. Additionally, creating beliefs about glucose ingestion (experiment 3) did not have the same effect as ingesting glucose for
those with a limited resource theory. We suggest that the belief
that willpower is limited sensitizes people to cues about their
available resources including physiological cues, making them dependent on glucose boosts for high self-control performance.
self theories

| implicit theories | ego depletion | cognitive performance

“Ideas set free beliefs, and the beliefs set free our wills.”
—William James, The Energies of Man (1907, p. 14) (1)

n intriguing ﬁnding in recent years is that the short-term
ingestion of glucose can improve a variety of basic cognitive
and self-regulatory functions including episodic memory, information processing, attention, and self-control (2–5). For instance, studies show that the ingestion of glucose can prevent the
drop in self-control performance that can otherwise follow the
exertion of self-control (6–8), improving such things as persistence and the inhibition of impulses.
In suggesting a close relationship between glucose and cognitive and self-regulatory outcomes, these ﬁndings raise fundamental questions about how physiological and psychological
processes intersect. Popular theories suggest that glucose directly
fuels brain functions, which would otherwise suffer from a lack of
glucose (9–11). These theories can be taken to suggest that optimal performance on everyday cognitive and self-regulatory tasks
requires frequent glucose boosts.
Given the centrality of cognitive performance and self-regulation for human functioning and welfare in general, it would be
striking if these functions were so fragile as to depend to a signiﬁcant extent on the short-term ingestion of glucose (12, 13).
Research shows that various processes in the body (such as
glucose release from the liver) assure that under normal conditions the brain has ample energy supplies for neuronal functioning (14). Moreover, numerous studies show that self-control
performance can be restored by various psychological manipulations (e.g., positive mood, mindfulness meditation) without
glucose ingestion (15–18). Taken together, these ﬁndings imply
that brain functions are unlikely to depend on the short-term
intake of glucose (14, 19). Why then does glucose ingestion
improve self-control performance?

A

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1313475110

In contrast to the “brain-fueling” hypothesis, we hypothesized
that a culturally shaped belief common in modern society creates
conditions in which glucose facilitates cognitive performance and
self-regulation. If this is the case, it would mean that many of the
limits in self-control attributed to a lack of glucose are imposed
largely by our society and ourselves. Our reasoning is consistent
with the classic theorizing of William James, who wrote, “We live
subject to inhibition by degrees of fatigue which we have come
only from habit to obey” (1, p. 5).
Is it only from habit—stemming from a common cultural belief—that the ingestion of glucose affects subsequent cognitive
and self-regulatory performance? With a particular focus on selfcontrol, we hypothesized that the pervasive belief that willpower
is limited and easily depleted can cause people to become dependent on glucose boosts for optimal functioning. This belief,
which we call a limited resource theory of willpower, may sensitize people to cues about their available resources and their
capacity to sustain a high level of self-control. Glucose ingestion
and the physiological processes it triggers may serve as one such
cue, signaling to people who believe that willpower is highly
limited that they have the capacity to sustain effort.
How might glucose ingestion signal people with a limited resource theory that they have sufﬁcient resources? One route suggested by previous research involves peripheral sensory receptors
(e.g., in the mouth and digestive system), which activate dopaminergic pathways connected to reward regions in the brain (20, 21).
For instance, recent studies ﬁnd that merely rinsing the mouth
with glucose without ingesting it can improve self-control performance (22–24). Thus, people who have ingested glucose may
perform better because these peripheral cues signal the likely
availability of energy, motivating them to sustain effort on difﬁcult tasks (25–27). In the present research, we hypothesized
that such cues are relevant only for people who think that willpower is a limited resource, because only these people are concerned about the availability of mental resources and expect that
their capacity for self-control will diminish as a consequence of the
exertion of self-control.
Signiﬁcance
The present research provides critical new ﬁndings about the
role of glucose ingestion in self-control and cognitive performance. It argues against the popular view that self-control
depends on a limited physiological resource (blood glucose) that
is depleted by even brief acts of self-control and is restored by
glucose consumption. Instead, the results highlight the critical
role of beliefs about willpower in self-control performance.
Author contributions: V.J., G.M.W., and C.S.D. designed research; V.J. and K.B. performed
research; V.J. analyzed data; and V.J., G.M.W., and C.S.D. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
See QnAs on page 14818.
1

To whom correspondence may be addressed. E-mail: v.job@psychologie.uzh.ch or
dweck@stanford.edu.

PNAS | September 10, 2013 | vol. 110 | no. 37 | 14837–14842

PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES

Contributed by Carol S. Dweck, July 18, 2013 (sent for review January 19, 2013)

Our proposal draws on past research that examined people’s
beliefs about the nature of willpower (28). One belief, as noted
above, is the belief that willpower is limited and easily depleted
(assessed with questions like “After a strenuous mental activity,
your energy is depleted and you must rest to get it refueled
again”). The other belief, which we call the nonlimited resource
theory,* is the idea that willpower is not easily used up but can
even be activated through the exertion of self-control (e.g.,
“After a strenuous mental activity, you feel energized for further
challenging activities”). Job et al. (28) found that only people with
a limited resource theory performed more poorly on cognitive
and self-control tasks as demands on self-control accumulated.
People who believed—or who had been led to believe—that
willpower is nonlimited continued to perform well on a series
of tasks regardless of whether they had previously exerted selfcontrol or not.
Importantly, this past research provides initial evidence that
people with a limited resource theory perform worse after a
demanding task because they are sensitive to cues about the
availability of mental resources. Although people induced to
hold a limited resource theory and a nonlimited theory of willpower found an initial demanding task equally fatiguing, only for
those with the limited resource theory did the extent to which
they found the task fatiguing predict worse performance on the
next self-control task.
If a limited resource theory sensitizes people to cues about the
availability of resources, one such cue could be glucose and the
physiological response it triggers (22). If so, only people with
a limited resource theory about willpower should exhibit glucosedependent self-control performance. By contrast, people with a
nonlimited theory of willpower should perform well regardless
of whether they have consumed glucose or not.
Moreover, if it is really the belief that accounts for differences
in the reaction to glucose ingestion and not a preexisting difference between groups (e.g., in glucose tolerance), then the
same ﬁndings should emerge both when willpower theories are
measured as an individual difference and when they are manipulated experimentally.
Overview of Studies
Three experiments tested the joint effect of lay theories about
willpower and glucose ingestion on self-control performance
following an initial demanding task. Lay theories about willpower were measured in experiment 1 and manipulated in
experiments 2 and 3 to test their causal effect. In experiment 3,
the belief that one had ingested sugar was additionally manipulated to see whether the mere belief would have the same effect
as actually ingested glucose. Across all studies, we predicted that
only people with a limited resource theory of willpower would
show poor performance following a demanding task and improved performance with the ingestion of glucose.
Experiment 1
Experiment 1 tested the effects of ingesting a sugar drink as
opposed to an artiﬁcially sweetened drink on self-control after
a demanding task. We predicted, as noted, that this effect would
differ as a function of people’s lay theory about willpower. Participants (n = 87) were recruited for a study on perception of
food and tasks. Following past studies, they were asked not to eat
or drink anything but water in the 2 h before the study (8, 9).
During the session, participants ﬁrst completed several scales
including the implicit theories about willpower scale (six items)

*The term nonlimited should not be confused with unlimited. People with a nonlimited
theory of willpower reject the view that willpower is highly constrained and easily depleted (e.g., by a relatively modest act of mental exertion). However, such people do not
necessarily view willpower as limitless and are not immune to depletion from highly
strenuous tasks of long duration.

14838 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1313475110

(28). Next, they drank and evaluated lemonade sweetened with
either sugar (140 calories) or a sugar substitute (0 calories). We
allowed 10 min to pass before the key dependent measure
(the time prescribed by past research for glucose to exert its
physiological effect) (9). During this time, all participants completed a demanding self-control task that required them to override a previously established habit (crossing out every “e” in a text)
based on a more complex rule that required them to cross out
some “e’s” but not others (29, 30). Finally, as the primary outcome, participants completed a computer-based Stroop task,
a frequently used measure of self-control (31). Color words
appeared on a screen in a font color that was either congruent
(48 trials) or incongruent (48 trials) with the color name. Participants were instructed to identify as quickly as possible the
font color. When the word-color combination is incongruent
(e.g., the word “green” written in red), participants must inhibit
the interfering word meaning to respond with the correct font
color. As a measure of self-control performance on the Stroop
task, we examined the difference in reaction time between congruent and incongruent trials (Stroop interference).
Conﬁrming the success of random assignment, there were no
differences between the sugar and nonsugar conditions in participants’ theories of willpower or any other variable assessed
before the tasting task. However, although participants could not
detect whether they had consumed a sugar or a nonsugar beverage (χ2 < 1), they liked the sugar drink (mean = 4.66, SD =
1.45) more than the sugar-substitute drink (mean = 3.67, SD =
1.53) [t(85) = 3.15, P = 0.002]. We therefore included the liking
of the beverage as a covariate in our analyses. Including this
covariate did not alter the results.
A hierarchical regression analysis of Stroop interference was
conducted with control variables in the ﬁrst block,† experimental
condition (sugar = 0, nonsugar =1) and lay theories about willpower (centered) in the second block, followed by their interaction term in the third block.
Neither the main effect of drink condition nor the main effect
of lay theories about willpower was signiﬁcant; their interaction,
however, was signiﬁcant [b = 30.62, seb = 14.56, ΔR2 = 0.05, t(78) =
2.10, P = 0.04]. Fig. 1 displays Stroop interference as a function
of drink condition and willpower theory (for participants 1 SD
above and below the mean). Participants with a limited resource
theory who consumed the nonsugar drink show greater Stroop
interference than the other three groups. A simple slopes analysis yielded a signiﬁcant effect of drink condition for participants
with a limited resource theory [b = 43.34, seb = 20.52, t(78) =
2.11, P = 0.04]. Their self-control performance was better in the
sugar condition than in the nonsugar condition. However, participants with a nonlimited theory showed no difference between
the sugar and nonsugar conditions [t(78) < 1]. If anything, they
performed more poorly in the sugar condition. Further, theories
about willpower predicted Stroop performance within the nonsugar condition [b = 21.72, seb = 10.77, t(78) = 2.02, P = 0.05].
Without sugar, participants with a limited theory performed
more poorly than those with a nonlimited theory. Within the
sugar condition, theories about willpower were not related to
performance [t(78) ≤1].‡
These results demonstrate that the effect of glucose on selfcontrol after a demanding task depends on people’s theories
†

First, age was controlled for, because it is known to predict Stroop performance (32). In
the third block, it had a marginal effect [β = −0.15, t(79) = −1.39, P = 0.17]. Second, we
included a dummy variable for the two laboratory rooms where participants were
seated. The rooms differed in the intrusion of outside noise, which may explain a slight
difference in Stroop performance between them [β = −0.20, t(79) = −1.86, P = 0.07].
Finally, accuracy (the total number of errors on the Stroop task) was included [β = 0.22,
t(78) = 2.10, P = 0.04] to control for speed-accuracy tradeoffs.

‡

The same analyses with accuracy as the dependent variable did not yield signiﬁcant
results either in experiment 1 or in experiment 3.

Job et al.

Stroop Interference

Limited Theory (+1 SD)
140
120
100
80
60

Sugar Drink

Sugar-Substitute Drink

Fig. 1. Mean Stroop interference (reaction time to incongruent trials – reaction time to congruent trials) in milliseconds as a function of drink condition and implicit theories about willpower at ±1 SD (experiment 1).

about willpower. Only people with a limited theory of willpower
performed better after consuming glucose.
Experiment 2
Experiment 2 manipulated theories about willpower to test their
causal effect. It also sought to extend our ﬁndings to a different
measure of cognitive performance. Theories of willpower were
manipulated by having participants (n = 62) complete a biased
eight-item questionnaire that was altered from the original
questionnaire by adding words like “can” or “sometimes” to
foster agreement with either a limited theory (e.g., “Working on
a strenuous mental task can make you feel tired such that you
need a break before accomplishing a new task.”) or a nonlimited
theory (e.g., “Sometimes, working on a strenuous mental task
can make you feel energized for further challenging activities.”)
(28). Next, participants completed the same tasting task as in
experiment 1, followed by a 10-min task requiring self-control.
For the latter task, participants wrote about a recent trip without
using the letters “a” or “n” (33, 34). As the dependent measure,
participants were then given eight moderately difﬁcult nonverbal
IQ problems. Each problem contained a series of geometric
ﬁgures. Participants were asked to identify from a set of possible
solutions the ﬁgure that completed the series. This type of intellectual performance requires active self-regulation and is
particularly susceptible to decrements after self-control exertion
(35). Participants had 20 s to ﬁnd the correct solution to each IQ
problem. The number of problems answered incorrectly served
as the measure of (poor) self-control performance. By using a
different task to tax self-control and a different dependent measure of self-control, experiment 2 ensures that the effects observed are not speciﬁc to the tasks used in experiment 1.
As in experiment 1, participants were unable to detect what kind
of beverage they had consumed [χ2(1) = 1.10, P = 0.29]. In addition, in this study, there was no effect of sugar vs. nonsugar on
participants’ reported liking of the beverage [t(60) = 1.11, P = 0.27].
To test whether the theories of willpower manipulation moderated the effects of sugar, we conducted an ANOVA on the
total number of failed IQ problems. The predicted interaction
was signiﬁcant [F(1,58) = 5.16, P = 0.03, η2 = 0.08; Fig. 2].
Paralleling the results of experiment 1, simple-effects analyses
revealed that participants in the limited theory condition performed more poorly in the nonsugar condition than in the sugar
condition [F(1,58) = 6.32, P = 0.01, η2 = 0.10]. However, participants in the nonlimited theory condition showed no effect of
drink condition [F(1,58) = 0.52, P = 0.47, η2 = 0.01]. Further,
within the sugar-substitute condition, participants in the nonlimited theory condition performed better than participants in
Job et al.

Experiment 3
The major aim of experiment 3 was to replicate the ﬁndings of
experiments 1 and 2 and to examine the impact of beliefs about
the glucose content of the beverage. We suggested that a limited
theory sensitizes people to cues that can tell them about the
availability or nonavailability of resources that might be relevant
to the exertion of self-control, such as feelings of fatigue (28) and
the ingestion of glucose (experiments 1 and 2). Experiment 3
tested whether the belief that one has consumed sugar would
have the same effect as actually consuming sugar and improve
self-control performance among people with a limited theory
about willpower.§ Would a limited willpower theory sensitize
people to both top-down cues (the belief that one has consumed
sugar) and bottom-up cues (bodily cues that might result from
the ingestion of sugar) or would it sensitize people to bodily cues
alone (22)? At the same time, the study tests whether a nonlimited theory of willpower liberates people from a dependence
on both kinds of cues.
Additionally, we removed the restriction that participants not
eat or drink for 2 h before the study to make the ﬁndings more
widely applicable. Removing the restriction also provided a more
stringent test of our hypothesis that those with a limited willpower theory are sensitive to local cues, because participants
were not deprived of glucose at the start of the study and any
deﬁcit in willpower would come solely from their experience with
the depleting task.
Participants (n = 154) completed one of the two versions
of the biased questionnaire to manipulate their theories about
willpower. Then they performed the tasting task (consuming a
sugar or sugar-substitute drink). Fully crossed with the drink
manipulation used in experiments 1 and 2 was a third manipulation. Participants were told that the drink contained either
sugar or a sugar substitute. During the subsequent 10 min, all
participants performed a thought suppression task requiring selfcontrol. They were asked to write down all their thoughts on a
piece of paper without thinking about a white bear (36).{ As in
experiment 1, participants then completed a Stroop task as the
dependent measure of self-control performance. Finally, they
completed a manipulation check for the sugar-expectation manipulation. When asked whether they believed the drink was
ﬂavored with sugar or a sugar substitute, all participants agreed
with their assigned sugar-expectation description.
There was no effect of induced theories or beliefs about sugar
(or their interaction) on liking of the beverage, and the two
beverages did not differ in how much they were liked.
We entered the Stroop interference scores into a 2 (drink
condition: nonsugar vs. sugar) × 2 (theory condition: nonlimited vs. limited) × 2 (sugar-expectation condition: nonsugar vs.
sugar) ANOVA.jj Replicating experiments 1 and 2, there was

§

In experiments 1 and 2, participants were asked at the end of the study whether they
thought the beverage contained sugar or a sugar substitute. These retrospective reports
did not predict performance or interact with theories about willpower or
glucose ingestion.

{

jj

The thought suppression task was followed by several questions about participants’
overall mood. There were no effects of the experimental manipulations on these questions and they were unrelated to subsequent self-control performance.

To follow the same analytic approach as study 1, analyses controlled for age and accuracy on the Stroop task. In study 3, these were not signiﬁcant covariates [F(1,139) < 1]
and removing them does not change the results. We did not control for different laboratory rooms, because all participants worked in cubicles in the same room.

PNAS | September 10, 2013 | vol. 110 | no. 37 | 14839

INAUGURAL ARTICLE

Nonlimited Theory (-1 SD)
160

the limited theory condition [F(1,58) = 6.47, P = 0.01, η2 = 0.10].
In the sugar condition, there was no effect of induced theory
[F(1,58) = 0.29, P = 0.59, η2 = 0.01].
The results replicate experiment 1, show that the effect of willpower theories on responses to glucose ingestion is causal, and
extend the effect to another measure of cognitive performance.

PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES

180

Nonlimited Theory
Incorrect IQ Problems

4.5

Limited Theory

4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0

Sugar Drink

Sugar-Substitute Drink

Fig. 2. Mean number of incorrect IQ problems as a function of drink condition and induced theory about willpower condition (experiment 2).

a signiﬁcant interaction between theory condition and drink condition [F(1,139) = 5.28, P = 0.02, η2 = 0.04; Fig. 3]. Participants in
the limited theory condition showed better Stroop performance
when they had consumed glucose compared with sugar substitute [F(1,139) = 6.53, P = 0.01, η2 = 0.04]. For participants in
the nonlimited theory condition, the glucose content of the
drink did not affect Stroop performance [F(1,139) < 1]. Within
the sugar-substitute condition, participants in the nonlimited
theory condition outperformed participants in the limited theory condition [F(1,139) = 4.45, P = 0.04, η2 = 0.03]. In the sugar
condition, there was no effect of induced theory [F(1,139) =
1.15, P = 0.29, η2 = 0.01].
The main effect of the sugar expectation condition and its
interactions with both drink condition and theory condition were
all non signiﬁcant [Fs(1,141) < 1]. Those with a limited willpower
theory were not swayed by explicit information about whether
they had ingested glucose. They were swayed only by internal
cues that resulted from the consumption of a drink with or
without sugar.**
Replicating experiment 2, experiment 3 shows that people led
to think of willpower as reliant on a limited resource became
dependent on glucose: they exerted self-control more successfully after having consumed glucose than not and they performed
worse without glucose than participants led to think of willpower
as nonlimited. Furthermore, the data indicate that for people
with a limited resource theory, just believing that they had consumed sugar did not improve performance. They seem to be
sensitive speciﬁcally to internal signals about the availability
of resources.
General Discussion
This research shows that a seemingly basic physiological process,
the effect of glucose ingestion on self-control, depends on cultural beliefs about the nature of willpower. Replicating past research, we found that glucose ingestion can improve self-control
and cognitive performance following the exertion of self-control
(8). However, this effect occurred only when people endorsed

**Although there was no effect of beliefs about sugar consumption on Stroop interference (reaction time to incongruent − congruent trials), an interesting pattern emerged on
reaction times overall. Analysis across all trials with HLM yielded a signiﬁcant three-way
interaction between theory condition (nonlimited = 0, limited = 1), drink condition (nonsugar = 0, sugar = 1), and sugar expectation condition (nonsugar = 0, sugar = 1) [b = 43.88,
seb = 15.17, t(11800) = 2.89, P = 0.004]. Being told that the drink contained sugar made
participants with a limited theory who had in fact consumed a diet beverage respond
faster overall [b = −38.64, seb = 8.31, t(2811) = −4.65, P = 0.001]. However, it did not affect
their capacity for self-control, as shown by the null effect of the sugar expectation condition on Stroop interference.

14840 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1313475110

the theory that willpower relies on a limited resource or had
been led to endorse this belief experimentally. When people
believed instead that willpower is not limited (experiment 1) or
when they had been led to endorse this belief (experiments 2 and
3), they did not need glucose to sustain high levels of self-control
performance. A nonlimited theory of willpower liberates people
from the need for constant glucose boosts to exert self-control
successfully. Put the other way around, the performance enhancing effect of glucose arises in part because people behave in
the context of a cultural belief that willpower is limited and
readily depleted.
These results provide compelling evidence against the theory
that self-control really does rely on a limited physiological resource that is depleted by even brief acts of self-control and is
restored by glucose consumption (8, 11). Again, only those who
believe that willpower relies on a limited resource show poor
performance without sugar and a replenishment effect with
sugar. We suggest that those who believe that willpower is not
highly limited show no replenishment effect when given sugar
because they do not need one and/or because they are not vigilant for cues about the availability of mental energy. Future research may further analyze and test these mechanisms. However,
by demonstrating that glucose boosts are not necessary for
people with a nonlimited resource theory, our results suggest
that failures in self-control, at least in the normal course of
events, do not result from a ﬁxed physiological constraint involving a shortage in the supply of glucose.
This conclusion should not be taken to imply that glucose is
irrelevant to human functioning. We do not doubt that glucose is
the major fuel of cerebral processes (14, 37). Indeed, because the
brain cannot afford to run out of glucose, the body contains
redundant mechanisms to ensure its supply (14, 19, 38).
The implication that people do not need frequent sugar boosts
to self-regulate effectively is especially important in a society that
faces an epidemic of obesity and glucose-related disorders (e.g.,
type II diabetes) (39, 40). The present ﬁndings suggest that cultivating a culture in which people understand that willpower is
not highly limited but rather self-generating—teaching that selfcontrol begets self-control—may liberate people from the need
for frequent sugar boosts or a dependence on other momentary
internal or external cues that signal the availability of resources in
their everyday lives (e.g., hunger, hours of sleep, time of the day,
social conventions to take a break). Previous research has shown
that it is possible to change people’s beliefs about the malleability
of other aspects of the self, such as intelligence and personality,
and that doing so can improve intellectual and interpersonal

140
120

Stroop Interference

5.0

Nonlimited Theory
Limited Theory

100
80
60
40
20

Sugar Drink

Sugar-Substitute Drink

Fig. 3. Mean Stroop interference (reaction time to incongruent trials – reaction time to congruent trials) in milliseconds as a function of drink condition and induced theory about willpower condition (experiment 3).

Job et al.

Methods
Experiment 1. Participants and design. Eighty-seven students at a US university
(50 females, Mage = 20.83) participated in a “study on food and task perception” in exchange for course credit or $10. Participants were asked not to
eat or drink anything but water for 2 h before the study. There were two
independent variables: participants’ implicit theory of willpower (measured)
and glucose vs. nonglucose ingestion (manipulated).
Procedure. Participants took part individually. The procedure followed past
studies on glucose ingestion and self-control (8, 10). Instructions and tasks
were presented on a computer to ensure standardization across participants.
First, participants provided informed consent and demographic information,
reported their current hunger and thirst, reported when and what they last
ate and drank, and completed several scales. Embedded among these was
the theories about willpower scale (six items) (28). Items included “After
a strenuous mental activity your energy is depleted and you must rest to get
it refueled again” (limited theory) and “Your mental stamina fuels itself;
even after strenuous mental exertion you can continue doing more of it”
(nonlimited theory) (1 = strongly agree, 6 = strongly disagree). Items referring to the limited theory were reverse-scored so that higher values
represent greater agreement with the limited resource theory (α= 0.81,
mean = 4.17, SD = 0.74).
Next, following past research (8), participants drank 14 oz of Kool-Aid
lemonade described only as “a beverage.” The drink was sweetened with either sugar (140 calories) or a sugar substitute (Splenda; 0 calories). To bolster
the cover story, participants then evaluated the drink’s taste and appearance.
Again following past research, we allowed 10 min to pass before the key
dependent measure (the time prescribed by past research to allow glucose to
exert its physiological effects) (10). During this time, all participants completed a task used in previous research, which requires people to exert selfcontrol (18, 29, 30). This paper-and-pencil task, described as a “stimulus
detection task,” consisted of two parts each lasting 5 min. First, all participants crossed out every “e” on a page of typewritten text; this is designed
to establish a behavioral pattern. Next, they performed a version of the task
with complex rules that required them to inhibit the previously established
response in certain instances (e.g., not to cross out “e’s” followed by vowels).
Finally, participants completed a computer-based Stroop task, which
provided the critical self-control outcome. Color words appeared on the
screen (red, green, yellow, blue) in a font color that was either congruent or
incongruent with the meaning of the word. On each of 96 trials (48 incongruent), participants were instructed to press a key marked with the color
the word was written in. On incongruent trials, the meaning of the word
interferes with naming its color and has to be suppressed. Only correct Stoop
trials (95%) were included in the analysis. Data were corrected on the trial
level (i.e., identifying outlying trials within each individual) and on the group
level (i.e., identifying outliers on Stroop interference). Outlying trials were
deﬁned as ≥3 SDs from each individual’s mean within each trial category
(congruent and incongruent) and were removed from analyses. Removing
outlying trials led to the exclusion of 1.08% of all correct trials (48). Stroop
interference was calculated by subtracting the mean reaction time for
congruent trials from the mean reaction time for incongruent trials. Two
participants were identiﬁed as statistical outliers on the Stroop interference
score, >3 SDs above the mean, and removed from analyses.

Job et al.

Experiment 2. Participants. Sixty-two members of a Swiss university participant
pool (40 females; Mage = 25.62) took part in exchange for 10 Swiss francs. As
in experiment 1, participants were asked not to eat or drink anything but
water in the 2 h before the study.
Materials and procedure. First, we manipulated lay theories about willpower.
Following a procedure validated in past research (28), participants completed
a biased eight-item questionnaire (translated into German) formulated to
foster agreement with either a limited theory (e.g., “Working on a strenuous mental task can make you feel tired such that you need a break before
accomplishing a new task”) or a nonlimited theory (e.g., “Sometimes,
working on a strenuous mental task can make you feel energized for further
challenging activities”) (1 = strongly agree, 6 = strongly disagree). Onesample t tests comparing the mean in each condition to the scale midpoint
(3.50) indicated that participants agreed with the suggested theory in both
the limited theory condition [mean = 2.19; t(31) = −12.63, P < 0.001] and the
nonlimited theory condition [mean = 2.32; t(30) = −9.00, P < 0.001].
Next, participants completed the same tasting task as in experiment 1,
followed by a 10-min writing task, used in previous research that require selfcontrol (33, 34). Participants wrote about a recent trip without using the
letters “a” or “n.”
As the dependent measure, participants were then given eight moderately
difﬁcult IQ problems. They were asked to select which of ﬁve ﬁgures best
completed a series of ﬁgures, with 20 s allotted to each problem. The number
of IQ problems not answered correctly served as the measure of poor selfcontrol performance (35).
As in experiment 1, participants then reported whether they thought the
beverage they had drunk contained sugar or a sugar substitute, completed
the suspicion check, and were debriefed.
Experiment 3. Participants. One hundred ﬁfty-four German students (128
female, Mage = 22.78) took part in a study on “perception of tastes and tasks”
in exchange for 5 Euros.
Procedure. As in experiment 2, participants were randomly assigned to
complete one of the two versions of the biased questionnaire to manipulate
lay theories about willpower. They then performed the tasting task. Fully
crossed with the drink manipulation used in experiments 1 and 2 (i.e., sugar
vs. sugar substitute) was a third manipulation. Participants were told the
drink contained either sugar or a sugar substitute. As in the previous studies,
they then drank the full beverage before evaluating it. During the subsequent 10 min, all participants performed a task requiring self-control. They
were asked to write down all their thoughts on a piece of paper without
thinking about a white bear (36). Every time they thought of a white bear
they were asked to make a mark in the margin of the paper.
Finally, participants completed a Stroop task, which was slightly altered
from that used in experiment 1. The proportion of incongruent trials was
reduced to one-third to make a correct response on these trials more difﬁcult
(49, 50). To keep the number of incongruent and congruent trials equal, we
therefore included control trials in which only a colored square appeared. In
total, participants completed 130 trials, 10 practice trials followed by 40
trials of each kind (congruent, incongruent, and control) in a random order.
Only reaction times for correct trials were included in the analysis. Reaction
times were trimmed as in experiment 1, which led to the exclusion of 1.37%
of all correct trials. Stroop interference was calculated by subtracting the
mean reaction time for congruent trials from the mean reaction time for
incongruent trials. Five participants were identiﬁed as statistical outliers
and removed from analyses (two were >3 SDs above the mean in the
Stroop interference; three answered fewer than half of the incongruent
trials correctly).
At the end of the study, participants were asked what they thought the study
was about; no participant guessed the study’s purpose. In addition, a manipulation check conﬁrmed that all participants believed the manipulation of the
description of the drink (i.e., as containing sugar vs. a sugar substitute).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Susanne Anrig, Krishna Savani, Martin
Sutnar, Ariane Wepfer, and Rebecca Wheeler for invaluable assistance. This
research was supported by Swiss National Science Foundation Fellowship
PZ00P1-131858 (to V.J.).

PNAS | September 10, 2013 | vol. 110 | no. 37 | 14841

INAUGURAL ARTICLE

At the end of the study, participants were asked whether they thought the
beverage they had drunk contained sugar or a sugar substitute and what they
thought the study was about; no participant guessed the study’s purpose.
Finally, participants were debriefed and reimbursed.

PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES

outcomes in a relatively enduring way (41–43). Future research
should test whether interventions that foster a nonlimited theory
of willpower can help people sustain high levels of self-control in
important real-world settings.
Is just believing that willpower is not highly limited sufﬁcient
for successful self-control? Certainly not, but it may be an important ingredient. People also need effective self-regulation
strategies to put this understanding to work. Such strategies
might involve arranging situations to minimize temptations (e.g.,
keeping junk food out of the house; blocking Facebook while
trying to study) or planning in advance when, where, and how to
act or respond to difﬁculties (e.g., “If I feel like having a chocolate snack I’ll go and get a fruit cup.”) (44–47). With a nonlimited mindset and effective strategies, people may exert selfcontrol over an extended period without frequent glucose boosts.
As William James (1) suggested more than a century ago, people
have far greater capacity to exert self-control than they may
believe—or than a simple glucose model would suggest.

1. James W (1907) The energies of men. Science 25(635):321–332.
2. Leigh Gibson E, Green MW (2002) Nutritional inﬂuences on cognitive function:
Mechanisms of susceptibility. Nutr Res Rev 15(1):169–206.
3. Hoyland A, Lawton CL, Dye L (2008) Acute effects of macronutrient manipulations on
cognitive test performance in healthy young adults: A systematic research review.
Neurosci Biobehav Rev 32(1):72–85.
4. Messier C (2004) Glucose improvement of memory: A review. Eur J Pharmacol
490(1-3):33–57.
5. Smith MA, Riby LM, Eekelen JAM, Foster JK (2011) Glucose enhancement of human
memory: A comprehensive research review of the glucose memory facilitation effect.
Neurosci Biobehav Rev 35(3):770–783.
6. Dewall CN, Baumeister RF, Gailliot MT, Maner JK (2008) Depletion makes the heart
grow less helpful: Helping as a function of self-regulatory energy and genetic relatedness. Pers Soc Psychol Bull 34(12):1653–1662.
7. Gailliot MT, Peruche BM, Plant EA, Baumeister RF (2009) Stereotypes and prejudice in
the blood: Sucrose drinks reduce prejudice and stereotyping. J Exp Soc Psychol 45(1):
288–290.
8. Gailliot MT, et al. (2007) Self-control relies on glucose as a limited energy source:
Willpower is more than a metaphor. J Pers Soc Psychol 92(2):325–336.
9. Donohoe RT, Benton D (2000) Glucose tolerance predicts performance on tests of
memory and cognition. Physiol Behav 71(3-4):395–401.
10. Donohoe RT, Benton D (1999) Blood glucose control and aggressiveness in females.
Pers Individ Dif 26(5):905–911.
11. Gailliot MT, Baumeister RF (2007) The physiology of willpower: Linking blood glucose
to self-control. Pers Soc Psychol Rev 11(4):303–327.
12. Beedie CJ, Lane AM (2012) The role of glucose in self-control: Another look at the
evidence and an alternative conceptualization. Pers Soc Psychol Rev 16(2):143–153.
13. Kurzban R (2010) Does the brain consume additional glucose during self-control
tasks? Evol Psychol 8(2):244–259.
14. Peters A, et al. (2004) The selﬁsh brain: Competition for energy resources. Neurosci
Biobehav Rev 28(2):143–180.
15. Clarkson JJ, Hirt ER, Jia L, Alexander MB (2010) When perception is more than reality:
The effects of perceived versus actual resource depletion on self-regulatory behavior.
J Pers Soc Psychol 98(1):29–46.
16. Egan PM, Hirt ER, Karpen SC (2012) Taking a fresh perspective: Vicarious restoration
as a means of recovering self-control. J Exp Soc Psychol 48(2):457–465.
17. Friese M, Messner C, Schaffner Y (2012) Mindfulness meditation counteracts selfcontrol depletion. Conscious Cogn 21(2):1016–1022.
18. Tice DM, Baumeister RF, Shmueli D, Muraven M (2007) Restoring the self: Positive
affect helps improve self-regulation following ego depletion. J Exp Soc Psychol 43(3):
379–384.
19. Coker RH, Kjaer M (2005) Glucoregulation during exercise : The role of the neuroendocrine system. Sports Med 35(7):575–583.
20. Berridge KC, Robinson TE (1998) What is the role of dopamine in reward: Hedonic
impact, reward learning, or incentive salience? Brain Res Brain Res Rev 28(3):309–369.
21. Kringelbach ML (2004) Food for thought: Hedonic experience beyond homeostasis in
the human brain. Neuroscience 126(4):807–819.
22. Molden DC, et al. (2012) Motivational versus metabolic effects of carbohydrates on
self-control. Psychol Sci 23(10):1137–1144.
23. Hagger MS, Chatzisarantis NLD (2013) The sweet taste of success: The presence of
glucose in the oral cavity moderates the depletion of self-control resources. Pers Soc
Psychol Bull 39(1):28–42.
24. Sanders MA, Shirk SD, Burgin CJ, Martin LL (2012) The gargle effect: Rinsing the
mouth with glucose enhances self-control. Psychol Sci 23(12):1470–1472.
25. Inzlicht M, Schmeichel BJ (2012) What is ego depletion? Toward a mechanistic revision of the resource model of self-control. Perspect Psychol Sci 7(5):450–463.
26. Scholey AB, Sünram-Lea SI, Greer J, Elliott J, Kennedy DO (2009) Glucose enhancement of memory depends on initial thirst. Appetite 53(3):426–429.

14842 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1313475110

27. Wang XT, Dvorak RD (2010) Sweet future: Fluctuating blood glucose levels affect
future discounting. Psychol Sci 21(2):183–188.
28. Job V, Dweck CS, Walton GM (2010) Ego depletion—Is it all in your head? Implicit
theories about willpower affect self-regulation. Psychol Sci 21(11):1686–1693.
29. Baumeister RF, Bratslavsky E, Muraven M, Tice DM (1998) Ego depletion: Is the active
self a limited resource? J Pers Soc Psychol 74(5):1252–1265.
30. Wheeler SC, Briñol P, Hermann AD (2007) Resistance to persuasion as self-regulation:
Ego-depletion and its effects on attitude change processes. J Exp Soc Psychol 43(1):
150–156.
31. Inzlicht M, Gutsell JN (2007) Running on empty: Neural signals for self-control failure.
Psychol Sci 18(11):933–937.
32. West R, Alain C (2000) Age-related decline in inhibitory control contributes to the
increased Stroop effect observed in older adults. Psychophysiology 37(2):179–189.
33. Schmeichel BJ (2007) Attention control, memory updating, and emotion regulation
temporarily reduce the capacity for executive control. J Exp Psychol Gen 136(2):
241–255.
34. Schmeichel BJ, Harmon-Jones C, Harmon-Jones E (2010) Exercising self-control increases approach motivation. J Pers Soc Psychol 99(1):162–173.
35. Schmeichel BJ, Vohs KD, Baumeister RF (2003) Intellectual performance and ego depletion: Role of the self in logical reasoning and other information processing. J Pers
Soc Psychol 85(1):33–46.
36. Wegner DM, Schneider DJ, Carter SR, 3rd, White TL (1987) Paradoxical effects of
thought suppression. J Pers Soc Psychol 53(1):5–13.
37. Attwell D, Laughlin SB (2001) An energy budget for signaling in the grey matter of
the brain. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 21(10):1133–1145.
38. Hitze B, et al. (2010) How the selﬁsh brain organizes its supply and demand. Front
Neuroenergetics 2(7):1–13.
39. Wang Y, Beydoun MA, Caballero B, Kumanyika SK (2008) Will all Americans become
overweight or obese? Estimating the progression and cost of the US obesity epidemic.
Obesity 16(10):2323–2330.
40. Wild S, Roglic G, Green A, Sicree R, King H (2004) Estimates for the year 2000 and
projections for 2030. Diabetes Care 27(5):1047–1053.
41. Aronson J, Fried CB, Good C (2002) Reducing the effects of stereotype threat on
African American college students by shaping theories of intelligence. J Exp Soc
Psychol 38(2):113–125.
42. Blackwell LS, Trzesniewski KH, Dweck CS (2007) Implicit theories of intelligence predict achievement across an adolescent transition: A longitudinal study and an intervention. Child Dev 78(1):246–263.
43. Yeager DS, Trzesniewski KH, Dweck CS (2013) An implicit theories of personality intervention reduces adolescent aggression in response to victimization and exclusion.
Child Dev 84(3):970–988.
44. Duckworth AL, Grant H, Loew B, Oettingen G, Gollwitzer PM (2011) Self‐regulation
strategies improve self‐discipline in adolescents: Beneﬁts of mental contrasting and
implementation intentions. Educ Psychol UK 31(1):17–26.
45. Magen E, Gross JJ (2007) Harnessing the need for immediate gratiﬁcation: Cognitive
reconstrual modulates the reward value of temptations. Emotion 7(2):415–428.
46. Stadler G, Oettingen G, Gollwitzer PM (2010) Intervention effects of information
and self-regulation on eating fruits and vegetables over two years. Health Psychol
29(3):274–283.
47. Webb TL, Sheeran P (2003) Can implementation intentions help to overcome egodepletion? J Exp Soc Psychol 39(3):279–286.
48. Salvatore J, Shelton JN (2007) Cognitive costs of exposure to racial prejudice. Psychol
Sci 18(9):810–815.
49. Carter CS, et al. (2000) Parsing executive processes: Strategic vs. evaluative functions
of the anterior cingulate cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97(4):1944–1948.
50. Logan GD, Zbrodoff NJ (1979) When it helps to be misled: Facilitative effects of increasing the frequency of conﬂicting stimuli in a Stroop-like task. Mem Cognit 7(3):
166–174.

Job et al.

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
2015, Vol. 108, No. 4, 637– 647

© 2015 American Psychological Association
0022-3514/15/$12.00 http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/pspp0000014

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Implicit Theories About Willpower Predict Self-Regulation and Grades
in Everyday Life
Veronika Job

Gregory M. Walton

University of Zurich

Stanford University

Katharina Bernecker

Carol S. Dweck

University of Zurich

Stanford University

Laboratory research shows that when people believe that willpower is an abundant (rather than highly
limited) resource they exhibit better self-control after demanding tasks. However, some have questioned
whether this “nonlimited” theory leads to squandering of resources and worse outcomes in everyday life
when demands on self-regulation are high. To examine this, we conducted a longitudinal study, assessing
students’ theories about willpower and tracking their self-regulation and academic performance. As
hypothesized, a nonlimited theory predicted better self-regulation (better time management and less
procrastination, unhealthy eating, and impulsive spending) for students who faced high self-regulatory
demands. Moreover, among students taking a heavy course load, those with a nonlimited theory earned
higher grades, which was mediated by less procrastination. These findings contradict the idea that a
limited theory helps people allocate their resources more effectively; instead, it is people with the
nonlimited theory who self-regulate well in the face of high demands.
Keywords: implicit theories about willpower, self-regulation, grades

high demands on self-control. Instead, we propose that an alternative belief—the belief that willpower is not easily used up and
can even be fueled by the exertion of self-control (a nonlimited
theory)—promotes more successful self-regulation and performance when people encounter challenging self-regulatory demands.

Do people’s beliefs about the nature of self-control affect their
ability to exert self-control in everyday life settings? If so, what
beliefs are most functional? One hypothesis is suggested by the
strength model of self-control (Baumeister, Bratslavsky, Muraven,
& Tice, 1998; Baumeister, Vohs, & Tice, 2007). This model
proposes that self-control relies on a limited resource and that
understanding this limit helps people use this resource judiciously,
improving self-regulation especially when demands on self-control
are high (Vohs, Baumeister, & Schmeichel, 2012). In the present
research, however, we propose the opposite, namely, that this
limited-resource theory undermines people’s self-regulatory efforts and, moreover, does so especially when demands on selfcontrol are high. The belief that willpower relies on a limited
resource, we suggest, leads people to act as though their selfregulatory resources are depleted long before they reach any actual
limit in their self-regulatory capacity. As a consequence, we expect
that people with a limited-resource theory will reduce their effort
and engage in various overindulgent behaviors when they face

The Strength Model of Self-Control
Much contemporary research on self-regulation draws on the
strength model of self-control, which, as noted, posits that selfcontrol relies on a limited energy resource (Baumeister et al., 1998,
2007). According to this model, every act of self-control depletes
this resource, directly reducing the capacity to exert further selfcontrol—a phenomenon termed ego depletion. Empirical support
for this model comes from numerous laboratory experiments,
which show that, after an initial task requiring self-control, people
exhibit worse self-control on subsequent tasks than do people who
engaged in an initial undemanding task (for a meta-analysis, see
Hagger, Wood, Stiff, & Chatzisarantis, 2010).
Recent field studies extend these findings to everyday selfregulation, and appear to suggest that the same principle applies.
For instance, in an experience sampling study Hofmann, Vohs, and
Baumeister (2012) found that the more participants controlled
themselves by resisting desires the more likely they were to show
self-control failures later in the day. Similarly, research on stress
and self-regulation confirms that when people contend with stressful circumstances, such as daily hassles or academic examinations,
they tend to engage in more problematic, potentially harmful,
behaviors like eating unhealthy food, consuming alcohol, smoking, and spending excessively (Ng & Jeffery, 2003; Oaten &

Veronika Job, Department of Psychology, University of Zurich; Gregory
M. Walton, Department of Psychology, Stanford University; Katharina
Bernecker, Department of Psychology, University of Zurich; Carol S.
Dweck, Department of Psychology, Stanford University.
This research was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation
(PZ00P1_131858 to Veronika Job). We thank Niall Bolger for helpful
comments on a previous version of the manuscript.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Veronika
Job, Department of Psychology, University of Zurich, Binzmuehlestrasse
14/6, 8050 Zurich, Switzerland. E-mail: v.job@psychologie.uzh.ch
637

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

638

JOB, WALTON, BERNECKER, AND DWECK

Cheng, 2005; O’Connor, Jones, Conner, McMillan, & Ferguson,
2008; Steptoe, Lipsey, & Wardle, 1998). It is thus well documented that self-control often suffers when self-control demands
are high, both in laboratory and in everyday life settings.
Given the importance of self-regulation for successful goalstriving, health, and overall functioning (e.g., Moffitt et al., 2011),
identifying factors that predict better self-regulation, especially in
the face of high demands, is critical. Recent research has identified
several variables that moderate the ego depletion effect. For instance, motivational variables like incentives, expectations, and
perceptions of a task can diminish or eliminate ego depletion in
laboratory settings (Clarkson, Hirt, Jia, & Alexander, 2010; Martijn, Tenbult, Merckelbach, Dreezens, & De Vries, 2002; Muraven
& Slessareva, 2003). Most pertinent to the present research, Job,
Dweck, and Walton (2010) found that people’s lay beliefs about
willpower, so called implicit theories,1 determined whether people
showed ego depletion at all.

Implicit Theories About Willpower
Challenging the strength model of self-control, Job and colleagues (2010) demonstrated in a series of laboratory experiments
that only people who believe that willpower is limited and easily
depleted (a limited theory of willpower, assessed with questions
like, “After a strenuous mental activity, your energy is depleted
and you must rest to get it refueled again”) show ego depletion,
that is, perform worse after an initial self-control task. People who
reject the view that willpower is highly constrained and who
believe, instead, that willpower can even be self-generating (e.g.,
“After a strenuous mental activity, you feel energized for further
challenging activities”) showed no impairment over a series of
demanding self-control tasks (see also Miller et al., 2012). We call
the latter belief a nonlimited theory of willpower. We intentionally
do not use the term “unlimited.” People with a nonlimited theory
may not believe that willpower is limitless or that they are immune
to depletion from highly strenuous tasks of long duration. However, they reject the view that willpower is easily depleted by acts
of self-control.
Job and colleagues found that implicit theories about willpower
predict ego depletion both measuring theories about willpower as
an individual difference and manipulating them experimentally,
suggesting their causal role. These findings imply that selfregulatory failure following the brief exertion of self-control results from people’s beliefs about their available resources rather
than from a true lack of resources (see also Job, Walton, Bernecker, & Dweck, 2013).
How do implicit theories about willpower affect ego depletion?
Research suggests that the belief that willpower is limited sensitizes people to cues that may signal the availability or unavailability of mental resources. For example, finding an initial self-control
task exhausting predicted worse subsequent self-control performance for people with a limited theory but was unpredictive for
people with a nonlimited theory (Job et al., 2010, Study 3). In
another series of studies, ingesting glucose restored self-control for
those with a limited theory but had no effect on those with a
nonlimited theory, who continued to perform well on self-control
tasks whether they had ingested glucose or not (Job et al., 2013).
Previous research suggests that glucose signals the restoration of
self-control resources (Chambers, Bridge, & Jones, 2009; Molden

et al., 2012). Our results suggest that only people who believe that
willpower is highly limited carefully monitor for cues to the
availability of self-control resources.
Extending this research, Vohs and colleagues (2012) replicated
the effects of implicit theories about willpower on ego depletion
and raised an important question: Will the same effects hold when
self-control demands are especially high? Vohs and colleagues
hypothesized that implicit theories about willpower lead people to
temporarily compensate for a lack of resources. They suggest that
people can do so effectively in the face of mild or moderate
self-control demands but not in the face of high demands, where
“severe” depletion eventually takes its toll. In a laboratory experiment,
they examined how a manipulation of theories about willpower
interacted with three ego depletion conditions: a “no depletion”
condition in which participants completed no initial self-control
tasks; a “mild depletion” condition in which participants completed two initial self-control tasks; and a “severe depletion”
condition in which participants completed four initial self-control
tasks. Vohs and colleagues replicated the finding that a nonlimited
theory of willpower improves self-control in the face of “mild
depletion.” But in the “severe depletion” condition, there was no
positive effect of a nonlimited theory and on one of two measures
of self-control performance the effect even reversed: participants
led to adopt a limited-resource theory performed better. Vohs and
colleagues concluded that a nonlimited theory can be counterproductive. Thinking that willpower is nonlimited, they write, “might
undermine the normal tendency to conserve resources (Muraven,
Shmueli, & Burkley, 2006) so that people find themselves severely
depleted after multiple tasks” (p. 186).
Laboratory tasks, however, are not ideal for drawing conclusions about the limits of willpower. There are many reasons people
might display less effort after a long series of demanding but
potentially unmeaningful tasks. The critical test of how beliefs
about willpower affect self-regulation must be conducted in realworld settings in which people contend with accumulating demands on their self-control as they strive to accomplish personal
goals. Indeed, in contrast to Vohs and colleagues’ conclusion, an
earlier longitudinal study found that college students who endorsed
a nonlimited theory of willpower exhibited superior everyday
self-regulation during the week before final exams, when demands
on self-control were assumed to be high (Job et al., 2010, Study 4).
They ate less unhealthy food, procrastinated less, and pursued
personal achievement goals more effectively than students with a
limited theory.
The present research extends this prior study to provide a more
detailed examination of how implicit theories about willpower
predict everyday self-regulation. The study does so in several
ways. First, the prior study simply assumed that self-regulatory
demands were high for all students at a particular time; that is, as
final exams approached. In the present research, we assessed the
level of self-regulatory demands for each student on a week-byweek basis across an academic term so we could identify the
students who faced consistently high demands and those who
faced lower demands. We hypothesized that a nonlimited theory of
1
Here the term “implicit” means that theories about willpower are most
often not articulated. However, we assume that people are able to recognize
their beliefs when asked to respond to items that make them explicit.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

WILLPOWER-THEORIES PREDICT SELF-REGULATION AND GRADES

willpower would predict better self-regulatory outcomes among
students who contended with high self-regulatory demands but not
necessarily among students who faced low self-regulatory demands. Second, we assessed a broader range of self-regulatory
outcomes than in past research, including not only procrastination
and unhealthy eating but also ineffective time management, impulsive spending, and emotion-regulation failure. Finally, we examined a further important outcome that is determined in part by
self-regulation, and that is not self-reported: participants’ end-ofterm grade point average (GPA) (see Duckworth & Seligman,
2005). We examined whether a nonlimited theory of willpower
would predict a higher GPA that term (controlling for past GPA)
especially among students who took a heavy course load. We
further expected that any improvement in GPA would be mediated
by better self-regulation, especially lower levels of procrastination.
In summary, we tested the hypothesis that students holding a
nonlimited theory of willpower facing consistently high demands
would display better self-regulation and consequently would reach
higher grades than would students holding a limited theory facing
similar circumstances. If this is the case, it would suggest that
thinking of willpower as a nonlimited resource, rather than harming people by leading them to waste their resources, helps people
stay focused on their goals when a heavy workload and accumulating demands make self-regulation challenging.

Method
Participants and Procedure
Participants were 176 students at a selective university in the
Western United States (101 women; Mage ⫽ 21.21, SD ⫽ 2.62).
They were asked to complete an online questionnaire at five time
points, once each week during the second half of a 10-week term
(T1–T5). Students received $3 for completing each questionnaire
and a $10 bonus for completing all five questionnaires. A total of
113 participants completed all five questionnaires; 26 completed
four, 13 completed three, 10 completed two, and 14 completed
one. Data from all participants who completed at least two consecutive questionnaires were included in hierarchical linear modeling (HLM) analyses of self-regulation (N ⫽ 156). [Participants
who completed the relevant measures versus those who did not did
not differ in theories about willpower, t(174) ⫽ ⫺.84, p ⫽ .40.]
Each week on Monday morning, participants received a link to the
online questionnaire with a request to respond that day. On average, 65% of participants completed the questionnaire that day
(ranging from 83% at T1% to 54% at T4). Nonresponding participants were sent a reminder on Tuesday and could respond until
Wednesday night.
At the beginning of the first questionnaire, participants provided
informed consent and were asked to authorize the release of their
college academic records from the term of their participation and
the prior term. One hundred fifty-three participants (87%) authorized the release. [Participants who authorized the release of their
academic record did not differ in their theories about willpower
from those who did not, t(174) ⫽ 0.23, p ⫽ .82.]

Measure of Implicit Theories About Willpower
At Time 1 participants completed a 6-item measure assessing
theories about willpower with respect to strenuous mental ex-

639

ertion (Job et al., 2010). Sample items include, “After a strenuous mental activity your energy is depleted and you must rest
to get it refueled again” (limited-resource theory) and, “Your
mental stamina fuels itself; even after strenuous mental exertion
you can continue doing more of it” (nonlimited-resource theory) (1 ⫽ strongly agree, 6 ⫽ strongly disagree; ␣ ⫽ .85).
Items referring to the limited-resource theory were reversescored so that higher values represent greater agreement with
the limited-resource theory (Mgrand ⫽ 3.88, SD ⫽ .88).

Measures of Everyday Self-Regulation Failures and
Self-Regulatory Demands
Our questionnaire allowed us to determine which students faced
high demands over a several week period. Each questionnaire
assessed, first, indices of everyday self-regulation failures during
the previous week and, second, self-regulatory demands anticipated in the current week. This approach separates the assessment
of the two critical variables for each week in order to prevent
reports of one from biasing reports of the other. Since we had no
measure of self-regulation failures during the last week of the
study, we had complete information about anticipated selfregulatory demands and self-regulation failures for four weeks.
Everyday self-regulation. Each questionnaire (T1–T5) assessed self-regulatory failures during the prior week by asking
participants to report the frequency of (a) procrastination, defined
as engaging in nonacademic activities rather than studying (e.g.,
“How often did you meet friends instead of studying?”), (b)
consumption of unhealthy (high fat/high sugar) foods and drinks,
like chocolate bars or salty snacks, (b) poor time management
(e.g., “How often did you come late to an appointment?”), (d)
excess spending (e.g., “How often did you buy something knowing
that it’s actually too expensive for you?”), and (e) failure to control
emotions, (e.g., “How often did you have trouble controlling your
temper?”) during the prior week (1 ⫽ never, 2 ⫽ 1 time per week,
3 ⫽ 2 times per week, 4 ⫽ 3– 4 times per week, 5 ⫽ 5– 6 times per
week, 6 ⫽ 1 time per day, 7 ⫽ two or more times per day).
Descriptive statistics and reliability information are presented in
Table 1.
To assess whether the five indicators of self-regulation failure
converged as indicators of a single latent variable, we conducted a
confirmatory factor analysis with full information maximum likelihood estimation on the five measures assessed at T1. A onefactor model fit the data: ␹2(df ⫽ 5, N ⫽ 176) ⫽ 3.03, p ⫽ .70,
comparative fit index (CFI) ⫽ 1.00, root mean square error of
approximation (RMSEA) ⫽ .00. All loadings were significant
(standardized values: procrastination ⫽ .67, consumption of unhealthy foods ⫽ .22, poor time management ⫽ .59, excess spending ⫽ .46, emotion-regulation failure ⫽ .52). Therefore, in addition to examining each measure separately, we also created a
composite index of self-regulation failure by averaging scores for
the five variables at each time point.
Anticipated self-regulatory demands. We created a list of 13
demands undergraduate students commonly face over an academic
term. These included academic tasks (e.g., “class presentations to
deliver,” “tests to take”) and social stressors (e.g., “conflicts with
one’s professor or TA,” “experience of social exclusion or rejection”). For each demand, participants were asked to “indicate how
much you will have to deal with [this] task or experience during

JOB, WALTON, BERNECKER, AND DWECK

640

Table 1
Means and Standard Deviations of Self-Regulation Failure (1 ⫽ Never, 7 ⫽ Two or More Times Per Day), Negative Affect (1 ⫽
Never, 5 ⫽ Very Often), and Forecasted Self-Control Demands (1 ⫽ Not at all, 4 ⫽ Very Much)
Sample item

Range

␣

Week 1

Week 2

Week 3

Week 4

“How often did you meet friends instead
of studying?” (6 items)
“How often did you eat chocolate or candy
bars?” (6 items)
“How often did you come late to an
appointment?” (4 items)
“How often did you buy something
knowing that it’s actually too expensive
for you?” (6 items)
“How often did you have trouble
controlling your temper?” (3 items)
“How much will you have to deal with
papers/essays due?” (13 items, summed)

1–7

.78–.87

158
3.37 (1.14)

149
3.30 (1.26)

143
3.29 (1.28)

119
2.92 (1.31)

1–7

.67–.74

2.99 (1.00)

2.96 (0.95)

2.98 (1.00)

2.95 (1.03)

1–7

.62–.76

1.77 (0.73)

1.81 (0.81)

1.73 (0.91)

1.41 (0.62)

1–7

.80–.91

1.58 (0.68)

1.53 (0.65)

1.64 (0.88)

1.45 (0.66)

1–7

.76–.87

2.06 (0.92)

2.03 (1.08)

2.00 (1.03)

2.00 (0.92)

1–4

.66–.72

25.74 (5.70)

24.99 (6.14)

25.13 (5.79)

24.32 (5.92)

Scale
N
Procrastination
Unhealthy food
Poor time management

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Excess spending
Emotion-regulation
failure
Forecasted self-regulatory
demands

the next seven days” (1 ⫽ not at all, 2 ⫽ a little, 3 ⫽ somewhat,
4 ⫽ very much). These ratings thus allowed us to summarize
diverse anticipated self-regulatory demands to create a single index for each student.2
Academic performance and course load. Students’ college
academic records provided measures of (a) their GPA during the
term the study was conducted and the previous term, and (b) their
course load, that is, the number of units students enrolled in each
term.

Trait Self-Control
If we find the hypothesized relationship between a nonlimited
theory and fewer self-regulatory failures, a potential alternative
explanation involves trait self-control: perhaps people with a nonlimited theory about willpower show better self-regulatory outcomes simply because they have greater self-control to begin with.
To examine this possibility, we administered the brief Trait SelfControl Scale (Tangney, Baumeister, & Boone, 2004) at the end of
the T2 questionnaire. Participants indicated on a 5-point scale (1 ⫽
not at all, 5 ⫽ very much) how well each of 13 statements about
self-control described their typical behavior (e.g., “I’m good at
resisting temptation,” “I am lazy”) (␣ ⫽ .88).

Results
After reporting descriptive statistics and zero-order correlations,
the results are divided into two main sections. First, we analyzed
everyday self-regulation with a multilevel approach. Our primary
focus was on between-participants differences in self-regulatory
demands—whether students who faced high demands during the
term self-regulated better or more poorly as a function of their
implicit theory of willpower. We focused on this question because we
expected self-regulatory demands and behavior to vary more betweenthan within-participants over this relatively short time period (i.e., five
consecutive weeks within a term). However, we also examined
within-participant (i.e., week-to-week) changes in self-regulatory
demands to determine whether students showed differences in
self-regulation, as a function of their theories about willpower, on

weeks they had previously predicted would pose high versus low
demands.
Second, we examined students’ end-of-term GPA. A series of
regression analyses tested the hypothesis that theories about willpower would predict GPA, that this relationship would be moderated by academic work-load, and that it would be mediated by
procrastination.

Descriptive Statistics
Means and standard deviations of self-regulatory behaviors and
self-regulatory demands for each week are presented in Table 1.
Over the course of the five measurement times, levels of procrastination and time-management failure dropped: linear withinparticipant contrasts F(1, 93) ⫽ 16.19, p ⫽ .001 and F(1, 93) ⫽
25.32, p ⬍ .001, respectively. As the end of the term and final
exams approached, students procrastinated less and managed their
time better.
Table 2 reports the means, standard deviations, and zero-order
correlations of theories about willpower, course load in the current
term, GPA in the current and previous term, as well as trait
self-control. There were no significant zero-order correlations
among willpower theories, course load, and GPA. As expected,
current- and prior-term GPA were highly correlated and there was
no mean difference between the two, t ⬍ 1. There was also a
significant correlation between theories about willpower and trait
self-control. Participants low in trait self-control agreed more with
2
An important question concerns how self-regulatory demands change
over the course of an academic term. In past research, we theorized that
demands increase as finals week approaches (Job et al., 2010). The present
data allow a test of this assumption. This was the case for academic
demands. Specifically, participants’ ratings of how much they would have
to deal with tests increased over the four weeks as indicated by a significant
linear within-participant contrast, F(1, 128) ⫽ 59.20, p ⬍ .001. There was
no such increase for nonacademic demands; indeed, social stressors (e.g.,
social obligations) declined as the end of the term approached, F(1, 128) ⫽
5.67, p ⫽ .04. A strength of the present study is that, rather than assuming
that all students are facing high or low demands at certain times, we
assessed the level of demands each student anticipated week by week over
the second half of the term.

WILLPOWER-THEORIES PREDICT SELF-REGULATION AND GRADES

641

Table 2
Descriptive Statistics and Correlations for Participants-Level Variables
Variable

2

Willpower theory
Course loada
Current term GPA
Previous term GPA
Trait self-control
Age

⫺.07

3
⫺.13
⫺.01

4

5

⫺.01
.02
.68ⴱⴱ

ⴱ

⫺.17
⫺.16⫹
.23ⴱⴱ
.17ⴱ

6

M

SD

.10
⫺.39ⴱⴱ
.25ⴱⴱ
.28ⴱⴱ
⫺.10

3.88
14.60
3.57
3.60
3.07
20.58

.88
3.64
.46
.42
.72
1.74

Note. N ⫽ 149.
Units taken in the current term.
⫹
p ⬍ .10. ⴱ p ⬍ .05. ⴱⴱ p ⬍ .001 (two-tailed).
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

a

a limited-resource theory. As will be seen, however, this difference
did not account for the effect of theories about willpower on
self-regulation and performance.

Everyday Self-Regulation Failure and Self-Regulatory
Demands
Our data on students’ weekly self-regulation failure and selfregulatory demands conform to a two-level hierarchical structure
(repeated measures nested within individuals). Therefore, we used
hierarchical linear modeling (HLM 6.2 statistical software package, Raudenbush, Bryk, Cheong, Congdon, & du Toit, 2004) to
analyze between- and within-person differences in self-regulation
as our dependent variable. We first estimated an unconditional
model with no predictors at either level of the hierarchy, to see
how much variation in weekly self-regulation lay between- versus
within-participants. This analysis revealed that, as might be expected, most of the variance in self-regulation was betweenparticipants (81%) (␶00 ⫽ 0.35); only 19% was within-participants
(␴2 ⫽ 0.08). Similarly, an unconditional model predicting forecasted demands showed that more of the variance was betweenparticipants (62%) than within-participants (38%) (␴2 ⫽ 0.12,
␶00 ⫽ 0.08).
To estimate effects of self-regulatory demands at both the
between-participants and the within-participants levels of analysis
we ran a compositional model including the aggregated score for
mean demands across weeks as a participant-level predictor, as
well as weekly scores of demands (group-centered) as the weeklevel predictor (Enders & Tofighi, 2007; Raudenbush & Bryk,
2002). This is the full model:

Self-Regulationij ⫽ B0j ⫹ B1j Demands ⫹ Rij
B0j ⫽ G00 ⫹ G01 WillpowerTheory ⫹ G02MeanDemands
⫹ G03Theory ⫻ Demands ⫹ u0j
B1j ⫽ G10 ⫹ G11WillpowerTheory ⫹ u1j
G00 is the intercept. G01 and G02 represent the main effects of
willpower theories and mean demands on participants’ mean selfregulation failure reports. G03 represents the interaction between
willpower theory and demands, which tests our hypothesis at the
between-participants level. G10 represents the main withinparticipant effect of week-to-week changes in predicted selfregulatory demands on week-to-week self-regulation reports. Finally, G11 represents the cross-level interaction between willpower
theory and self-regulatory demands, which tests effects at the
within-participant level.
Table 3 contains the coefficients for this model predicting the
composite self-regulation failure index as well as each measure of
self-regulation failure. There was a highly significant main effect
of mean demands (G02): High demands were associated with more
self-regulation failure. The main effect of willpower theories (G01)
(irrespective of self-regulatory demands) was significant for procrastination: The more students endorsed a limited-resource theory, the more they procastinated. Most importantly, the interaction
between willpower theories and mean demands (G03) was significant for both the composite index and each measure of selfregulation failure except poor time management. These results
support our hypothesis: a limited theory about willpower predicted

Table 3
Unstandardized Coefficients From a Multilevel Linear Model of Self-Regulation and Affect
Predictor
G00
G01
G02
G03
G10
G11

intercept
willpower theory (WT)
mean demands
WT ⫻ mean demands
weekly demands
WT ⫻ weekly demands

Composite self-regulation
failure

Procrastination

Unhealthy food

Poor time
management

Excess
spending

Emotion-regulation
failure

2.31 (0.04)ⴱⴱⴱ
0.08 (0.04)⫹
0.95 (0.10)ⴱⴱⴱ
0.17 (0.04)ⴱⴱⴱ
0.05 (0.06)
⫺0.07 (0.7)

3.26 (0.08)ⴱⴱⴱ
0.23 (0.09)ⴱ
1.18 (0.22)ⴱⴱⴱ
0.33 (0.09)ⴱⴱ
0.28 (0.14)ⴱ
⫺0.01 (0.18)

3.00 (0.07)ⴱⴱⴱ
0.04 (0.08)
0.55 (0.19)ⴱⴱ
0.18 (0.08)ⴱ
⫺0.03 (0.10)
⫺0.17 (0.12)

1.71 (0.05)ⴱⴱⴱ
0.11 (0.06)⫹
0.92 (0.13)ⴱⴱⴱ
0.05 (0.05)
0.32 (0.10)ⴱⴱ
0.09 (0.12)

1.56 (0.04)ⴱⴱⴱ
0.02 (0.05)
0.73 (0.12)ⴱⴱⴱ
0.12 (0.06)ⴱ
⫺0.04 (0.10)
⫺0.00 (0.12)

2.03 (0.06)ⴱⴱⴱ
⫺0.02 (0.06)
1.27 (0.15)ⴱⴱⴱ
0.13 (0.06)ⴱ
⫺0.23 (0.14)
⫺0.25 (0.17)

Note. WT ⫽ willpower theory; standard errors are given in parentheses.
⫹
p ⬍ .10. ⴱ p ⬍ .05. ⴱⴱ p ⬍ .01. ⴱⴱⴱ p ⬍ .001.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

642

JOB, WALTON, BERNECKER, AND DWECK

more self-regulation failure among students who experienced
greater self-regulatory demands than their peers.
Figure 1 depicts predicted values of the composite index for
students with a limited-resource (⫹1 SD) and a nonlimited theory
(⫺1 SD) who dealt with high (⫹1 SD) or low (⫺1 SD) mean
self-regulatory demands. Among students who generally faced
high demands, those with a limited-resource theory reported significantly more self-regulatory failures than those with a nonlimited theory, b ⫽ 0.27, se ⫽ 0.07, t(152) ⫽ 3.98, p ⬍ .001.
Among students who faced lower demands, self-regulatory
failures were far less frequent. Interestingly, however, among
these students those with a nonlimited theory showed marginally worse self-regulation than those with a limited-resource
theory, b ⫽ ⫺0.12, se ⫽ 0.07, t(152) ⫽ ⫺1.81, p ⫽ .072. We
return to this interesting effect later.
Next, we tested the key contrast for each index of self-regulation
failure. Among students who faced high demands, those with a
limited-resource theory, relative to those with a nonlimited theory,
procrastinated more (b ⫽ 0.61, se ⫽ 0.14, t(152) ⫽ 4.20, p ⬍
.001), consumed more unhealthy foods (b ⫽ 0.24, se ⫽ 0.12,
t(152) ⫽ 1.99, p ⫽ .048), managed their time marginally more
poorly (b ⫽ 0.16, se ⫽ 0.09, t(152) ⫽ 1.91, p ⫽ .058), and spent
more excessively (b ⫽ 0.16, se ⫽ 0.08, t(152) ⫽ 2.06, p ⫽ .041).
For emotion regulation there was a weak trend in the same direction (b ⫽ 0.14, se ⫽ 0.10, t(152) ⫽ 1.39, p ⫽ .17). To illustrate the
interactions, Figure 2 depicts procrastination and unhealthy eating
behavior for participants with a limited or nonlimited theory who
faced high versus low demands.
For students who faced low demands, willpower theories were
not significantly related to procrastination (b ⫽ ⫺0.15, se ⫽ 0.14,
t(152) ⫽ ⫺1.06, p ⫽ .29), unhealthy eating (b ⫽ ⫺0.16, se ⫽
0.12, t(152) ⫽ ⫺1.35, p ⫽ .18), bad time management (b ⫽ 0.03,
se ⫽ 0.08, t(152) ⫽ 0.38, p ⫽ .70), or excess spending
(b ⫽ ⫺0.11, se ⫽ 0.07, t(152) ⫽ ⫺1.52, p ⫽ .13). Students with
a nonlimited theory, however, reported marginally worse emotion
regulation when demands were low (b ⫽ ⫺0.18, se ⫽ 0.10,
t(152) ⫽ ⫺1.86, p ⫽ .064).

Figure 1. Mean self-regulation failure (composite index) as a function of
forecasted self-regulatory demands and willpower theory. The limited and
nonlimited-resource theory groups represent participants 1 SD above and
below the mean on the willpower-theories measure. High versus low
demands represents ⫾ 1 SD from the grand mean.

Figure 2. Mean procrastination and unhealthy eating (1 ⫽ never, 2 ⫽ 1
time per week, 3 ⫽ 2 times per week, 4 ⫽ 3– 4 times per week, 5 ⫽ 5– 6
times per week, 6 ⫽ 1 time per day, 7 ⫽ two or more times per day) as a
function of self-regulatory demands and willpower theory. The limited and
nonlimited-resource theory groups represent participants 1 SD above and
below the mean on the willpower-theories measure. High versus low
demands represents ⫾ 1 SD from the grand mean.

We have suggested that a limited-resource theory undermines
self-regulation when self-regulatory demands are high. A potential
alternative explanation is that students with a limited theory anticipate and have more self-regulatory demands than students with
a nonlimited theory. This was not the case. We ran an HLM
analysis on students’ anticipated self-regulatory demands with
theories about willpower as a participant-level predictor. This
analysis showed no relationship between implicit theories and
anticipated demands, b ⫽ ⫺0.01, se ⫽ 0.02, t(552) ⫽ ⫺0.40, p ⫽
.69. Furthermore, the correlation between theories about willpower
and mean self-regulatory demands was not significant, r ⫽ ⫺.026,
p ⫽ .75. Students with a limited and a nonlimited theory anticipated similar self-regulatory demands. But only students with a
limited theory responded to high demands with more selfregulation failures.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

WILLPOWER-THEORIES PREDICT SELF-REGULATION AND GRADES

A second potential alternative explanation, as noted earlier,
involves trait self-control: perhaps students who endorse a limited
willpower theory self-regulate less effectively in the face of selfregulatory challenges simply because they have less trait selfcontrol. This was not the case. We ran an HLM-model predicting
the composite index of self-regulation failure from theories about
willpower, mean demands, and their interaction, as well as trait
self-control and its interaction with mean demands as participantlevel predictors. There was a significant main effect for trait
self-control, b ⫽ ⫺0.39, se ⫽ 0.05, t(146) ⫽ ⫺7.92, p ⬍ .001:
students lower in trait self-control reported more self-regulatory
failures. The interaction between trait self-control and demands
was also significant, b ⫽ ⫺0.07, se ⫽ 0.03 t(146) ⫽ ⫺2.20, p ⫽
.030: When demands were high, students low in trait self-control
reported the most self-regulatory failures. However, importantly,
in this analysis the interaction between theories about willpower
and mean demands remained significant, b ⫽ 0.09, se ⫽ 0.04,
t(146) ⫽ 2.43, p ⫽ .017. The effect of theories of willpower is not
accounted for by differences in trait self-control.
In contrast to these between-participants results, withinparticipant results were not significant (see Table 3). First, withinparticipant (week-to-week) changes in demands (G10) predicted
only procrastination and time management failure. They were not
related to the composite index of self-regulation failure. Second,
there was no cross-level interaction between willpower theories
and within-participant changes in demands (G11). That is, there
was no conjoint effect of participants’ week-to week changes in
demands, corrected for their mean level of demands, and theories
about willpower on weekly reports of self-regulation. We suspect
that a longitudinal study with more intervals over a longer period
of time might be able to better detect conjoint effects of willpower
theories and within-person changes in demands on participants’
self-regulation. Another reason for the lack of within-person effects could be that the cumulative estimate of mean demands
provides a more reliable measure of the demands a student faces
than week-by-week predictions. For example, on the Monday of
one week a student might predict low demands for the upcoming
week, but then might accomplish less over the next few days and
end up having high demands the rest of the week. Or a student
might predict that the week will be a high-demand week but then
an instructor grants the class an extension on an assignment and
the week becomes lower in demands. If so, the anticipation of
demands on a week-by week basis may be less accurate than
cumulative estimates of demands over several weeks.

643

trolled for standardized GPA in the prior term, R2 ⫽ .47, F(1,
146) ⫽ 128.01, p ⬍ .001. Second, we added standardized willpower theories, which was significant, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.12, b ⫽ ⫺.06, se ⫽
.03, ⌬R2 ⫽ .02, F(1, 145) ⫽ 4.18, p ⫽ .04. Thus, even controlling
for prior GPA, the more students endorsed a limited-resource
theory, the lower was their end-of-term GPA.
Next, we tested whether this was especially the case among
students taking a heavy course load. We added course load and the
willpower theories by course load interaction (willpower theories
and course load were independent, r ⫽ ⫺.06, ns). In the final
model (⌬R2 ⫽ .04, F(1, 143) ⫽ 10.74, p ⫽ .001), the main effect
of willpower theories was marginally significant, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.11,
b ⫽ ⫺.05, se ⫽ .03, t(143) ⫽ ⫺1.80, p ⫽ .08. There was no main
effect of course load, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.04, b ⫽ ⫺.02, se ⫽ .03, t ⬍ 1.
However, the willpower theories by course load interaction was
significant, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.19, b ⫽ ⫺.09, se ⫽ .03, t(143) ⫽ ⫺3.28, p ⫽
.001. As shown in Figure 3, willpower theories did not predict
GPA among students taking a light course load (1 SD below the
mean, or 10.96 units out of a possible 20), ␤ ⫽ .12, b ⫽ .04, se ⫽
.12, t(144) ⫽ 1.01, p ⫽ .31. But among students taking a heavy
course load (1 SD above the mean, or 18.14 units), those with a
limited-resource theory earned lower GPAs (Mest ⫽ 3.41) than
those with a nonlimited theory about willpower (Mest ⫽ 3.69),
␤ ⫽ ⫺.41, b ⫽ ⫺.14, se ⫽ .11, t(144) ⫽ ⫺3.77, p ⬍ .001. In
addition, a heavy course load was associated with worse performance only for students with a limited-resource theory, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.32,
b ⫽ ⫺.11, se ⫽ .12, t(144) ⫽ ⫺2.81, p ⫽ .006. Students with a
nonlimited theory actually performed slightly better when they had
a heavy course load, ␤ ⫽ .21, b ⫽ .07, se ⫽ .11, t(144) ⫽ 1.81,
p ⫽ .07.
We also tested whether a limited theory predicted worse grades
on a longitudinal basis—that is, when students’ course load increased from one term to the next. We examined students’ currentterm GPA, with prior-term GPA controlled, and tested the effects
of willpower theories, change in course load (difference between
current term course load and previous term course load,

Academic Performance and Course Load
The self-report measures provide nuanced insight into how
willpower theories predict everyday self-regulation in the face of
self-regulatory demands. Next, we tested whether willpower theories also predict an objective (nonself-reported) and cumulative
index of successful self-regulation over time: students’ end-ofterm GPA calculated from official school records. If this shows the
same pattern, it would extend the self-reported indices of selfregulation and further illustrate the implications of theories about
willpower for students’ lives.
Willpower theories and academic performance. To test
whether willpower theories predicted students’ end-of-term GPA,
we conducted a hierarchical regression analysis. First, we con-

Figure 3. Mean GPA as a function of academic demands (units taken)
and willpower theory (⫾ 1 SD on the willpower theory measure). High
versus low demands represent ⫾ 1 SD from the grand mean. Means are
adjusted for prior-term GPA, age, and sex.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

644

JOB, WALTON, BERNECKER, AND DWECK

Mchange ⫽ ⫺0.76 units, SD ⫽ 3.26 units) from the prior term to the
current term, and the willpower theories by change-in-course-load
interaction. The interaction was significant, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.13, b ⫽ ⫺.06,
se ⫽ .03, t(143) ⫽ ⫺2.17, p ⫽ .03. Among students whose
decrease in course load was high (Mchange ⫺ 1 SD ⫽ ⫺0.76 –
3.26 ⫽ decrease of 4.02 units), there was no effect of willpower
theories on grades, t ⬍ 1. But among students whose course load
highly increased (Mchange ⫹ 1 SD ⫽ ⫺0.76 ⫹ 3.26 ⫽ increase of
2.5 units), those with a limited theory earned worse grades than
those with a nonlimited theory, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.35, b ⫽ ⫺.12, se ⫽ .12,
t(144) ⫽ ⫺2.95, p ⫽ .004. These findings confirm that GPA varies
with students’ implicit theories about willpower and their changing
course load.
As was the case for everyday self-regulation, the effect of
willpower theories on GPA was not accounted for by trait selfcontrol. We conducted a hierarchical regression predicting GPA
from previous-term GPA (block 1), theories about willpower,
course load, and trait self-control (block 2), as well as the interactions between course load and trait self-control and between
course load and willpower theories (block 3). In the final model
(⌬R2 ⫽ .54, F(6, 124) ⫽ 24.04, p ⬍ .01) the main effects for trait
self-control and willpower theories were both nonsignificant, ␤ ⫽
.10, b ⫽ .04, se ⫽ .03, t(124) ⫽ 1.49, p ⫽ .14, and, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.08,
b ⫽ ⫺.04, se ⫽ .03, t(124) ⫽ ⫺1.31, p ⫽ .19, respectively. The
course load by trait self-control interaction was also not significant, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.07, b ⫽ ⫺.03, se ⫽ .03, t(124) ⫽ ⫺1.08, p ⫽ .28.
However, the course load by willpower theory interaction remained significant, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.23, b ⫽ ⫺.10, se ⫽ .03,
t(124) ⫽ ⫺3.71, p ⬍ .01. In the face of a heavy course load,
willpower theories predict GPA above and beyond trait selfcontrol.
Mediation. Finally, we tested whether greater procrastination
explained the relationship between a limited willpower theory and
GPA. Past research shows that procrastination leads to lower
grades (Steel, 2007). Likewise, in the present research mean procrastination (averaged over five weeks) predicted GPA controlling
for previous-term GPA [partial r(145) ⫽ ⫺.32, p ⬍ .001]. Since
the previous analysis showed that theories about willpower affect
students’ procrastination, we tested whether students’ mean procrastination mediated the effect of willpower theories on GPA
controlling for previous-term GPA (Figure 4). We did so using the
INDIRECT macro (Preacher & Hayes, 2008), which uses boot-

Figure 4. Mediation model testing the indirect effect of willpower theory
on GPA through procrastination. ⴱ p ⬍ .05. ⴱⴱ p ⬍ .001.

strapping to estimate the indirect effect of an independent variable
(i.e., willpower theories) on a dependent variable (i.e., GPA)
through a mediator (i.e., procrastination). Because the macro provides only unstandardized path coefficients all variables were
z-standardized prior to using the macro to generate standardized
coefficients. The mediational model was significant, R2 ⫽ .53,
F(3, 144) ⫽ 52.71, p ⬍ .001. As reported earlier, there was a main
effect for willpower theories predicting procrastination; a limited
theory predicted greater procrastination, ␤ ⫽ .18, se ⫽ .07,
t(144) ⫽ 2.60, p ⫽ .01. The direct effect of procrastination on
GPA was also significant, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.11, se ⫽ .03, t(144) ⫽ ⫺3.75,
p ⬍ .001. The more students procrastinated the lower was their
end-of-term GPA. The bootstrapped indirect effect was different
from zero, 95% CI (⫺.005, ⫺.047), and the direct effect of
willpower theories on GPA was no longer significant, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.03,
se ⫽ .03, t(144) ⫽ ⫺1.30, p ⫽ .20. The other indicators of
self-regulatory failure did not show this meditational pattern. The
results suggest that the more students endorsed a limited-resource
theory of willpower, the more they procrastinated and the lower
the GPA they earned.

General Discussion
The present research shows that students who think that willpower is limited and easily depleted—the view of willpower
suggested by the strength model of self-control—self-regulate less
well in their everyday lives when they face high self-regulatory
demands. Far from conserving their resources and showing strong
self-regulation when needed, students who endorsed the limited
theory and who faced high demands over the term, procrastinated
more (e.g., watching TV instead of studying), ate more junk food,
and reported more excessive spending as compared to students
with a nonlimited theory about willpower. This was the case even
though students with a limited and a nonlimited theory faced
similar self-regulatory demands. By measuring students’ selfregulatory demands, the present study provides the first direct
evidence that it is precisely in the face of consistently high demands that a nonlimited theory of willpower predicts better everyday self-regulation.
Importantly, we found the same pattern for students’ term
grades, an objective and inherently important variable resulting
from successful self-regulation. Among students who took a heavy
course load, students with the limited theory earned lower grades
than students with the nonlimited theory. They did so, a mediation
analysis suggested, because they were more likely to procrastinate
in completing their work. By contrast, the nonlimited theory led
people to deploy their resources more effectively when they were
needed most. Notably, the effects of willpower theories on everyday self-regulation and on GPA did not arise because students with
a limited theory had lower trait self-control. The patterns remained
significant controlling for trait self-control.
Our findings contradict the hypothesis that a nonlimited theory
about willpower undermines self-regulation and does so especially
when demands are high. Relying on a laboratory experiment, Vohs
and colleagues (2012) suggested that the belief that willpower is
nonlimited might counteract ego depletion only in cases of mild or
moderate demands but not when self-control demands are “severe.” They speculated that this belief could even amplify ego
depletion and worsen self-regulation by undermining people’s

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

WILLPOWER-THEORIES PREDICT SELF-REGULATION AND GRADES

“normal tendency” to conserve their resources and then deploy
them when they were needed. To the contrary, examining students’
success and failure self-regulating in a highly demanding academic
environment, we found that the nonlimited theory was most predictive of better outcomes among students who faced the greatest
demands on their self-regulation.
In fact, it was only among students who faced low demands—
when self-regulation lapses may be less costly—that students with
a nonlimited theory “wasted” their self-regulatory resources relative to those with a limited theory. Under these conditions, they
reported giving in to impulses and pursuing nonacademic activities
at least as much as, if not more than, students with a limited theory.
Thus, students with a nonlimited theory are not self-control super
heroes who never give in to temptations; nor are they unwilling to
admit self-regulatory failure. This view is further supported by the
rather low correlation between theories about willpower and trait
self-control (⫺.17), suggesting that those with a nonlimited theory
are not simply natural self-regulators or people with outsized
self-control abilities. Rather, those with a nonlimited theory are
people who lean in when demands on self-regulation are high.
This pattern was replicated in the analysis of students’ academic
performance, where a nonlimited versus limited willpower theory
predicted higher GPA among students who took heavy course
loads. It was also interesting to find that participants with a
nonlimited theory tended to earn even higher grades when they
were dealing with a heavy course load than when they were taking
a light course load. These latter findings suggest that people with
a nonlimited theory may even profit from challenging circumstances. Indeed, it is possible that in situations where they are not
sufficiently challenged (e.g., in a boring job), people with a nonlimited theory might be the ones to show lower performance. For
them, boredom or lack of challenge may be depleting! In short,
people with a nonlimited theory about willpower look strong when
high demands require effective self-regulation but do not perform
better when demands are low.
Why did Vohs and colleagues (2012) find a different pattern in
a laboratory study—that the benefits of a nonlimited theory for
self-control performance disappeared as the number of self-control
tasks increased? As a laboratory session wears on, many other
factors beyond participants’ self-control capacity may affect their
willingness to exert further self-control on laboratory tasks. For
instance, participants may simply decide that they have done
enough and/or that the tasks are no longer interesting or consequential. A nonlimited theory about willpower would not be functional if it led people to engage on a high level with every task that
came along regardless of its value or purpose. Future laboratory
research may decompose the capacity to exert self-control from the
value or meaning of a task to the self.
In Vohs and colleagues’ (2012) research as well as in other
recent theorizing on ego depletion (Inzlicht & Schmeichel, 2012;
Inzlicht, Schmeichel, & Macrae, 2014) the effects of willpower
theories are grouped together with those of other “motivational”
factors such as monetary incentives. It is often assumed that both
counteract ego depletion through enhanced motivation. Research
on theories about willpower, however, proposes a different perspective. A nonlimited theory does not just motivate people to
regulate themselves better; instead, it removes a process that
undermines self-regulation. Our previous research suggests that a
limited-resource theory makes people more sensitive to or more

645

vigilant for cues that signal the availability of mental resources,
like perceived exhaustion or ingested glucose (Job et al., 2010,
2013). From this perspective people with a limited-resource theory
perform worse under high demands because as soon as they
experience even low-level signs of strain or exhaustion (as soon as
they perceive any “depletion”) they begin to reduce effort on the
task at hand. Instead of staying focused on a demanding task they
turn toward saving and/or replenishing their presumably limited
resources. Thus, willpower theories are not simply another variable that changes the incentive value of a task. Rather, by affecting
the fundamental assumptions people make about the nature and
workings of willpower, they can change how people approach and
enact self-regulation itself.
The present results suggest that a nonlimited theory of willpower is functional in a student sample facing high demands and
likely in other populations facing self-regulation challenges. But if
so, why do many people believe that willpower is limited? Vohs
and colleagues (2012) argued that if a nonlimited theory were
beneficial, these benefits would have led the theory to spread
across individuals and cultures. But a belief need not be functional
to spread. It just has to be simple and appealing (Bangerter &
Heath, 2004; Dawkins, 2006; Wagner, Kronberger, & Seifert,
2002). A fixed mindset about intelligence (the belief that intelligence is fixed not malleable) is a simple and widespread idea that
can have clear negative effects, for instance, in undermining students’ resilience and academic achievement (Blackwell, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2007; Dweck & Leggett, 1988; Hong, Chiu,
Dweck, Lin, & Wan, 1999). Furthermore, both a fixed mindset
about intelligence and a limited-resource theory about willpower
can have psychological benefits; for instance, as a justification for
putting forth low effort in the face of challenging tasks or temptations (see, e.g., Job et al., 2010; Robins & Pals, 2002).
Although a limited-resource theory might serve some psychological functions, the present research documents its costs.
The ability to self-regulate successfully is one of the most
robust predictors of major life outcomes, including health,
wealth, and well-being (Moffitt et al., 2011). A critical question
for future research involves better understanding the causal
effects of willpower beliefs in everyday settings and, if causal,
how to change these beliefs to increase self-regulatory success.
Laboratory studies show that implicit theories about willpower
can be manipulated and that their effects when manipulated
parallel their effects when measured (Job et al., 2010, 2013;
Miller et al., 2012). Thus, it seems probable that willpower
beliefs have causal effects in everyday life settings and, in these
settings too, they may be changed. Nevertheless, randomized
field-experiments that manipulate willpower beliefs and examine everyday self-regulatory outcomes are necessary to establish causality. Such field experiments would also test a novel
means to improve people’s self-regulatory outcomes, a pressing
issue (Diamond, 2012; Duckworth, Grant, Loew, Oettingen, &
Gollwitzer, 2011). Previous field experiments show that it is
possible to change people’s implicit theories about intelligence
and personality in field settings, with beneficial consequences,
including for academic performance (Aronson, Fried, & Good,
2002; Blackwell et al., 2007) and social outcomes (Yeager,
Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2013). Such interventions give people
information (e.g., scientific reports) about the nature of human
qualities and help them internalize this information using pow-

JOB, WALTON, BERNECKER, AND DWECK

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

646

erful persuasive techniques (e.g., “saying-is-believing” exercises, Aronson, 1999; see also Yeager & Walton, 2011). Could
this approach change people’s beliefs about the nature of willpower in a relatively enduring way?
Importantly, it may be essential to pair such learning opportunities with information about effective strategies that can help
people avoid self-regulatory failures. Although the present research did not examine self-regulation strategies, these strategies may be an important consideration in the development of
interventions to promote a nonlimited theory of willpower.
Ironically, simply learning that willpower is stronger than one
might have supposed could backfire if this encourages people to
put themselves in situations they are ill-equipped to deal with
(e.g., keeping temptations close at hand in the belief that they
will be able to resist them indefinitely). Effective selfregulation strategies may involve formulating plans to cope
with temptations (e.g., implementation intentions) or structuring one’s environment to avoid temptations (e.g., putting junk
food in a high cabinet, blocking Facebook while trying to study)
(Duckworth et al., 2011; Magen & Gross, 2007; Neal, Wood, &
Drolet, 2013; Stadler, Oettingen, & Gollwitzer, 2010; Webb &
Sheeran, 2003). Both for broad populations in demanding environments (e.g., students) and for clinical populations (e.g.,
diabetics), it would be exciting if exercises to teach people a
nonlimited theory plus effective self-regulatory strategies could
increase their success as they face stressful demands and strive
to accomplish their goals.

References
Aronson, E. (1999). The power of self-persuasion. American Psychologist,
54, 875– 884. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0088188
Aronson, J., Fried, C. B., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the effects of
stereotype threat on African American college students by shaping
theories of intelligence. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38,
113–125. http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/jesp.2001.1491
Bangerter, A., & Heath, C. (2004). The Mozart effect: Tracking the
evolution of a scientific legend. British Journal of Social Psychology,
43, 605– 623. http://dx.doi.org/10.1348/0144666042565353
Baumeister, R. F., Bratslavsky, E., Muraven, M., & Tice, D. M. (1998).
Ego depletion: Is the active self a limited resource? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 1252–1265. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
0022-3514.74.5.1252
Baumeister, R. F., Vohs, K. D., & Tice, D. M. (2007). The strength model
of self-control. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 16, 351–
355. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8721.2007.00534.x
Blackwell, L. S., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Implicit
theories of intelligence predict achievement across an adolescent transition: A longitudinal study and an intervention. Child Development, 78,
246 –263. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2007.00995.x
Chambers, E. S., Bridge, M. W., & Jones, D. A. (2009). Carbohydrate
sensing in the human mouth: Effects on exercise performance and brain
activity. The Journal of Physiology, 587, 1779 –1794. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1113/jphysiol.2008.164285
Clarkson, J. J., Hirt, E. R., Jia, L., & Alexander, M. B. (2010). When
perception is more than reality: The effects of perceived versus actual
resource depletion on self-regulatory behavior. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 98, 29 – 46. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0017539
Dawkins, R. (2006). The selfish gene. New York: Oxford University Press.
Diamond, A. (2012). Activities and programs that improve children’s
executive functions. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 21,
335–341. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0963721412453722

Duckworth, A. L., Grant, H., Loew, B., Oettingen, G., & Gollwitzer, P. M.
(2011). Self-regulation strategies improve self-discipline in adolescents:
Benefits of mental contrasting and implementation intentions. Educational Psychology, 31, 17–26. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01443410.2010
.506003
Duckworth, A. L., & Seligman, M. E. P. (2005). Self-discipline outdoes IQ
in predicting academic performance of adolescents. Psychological Science, 16, 939 –944. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2005.01641.x
Dweck, C. S., & Leggett, E. L. (1988). A social-cognitive approach to
motivation and personality. Psychological Review, 95, 256 –273. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.95.2.256
Enders, C. K., & Tofighi, D. (2007). Centering predictor variables in
cross-sectional multilevel models: A new look at an old issue. Psychological Methods, 12, 121–138. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/1082-989X.12
.2.121
Hagger, M. S., Wood, C., Stiff, C., & Chatzisarantis, N. L. D. (2010). Ego
depletion and the strength model of self-control: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 136, 495–525. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0019486
Hofmann, W., Vohs, K. D., & Baumeister, R. F. (2012). What people desire,
feel conflicted about, and try to resist in everyday life. Psychological
Science, 23, 582–588. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0956797612437426
Hong, Y., Chiu, C., Dweck, C. S., Lin, D. M.-S., & Wan, W. (1999).
Implicit theories, attributions, and coping: A meaning system approach.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 588 –599. http://dx
.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.77.3.588
Inzlicht, M., & Schmeichel, B. J. (2012). What is ego depletion? Toward
a mechanistic revision of the resource model of self-control. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7, 450 – 463. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/
1745691612454134
Inzlicht, M., Schmeichel, B. J., & Macrae, C. N. (2014). Why self-control
seems (but may not be) limited. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 18,
127–133. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2013.12.009
Job, V., Dweck, C. S., & Walton, G. M. (2010). Ego depletion—Is it all in
your head? Implicit theories about willpower affect self-regulation.
Psychological Science, 21, 1686 –1693. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/
0956797610384745
Job, V., Walton, G. M., Bernecker, K., & Dweck, C. S. (2013). Beliefs
about willpower determine the impact of glucose on self-control. PNAS
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America, 110, 14837–14842. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas
.1313475110
Magen, E., & Gross, J. J. (2007). Harnessing the need for immediate
gratification: Cognitive reconstrual modulates the reward value of temptations. Emotion, 7, 415– 428. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/1528-3542.7.2
.415
Martijn, C., Tenbult, P., Merckelbach, H., Dreezens, E., & De Vries, N. K.
(2002). Getting a grip on ourselves: Challenging expectancies about loss
of energy after self-control. Social Cognition, 20, 441– 460. http://dx.doi
.org/10.1521/soco.20.6.441.22978
Miller, E. M., Walton, G. M., Dweck, C. S., Job, V., Trzesniewski, K. H.,
& McClure, S. M. (2012). Theories of willpower affect sustained learning. PLoS ONE, 7(6), e38680. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone
.0038680
Moffitt, T. E., Arseneault, L., Belsky, D., Dickson, N., Hancox, R. J.,
Harrington, H., . . . Caspi, A. (2011). A gradient of childhood selfcontrol predicts health, wealth, and public safety. PNAS Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 108,
2693–2698. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1010076108
Molden, D. C., Hui, C. M., Scholer, A. A., Meier, B. P., Noreen, E. E.,
D’Agostino, P. R., & Martin, V. (2012). Motivational versus metabolic
effects of carbohydrates on self-control. Psychological Science, 23,
1137–1144. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0956797612439069

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

WILLPOWER-THEORIES PREDICT SELF-REGULATION AND GRADES
Muraven, M., Shmueli, D., & Burkley, E. (2006). Conserving self-control
strength. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91, 524 –537.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.91.3.524
Muraven, M., & Slessareva, E. (2003). Mechanisms of self-control failure:
Motivation and limited resources. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29, 894 –906. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0146167203029007008
Neal, D. T., Wood, W., & Drolet, A. (2013). How do people adhere to
goals when willpower is low? The profits (and pitfalls) of strong habits.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 104, 959 –975. http://dx
.doi.org/10.1037/a0032626
Ng, D. M., & Jeffery, R. W. (2003). Relationships between perceived stress
and health behaviors in a sample of working adults. Health Psychology,
22, 638 – 642.
Oaten, M., & Cheng, K. (2005). Academic examination stress impairs
self-control. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 24, 254 –279.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1521/jscp.24.2.254.62276
O’Connor, D. B., Jones, F., Conner, M., McMillan, B., & Ferguson, E.
(2008). Effects of daily hassles and eating style on eating behavior.
Health Psychology, 27, S20 –S31. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0278-6133
.27.1.S20
Preacher, K. J., & Hayes, A. F. (2008). Asymptotic and resampling
strategies for assessing and comparing indirect effects in multiple mediator models. Behavior Research Methods, 40, 879 – 891. http://dx.doi
.org/10.3758/BRM.40.3.879
Raudenbush, S. W., & Bryk, A. S. (2002). Hierarchical linear models:
Applications and data analysis methods (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Raudenbush, S. W., Bryk, A. S., Cheong, Y. F., Congdon, R. T., & du Toit,
M. (2004). HLM 6: Hierarchical linear and nonlinear modeling. Chicago, IL: Scientific Software International.
Robins, R. W., & Pals, J. L. (2002). Implicit self-theories in the academic
domain: Implications for goal orientation, attributions, affect, and selfesteem change. Self and Identity, 1, 313–336. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
15298860290106805
Stadler, G., Oettingen, G., & Gollwitzer, P. M. (2010). Intervention effects
of information and self-regulation on eating fruits and vegetables over

647

two years. Health Psychology, 29, 274 –283. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
a0018644
Steel, P. (2007). The nature of procrastination: A meta-analytic and theoretical review of quintessential self-regulatory failure. Psychological
Bulletin, 133, 65–94. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.133.1.65
Steptoe, A., Lipsey, Z., & Wardle, J. (1998). Stress, hassles and variations
in alcohol consumption, food choice and physical exercise: A diary
study. British Journal of Health Psychology, 3, 51– 63. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1111/j.2044-8287.1998.tb00555.x
Tangney, J. P., Baumeister, R. F., & Boone, A. L. (2004). High self-control
predicts good adjustment, less pathology, better grades, and interpersonal success. Journal of Personality, 72, 271–324. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1111/j.0022-3506.2004.00263.x
Vohs, K. D., Baumeister, R. F., & Schmeichel, B. J. (2012). Motivation,
personal beliefs, and limited resources all contribute to self-control.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48, 943–947. http://dx.doi
.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2012.03.002
Wagner, W., Kronberger, N., & Seifert, F. (2002). Collective symbolic
coping with new technology: Knowledge, images and public discourse.
British Journal of Social Psychology, 41, 323–343. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1348/014466602760344241
Webb, T. L., & Sheeran, P. (2003). Can implementation intentions help to
overcome ego-depletion? Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
39, 279 –286. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0022-1031(02)00527-9
Yeager, D. S., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2013). An implicit
theories of personality intervention reduces adolescent aggression in
response to victimization and exclusion. Child Development, 84, 970 –
988. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/cdev.12003
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological interventions
in dducation: They’re not magic. Review of Educational Research, 81,
267–301. http://dx.doi.org/10.3102/0034654311405999

Received December 27, 2013
Revision received April 25, 2014
Accepted May 2, 2014 䡲

How Brief Social-Psychological
Interventions Can Cause
Enduring Effects
DUSHIYANTHINI (TONI) KENTHIRARAJAH and GREGORY M. WALTON

Abstract
In recent years, several studies have shown that brief, theory-based socialpsychological interventions can cause large, enduring effects on important outcomes, such as school achievement and marital relationships. How are such
effects possible? We propose a field-theory model: this model distinguishes “nudge”
interventions—interventions designed to change a “snapshot” in time such as
a particular decision or behavior—from interventions designed to change a
“movie”—core beliefs or other aspects of the self and thus people’s behavior
as it unfolds over time in diverse settings. Movie interventions target underlying
social-psychological processes—such as students’ confidence that they belong in
school or individuals’ felt security in close relationships. These psychological processes can interact with naturalistic variables—such as how people interact with one
another and the relationships they build—to propel intervention effects forward in
time. In this model, real-world factors can serve as proximal outcomes that catalyze
long-term effects. An important implication is that such interventions can sometimes
amplify their effects over time, if the targeted recursive process “snowballs.” A second implication is that the long-term effects of movie interventions are dependent on
the context—specifically, on whether the context affords naturalistic variables that
can catalyze changes in the self forward in time. To illustrate this field-theory model,
we compare it to Mortensen and Cialdini’s (2010) full-cycle model. Although both
models share important features, including an emphasis on laboratory research, the
latter treats forces in the world as “noise” and predicts that the effects of psychological interventions will dissipate, not strengthen with time. In addition to their applied
potential, movie interventions raise profound new theoretical questions, such as how
psychological processes unfold over time and do so in interaction with social contexts. Exploring these questions represents an exciting direction for future research.

INTRODUCTION
It is increasingly obvious that most if not all major social problems have
a behavioral, and specifically a psychological component. Why do people
eat too much junk food; how can we encourage healthier eating? Why
Emerging Trends in the Social and Behavioral Sciences. Edited by Robert Scott and Stephan Kosslyn.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN 978-1-118-90077-2.

1

2

EMERGING TRENDS IN THE SOCIAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES

do few people sign up to be organ donors or contribute to retirement
savings programs? Why do many people not vote; can we promote greater
civic engagement? Why do students disengage from school; can we raise
achievement? What causes marriages to go awry; can we prevent this? How
can we promote more sustainable behaviors?
In recent years, the social sciences have seen a veritable explosion of
techniques to promote positive behavior change in diverse settings (Cohen
& Sherman, 2014; Thaler & Sunstein, 2009; Walton, 2014; Yeager & Walton,
2011). These techniques aim to help people flourish—to accomplish their
own personally important goals—and, in so doing, to begin to address major
societal problems. In an effort to facilitate a deeper understanding of diverse
social problems and how we can tackle them, this review distinguishes
two kinds of interventions. The first, often referred to as nudges (Thaler &
Sunstein, 2009) aims to change a specific decision or behavior in a specific
setting. We call these “snapshot interventions”: They aim to change behavior
in a moment in time. Although important in many contexts, we argue that
this approach is inherently limited. Many social problems unfold over time
in diverse settings, such as the quality of close relationships or students’
achievement in school. Is it possible to change behavior in a great array of
situations so as to strengthen marriages or to raise school achievement? We
call interventions that aim to accomplish this “movie interventions”: Movie
interventions aim to change core beliefs or other aspects of the self and thus
people’s behavior over time in diverse settings in ways that can become
self-perpetuating and improve outcomes such as these.
To illustrate this distinction, we begin with a prominent model of the intersection of psychological research with real-world problems: Mortensen and
Cialdini (2010)’s full-cycle model. We discuss some of the assumptions this
model makes and predictions that follow from it about how psychological
strategies can affect real-world outcomes. Next, we discuss several recent
interventions that are not well-explained by the full-cycle model and propose a complementary model—a field-theory model—to account for them.
We conclude by discussing critical questions these interventions raise for the
field.

FOUNDATIONAL RESEARCH
MORTENSEN & CIALDINI (2010)’S FULL-CYCLE MODEL OF PSYCHOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Mortensen and Cialdini’s full-cycle model emphasizes how theory development, laboratory experimentation and field research iteratively inform one
another. In this model, the control available in laboratory settings helps
researchers develop psychological theory and a precise understanding of

How Brief Social-Psychological Interventions Can Cause Enduring Effects

3

causal relationships, which may be weaker or less apparent in naturalistic
settings. Analogously, while field research can reveal whether an independent variable can change behavior that matters in the real world, Mortensen
and Cialdini argue that field settings are ill-equipped to identify the theoretical processes that underlie an effect. Moreover, they suggest, because
variables that were deliberately controlled in the laboratory may be influential in naturalistic settings, the field represents a conservative test of effects
established in the laboratory. They conceptualize naturalistic variables
as noise: “Once in the field and unable to carefully manipulate variables
under study while eliminating all confounding variables—variables that, as
mentioned before, may actually overpower the effects of the variables under
study outside the lab—one can see if an effect is really worth its salt.” (p. 59).
According to this model, it is crucial to test an effect in the laboratory to
understand its scope in a controlled environment and to identify underlying
mechanisms and in the field to identify boundary conditions and assess its
prevalence and strength.
SNAPSHOT INTERVENTIONS: NUDGES TO CHANGE A SPECIFIC DECISION OR BEHAVIOR IN A
SPECIFIC CONTEXT
If real-world settings are replete with noise that risks drowning out any intervention, then the task of the social scientist who wishes to promote positive
social change is daunting. From this perspective, one way forward is to identify key decision points or single behaviors that are consequential and can
be impacted positively with an understanding of underlying psychological
processes. By narrowly targeting a single important decision or behavior,
this approach tests whether a psychological process matters in terms of an
important outcome while limiting the influence of other factors that may
arise in field settings that would wash out the impact of a more comprehensive approach.
For instance, research points to the role of defaults in determining whether
people agree to be organ donors (Johnson & Goldstein, 2003); setting the
default as to donate rather than to not donate (opt-out versus opt-in) conveys a norm of donating that encourages greater support for organ donation
(Davidai, Gilovich, & Ross, 2012). In addition, research suggests that one way
to increase voter turn-out is to represent voting as an opportunity to become a
valued kind of person, not just an errand to be run (Bryan, Walton, Rogers, &
Dweck, 2011). In this research, simply asking registered voters to respond to a
series of questions the day before an election about “being a voter” instead of
parallel questions about “voting” increased voter turnout in two state-wide
elections in the United States by about 11%—one of the largest experimental
effects ever observed on objective measurements of voter turnout.

4

EMERGING TRENDS IN THE SOCIAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES

An obvious limitation of this approach is that many social problems are
not discrete decisions or behaviors but behaviors that unfold over time,
in interaction with social systems. Can “nudges” change behavior over
time? One approach to such problems is to instantiate fixed features in
social situations that continually evoke and re-evoke desired behaviors.
For instance, reorganizing a school cafeteria to make healthy options more
convenient can reduce how much junk food students eat (Hanks, Just,
Smith, & Wansink, 2012). In addition, research shows that “broken-windows
policing”—that is, fixing “broken windows”: cleaning vacant lots, razing
abandoned buildings, removing graffiti, and improving street lighting—can
reduce crime in those neighborhoods. Working with police in Lowell,
Massachusetts, Braga and Bond (2008) randomized local crime hotspots
to broken-windows or business-as-usual policing. As compared to control
hotspots, the cleaned-up hotspots showed 19.8% fewer citizen 911 calls for
infractions such as assault, robbery, and disorder over the next 6 months.
Why? Laboratory research and small-scale field experiments (e.g., Cialdini,
Reno, & Kallgren, 1990) show that salient cues of disorder signal that
rule breaking is acceptable in a setting. By changing those cues, local law
enforcement changed the perceived social norm and thus people’s behavior
within that setting over time.
What happens, however, when people leave one neighborhood and walk
into another? Alternatively, if signs of disorder in a neighborhood accumulate, perhaps after the broken-windows policing grant has run its course
or the police chief moves to a new city? Put bluntly, “nudge” interventions
have no theory of time beyond the immediate cues in a situation—no way
to understand how to change people’s behavior so as to improve their
outcomes in many situations over long periods of time. Yet this is exactly
characteristic of many social problems, from school achievement, to health
behaviors, to relationships. Another kind of intervention can address these
social problems—they target the one thing people carry with them from
situation to situation: the self.
CUTTING-EDGE RESEARCH: SOCIAL-PSYCHOLOGICAL
INTERVENTIONS AFFECT THE SELF OVER TIME
Diverse lines of research show that brief, single-shot social-psychological
interventions can affect people over long-periods of time and along diverse
outcomes. These movie interventions aim to change not a moment in time but
people’s experience over time (Walton, 2014; Wilson, 2011). For instance,
Walton and Cohen’s (2007, 2011) social-belonging intervention consisted
of a single hour-long session during students’ first-year of college. This
intervention gave students a new belief about the transition to college—that

How Brief Social-Psychological Interventions Can Cause Enduring Effects

5

worries about belonging are normal in this transition and pass with time.
This raised at-risk students’ achievement over the next 3 years. Finkel,
Slotter, Luchies, Walton, & Gross (2013) asked married couples to complete
three 7-min writing tasks over a year: they reflected on how a neutral third
party would view conflicts in their marriage and how they could adopt this
perspective in future conflicts. This caused couples to experience greater
passion, intimacy, and love in their marriages over the year, and the benefits
amplified over time.
How are such effects possible? As an intervention recedes in time, will it
not recede in recipients’ minds? How can an experience that is distal in time
and presumably in mind continue to cause effects?
To understand movie interventions, we propose a field-theory model (see also
Garcia & Cohen, 2013; Yeager & Walton, 2011). This model incorporates several aspects of the full-cycle model, including the importance of psychological
theory and basic laboratory research and the interplay between laboratory
and field research. However, the field-theory model conceptualizes the field
as not just a source of noise that risks undermining intervention effects but
as also replete with naturalistic variables—such as relationships people can
develop or skills they can acquire—that can serve as potential mediators or
catalysts that can propel intervention effects forward in time. These variables
are often of necessity absent in laboratory settings. However, in real-world
settings, the long-term effects of movie interventions may depend on them
(Table 1).
This approach builds on classic theorizing in social psychology. Lewin’s
(1943) field-theory analysis posits that people operate within a force field
Table 1
Comparison of “Snapshot” and “Movie” Interventions
Snapshot Interventions
Theoretical questions

Role of real-world variables

Role of time
Size of effect in laboratory
versus field settings
Range of situations in which
intervention effects may
arise

Movie Interventions

Psychological processes that Psychological processes that
can be isolated in the
arise in field settings and
laboratory
how these interact with
social contexts over time
“Noise” that may attenuate
Mediators that may propel
intervention effects
intervention effects forward
in time
Intervention effects assumed Intervention effects may
to diminish over time
sustain or amplify over time
Assumed to be larger in the May be as large or larger in
laboratory
field settings
Narrow
Potentially broad

6

EMERGING TRENDS IN THE SOCIAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES

or tension system in which, at any moment, multiple forces act upon the
individual. The equilibrium of forces determines the individual’s attitudes
and behaviors. Because forces in the system are interrelated, adding,
changing, or removing a force can change the individual’s outcomes. An
underappreciated aspect of this theorizing is that the force field is dynamic.
A change in how a person understands or responds to a setting can change
the situation they face later. As a consequence, a well-timed, well-targeted
intervention can, in theory, change people’s experiences in the future.
Movie interventions generally initiate change by first instantiating change
within the self, for instance in a person’s core beliefs and/or construal of
the social world. Because these interventions occur in naturalistic environments, the events, experiences and interactions that take place in these settings supply input, allowing the individual to use and act on a new way of
understanding the world. In a recursive environment, doing so elicits a congruent response from the environment. Over time, the force field is restructured, allowing the effects of an initial intervention to persist without further
intervention—to “snowball.”
Consider an intervention that promotes a less hostile view of a marital conflict. If successful, this intervention might change how people interact with
their spouse—whether they treat them generously or cruelly. This in turn
may change the situation the person finds him or herself in the future—with a
well-disposed or an angry spouse. As this process repeats over time, positive
interactions become easier. Through processes such as this, a brief intervention may generate lasting effects.
Because movie interventions are designed to change recursive processes
over time, they may be most effective in settings that are inherently recursive,
such as school environments, where students build relationships and learn
academic material over time, and close and intergroup relationship contexts.
Next we review brief movie interventions in all these areas.
SCHOOL ACHIEVEMENT
Social-Belonging Intervention. In the social-belonging intervention (Walton & Cohen, 2007, 2011), first-year college students learned that many
students worry about their social belonging when they first enter college
but, with time, come to feel at home. This 1-h intervention raised the
grade-point-average of African American students over the next 3 years
as compared to randomized controls, reducing the achievement gap with
White-American students by 52%. The intervention effect increased with
time; senior year it reduced the achievement gap by 79%. Moreover, at
the end of college, African American students in the treatment condition
reported being healthier and happier than peers in the control condition.

How Brief Social-Psychological Interventions Can Cause Enduring Effects

7

How is this possible? At the end of college, participating students were
asked what they had learned in the intervention. By and large, they could
not remember the intervention message. The intervention did not work
by remaining salient in students’ minds. Instead, it changed the implicit
narrative students used to interpret early experiences in college and thus
how they engaged with others over time. Students who are underrepresented
and negatively stereotyped in school can easily worry whether “someone
like me” can belong there. By giving students a non-threatening narrative
with which to interpret social adversity on campus—Everyone worries at first
about whether they belong: It doesn’t mean I don’t belong—the intervention helps
students ride out the inevitable early struggles of the college transition,
such as feeling lonely or disrespected, to reach out and build the kind of
positive peer and mentor relationships that are necessary for success in a
demanding academic environment; indeed, research increasingly shows that
this intervention helps students see daily adversities in less negative, global
terms and helps students build better relationships in school over time (e.g.,
Walton & Cohen, 2011; Walton, Logel, Peach, Spencer, & Zanna, in press).
In this research, changing a critical psychological variable—students’
beliefs about belonging in the transition to college—surely did not improve
their outcomes years later alone. However, this change-in-belief helped
students engage with others in the academic environment in ways that
promoted better relationships. The result was that, long after the intervention, intervention-condition students literally led different lives than
control-condition students—lives that afforded greater support to succeed
in college.
Implicit Theories of Intelligence Interventions. Using an 8-session workshop,
Blackwell, Trzesniewski, and Dweck (2007) taught middle school students
effective study skills. In addition, half learned that the brain is like a
muscle—that it grows new connections and “gets smarter” when a person
works hard on challenging tasks (a “growth-mindset”). Students in the
“growth mindset” condition showed a sharp increase in math grades over
the rest of the academic year. Students in the control condition exhibited a
continued decline in math grades, which is typical in middle school.
Why was this intervention powerful? Some students believe that intelligence is fixed—you either have it or you do not. This belief leads students
to avoid challenges and, when they experience a setback, to attribute this to
a lack of ability. Thus when schoolwork is challenging students disengage
and learn less (Blackwell et al., 2007). By contrast, students who believe that
intelligence is malleable prize learning. They seek out challenges that offer an
opportunity to learn and, when they experience a setback, attribute it to a lack
of effort or the wrong strategy. Thus they redouble their effort or seek help.

8

EMERGING TRENDS IN THE SOCIAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES

By changing students’ beliefs about the nature of intelligence, the
“growth-mindset” intervention transformed how students responded to
the increasing academic difficulties of middle school. It led students to stay
engaged as learners as the work got harder. Growth-mindset interventions
can thus forestall vicious cycles in which poor performance reinforces a
student’s belief that intelligence is fixed (and “I don’t have it”). Instead,
they facilitate virtuous cycles in which students respond to challenges
with increased effort and improved learning, reinforcing the belief that
intelligence is malleable.
Value-Affirmation Interventions. In a series of trials, Cohen and colleagues
have given adolescent students 15–20 min writing exercises in which they
reflect on values. Students write either about values that are personally
important to them or about values that are not important to them but
might matter to someone else. The results show that at-risk students
who write about personally important values exhibit striking gains in
academic performance. In one study, this “value-affirmation” intervention,
delivered several times, raised the overall grade-point-average of initially
low-performing African American adolescents over the next 2 years (Cohen,
Garcia, Purdie-Vaugns, Apfel, & Brzustoski, 2009).
How does this intervention work? Laboratory research shows that reflecting on personally important values can defuse psychological threat and help
people function more effectively in difficult situations. Doing so helps people understand a psychological threat in the broader context of values that
matter to them, and thus prevents people from feeling overwhelmed by the
threat. School is an inherently evaluative environment; it is especially threatening for students who face negative intellectual stereotypes, such as African
American students. Moreover, because school is so recursive, a poor performance early on, especially when experienced as a psychological threat,
can undermine later performance. Value-affirmation interventions delivered
early in the school year can prevent ethnic-minority students who struggle
early from inferring that they cannot fit in or succeed in school. By interrupting a cycle of poor performance and feelings of nonbelonging, the intervention caused lasting benefits among initially low-performing African American students.
CLOSE RELATIONSHIPS
Close relationships are perhaps nothing more than recursive processes. One
person behaves; the other person construes that behavior. That construal
affects their behavior in turn; the first person responds. I get mad and you do
too; I am kind and you are kind too. Can we alter such recursive processes to
improve close relationships over time?

How Brief Social-Psychological Interventions Can Cause Enduring Effects

9

The “Take-a-Compliment!” Intervention. People with low self-esteem habitually question their worth. As a consequence, they may question whether
a relationship partner truly loves them. This can prevent people with low
self-esteem from truly accepting a compliment from a romantic partner—
from believing that the compliment reflects how their partner views and
values them in a global way (e.g., “He appreciates that I am thoughtful” vs
“He said I was thoughtful”; Marigold, Holmes, & Ross, 2007).
Marigold et al. (2007) and Marigold, Holmes, and Ross (2010) designed an
intervention to induce people with low self-esteem to accept a compliment
from a romantic partner. They asked young people in relationships to think
of a compliment their partner had recently given them. Then some people
were asked to describe the setting in which their partner had complimented
them—when and where. Others were asked to describe “why your partner admired you … [and] what it meant to you and its significance for your
relationship.”
What was the effect? For people with high self-esteem, which question was
asked did not matter much—they seemed to have no trouble accepting a
compliment in either case. However, for people with low self-esteem, being
asked to describe why a compliment had general significance transformed
their experience in the relationship. In this condition, low self-esteem
participants reported valuing the relationship more and feeling more secure
in it. Several weeks later, they continued to feel more secure and, further,
their partners reported they behaved more positively toward them in the
interim. In turn, participants reported that their partner had behaved more
positively toward them as well (Marigold et al., 2007, 2010). The intervention
thus changed the recursive interplay between romantic partners; it set
couples off on a better trajectory.
One caveat suggests the importance of precision in this intervention. When
people with low self-esteem were asked not “why” but “whether your partner admired you” all the benefits disappeared (Marigold et al., 2007). When
asked “why,” people with low self-esteem could explain why their partner
had meant a general meaning. However, when asked “whether,” people with
low self-esteem essentially construed the compliment as not having a global
meaning.
The Third Person Perspective Intervention. Every few months, Finkel et al.
(2013) asked married couples enrolled in a longitudinal study to reflect on
the most serious conflict in their marriage. One year into the 2-year study,
a random half of the couples were asked, in addition, to describe (i) how
“a neutral third-party who wants the best for all” would think about the
conflict, (ii) barriers that could prevent them from taking this perspective

10

EMERGING TRENDS IN THE SOCIAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES

in future conflict situations with their spouse, and (iii) how they could
overcome these barriers to adopt this perspective. Couples completed this
7-min writing exercise three times over the course of a year. Couples in
the control condition, who did not complete this exercise, continued to
show the decline in marital quality that is typical in longitudinal studies.
However, couples who completed the perspective-taking task stabilized in
their marital quality—they reported levels of passion, intimacy, love, and
satisfaction as high at the end of the intervention year as at the beginning.
Why was this intervention so effective? Couples in both conditions reported
the same levels of conflict—the intervention did not reduce the conflict couples experienced. However, the intervention prevented conflicts from spiraling out of control. One of the most damaging cycles in relationships is
known as negative affect reciprocity (Gottman, 1998), where each person gets
angry in turn, exacerbating the other’s distress. By teaching couples to take
a neutral third-party perspective, the intervention reduced couples’ distress
in conflicts. With less distress, couples were presumably better able to use
conflicts to address issues in their relationships and problem-solve, instead
of exacerbating a negative interaction.
INTERGROUP RELATIONSHIPS
People often feel anxious interacting with members of another social
group, especially if they think that these interactions will go poorly. If
people avoid such interactions as a consequence, this may only increase
their anxiety about and avoidance of intergroup interactions. Page-Gould,
Mendoza-Denton, and Tropp (2008) hypothesized that developing a single
close intergroup friendship would contradict people’s negative expectations about intergroup interactions, and could thus reduce anxiety about
intergroup interactions and improve intergroup outcomes more broadly.
They assigned Latino and White students to interact in either same-race or
cross-race dyads in a series of three meetings. Partners got to know each
well over these meetings—asking one another increasingly self-disclosing
questions and completing several cooperative tasks together. As predicted,
participants in the cross-group dyads reported less anxiety in their daily
lives when interacting across racial lines and sought out more intergroup
interactions. Developing a close intergroup friendship helped participants
learn that intergroup interactions need not go badly, reducing anxiety and
facilitating further intergroup contact.
Additional research shows that even minimal social connections across
group lines can improve intergroup attitudes and interest in intergroup
interactions in some circumstances, with effects lasting as long as 6 months
later (Brannon & Walton, 2013). In demonstrating ways positive intergroup

How Brief Social-Psychological Interventions Can Cause Enduring Effects

11

interactions and relationships can become self-reinforcing, this research illustrates how psychological interventions can set in motion enduring change.
KEY ISSUES FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
Mortensen and Cialdini’s full-cycle model effectively accounts for snapshot
interventions—nudges to change a specific decision or behavior in a specific setting. However, it does not aim to account for movie interventions,
which aim to change the self and thus behavior over time and in diverse
circumstances. Yet movie interventions are especially exciting not only for
their applied potential but also because they raise profound new theoretical
questions absent in snapshot interventions: How does the psychological process
targeted by the intervention affect recursive processes that unfold over time? How
can proximal outcomes become mediators that affect subsequent outcomes? In so
doing, movie interventions force researchers to develop theories about social
contexts and how psychological processes intersect with these contexts over
time. For instance, researchers must consider whether a context provides the
necessary affordances for an initial psychological change to carry forward. If
a student acquires a growth mindset, is she exposed to challenging material
she can learn from and “practice” her growth-mindset on? Do her teachers
notice and support a more engaged approach to learning? Similarly, if an
intervention invites a person to take a more charitable approach to a marital
conflict, is there sufficient trust for his or her spouse to respond in kind?
These theoretical questions are fundamentally interdisciplinary. They
involve how social-psychological variables (e.g., What is the key psychological
process the intervention addresses? How?) play out over time, a core concern of
developmental psychology, and how they do so in interaction with social and
structural factors, core concerns of sociology. Research at this intersection
will give rise to a new understanding of how and when social-psychological
processes contribute to major social problems in interaction with social systems. It will also help us diagnose social problems in a new way. For instance,
if a growth-mindset intervention has no impact on students’ achievement
in particular settings, we can look to those settings and ask whether key
mediators of higher performance were present—was challenging material
available to students? Were teachers supportive of students’ efforts to learn?
This research will help us develop more comprehensive theories of social
problems and, simultaneously, reach more people in need.
REFERENCES
Blackwell, L. A., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Theories of intelligence
and achievement across the junior high school transition: A longitudinal study
and an intervention. Child Development, 78, 246–263.

12

EMERGING TRENDS IN THE SOCIAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES

Braga, A. A., & Bond, B. J. (2008). Policing crime and disorder hot spots: A randomized, controlled trial. Criminology, 46, 577–607.
Brannon, T. N., & Walton, G. M. (2013). Enacting cultural interests: How intergroup
contact reduces prejudice by sparking interest in an outgroup’s culture. Psychological Science, 24, 1947–1957.
Bryan, C. J., Walton, G. M., Rogers, T., & Dweck, C. S. (2011). Motivating voter turnout
by invoking the self. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, 108, 12653–12656.
Cialdini, R. B., Reno, R. R., & Kallgren, C. A. (1990). A focus theory of normative
conduct: Recycling the concept of norms to reduce littering in public places. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 1015–1026.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaugns, V., Apfel, N., & Brzustoski, P. (2009). Recursive processes in self-affirmation: Intervening to close the minority achievement
gap. Science, 324, 400–403.
Cohen, G. L., & Sherman, D. K. (2014). The psychology of change: Self-affirmation
and social psychological intervention. Annual Review of Psychology, 65, 333–371.
Davidai, S., Gilovich, T., & Ross, L. D. (2012). The meaning of defaults for potential
organ donors. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(38), 15201–15205.
Finkel, E. J., Slotter, E. B., Luchies, L. B., Walton, G. M., & Gross, J. J. (2013). A brief
intervention to promote conflict reappraisal preserves marital quality over time.
Psychological Science, 24, 1595–1601.
Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (2013). A social psychological perspective on educational
intervention. In E. Shafir (Ed.), Behavioral foundations of policy (pp. 329–350). New
York, NY: Russell Sage.
Gottman, J. M. (1998). Psychology and the study of marital processes. Annual Review
of Psychology, 49, 169–197.
Hanks, A. S., Just, D. R., Smith, L. E., & Wansink, B. (2012). Healthy Convenience:
nudging students toward healthier choices in the lunchroom. Journal of Public
Health, 34, 370–376.
Johnson, E. J., & Goldstein, D. G. (2003). Do defaults save lives? Science, 302,
1338–1339.
Lewin, K. (1943). Defining the “Field at a Given Time”. Psychological Review, 50,
292–310.
Marigold, D. C., Holmes, J. G., & Ross, M. (2007). More than words: Reframing compliments from romantic partners fosters security in low self-esteem individuals.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 232–248.
Marigold, D. C., Holmes, J. G., & Ross, M. (2010). Fostering relationship resilience:
An intervention for low self-esteem individuals. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 624–630.
Mortensen, C., & Cialdini, R. B. (2010). Full cycle social psychology for theory and
application. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 4, 53–63.
Page-Gould, E., Mendoza-Denton, R., & Tropp, L. R. (2008). With a little help from my
cross-group friend: Reducing anxiety in intergroup contexts through cross-group
friendship. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 95, 1080–1094.

How Brief Social-Psychological Interventions Can Cause Enduring Effects

13

Thaler, R. H., & Sunstein, C. R. (2009). Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth,
and happiness. New York, NY: Penguin Books.
Walton, G. M. (2014). The new science of wise psychological interventions. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 23, 73–82.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2007). A question of belonging: Race, social fit, and
achievement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 82–96.
Walton, G. M., Logel, C., Peach, J., Spencer, S., & Zanna, M. P. (in press). Two brief
social-psychological interventions transform women’s experience, relationships,
and achievement in engineering. Journal of Educational Psychology.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A brief social-belonging intervention improves
academic and health outcomes among minority students. Science, 331, 1447–1451.
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological interventions in education:
They’re not magic. Review of Educational Research, 81, 267–301.

FURTHER READING
Dweck, C. (2007). Mindset: The new psychology of success. New York, NY: Random
House.
Murray, S. L., Homes, J. G., & Collins, N. L. (2006). The relational signature of felt
security. Psychological Bulletin, 132, 641–666.
Sherman, D. K., & Cohen, G. L. (2006). The psychology of self-defense:
Self-affirmation theory. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 38, pp. 183–242). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Steele, C. M. (2010). Whistling Vivaldi: And other clues to how stereotypes affect us. New
York, NY: Norton.
Walton, G. M., Spencer, S. J., & Erman, S. (2013). Affirmative meritocracy. Social Issues
and Policy Review, 7, 1–35.
Wilson, T. D. (2011). Redirect: The surprising new science of psychological change. New
York, NY: Little Brown.

DUSHIYANTHINI (TONI) KENTHIRARAJAH SHORT BIOGRAPHY
Dushiyanthini (Toni) Kenthirarajah is a PhD candidate in Social Psychology at Stanford University (http://stanford.edu/∼tonikent). She received a
BA with Honors in Psychology from the University of Waterloo in 2010 and
an MA in Psychology from Stanford University in 2013. Working with Gregory M. Walton and Geoffrey L. Cohen, Toni’s research examines subtle cues
that affect social perception and judgment in intergroup contexts, such as
the effects of ethnic-minority versus Anglo first names on judgments about
who should be granted U.S. Citizenship, hired for a job or what the appropriate prison sentence is in a criminal case. In other research, Toni studies
how subtle linguistic cues that signal a fixed versus growth mindset about
intelligence in critical feedback affect students’ persistence and motivation
following setbacks.

14

EMERGING TRENDS IN THE SOCIAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES

GREGORY M. WALTON SHORT BIOGRAPHY
Gregory M. Walton is an assistant professor of social psychology at Stanford
University (http://www.stanford.edu/∼gwalton). Much of his research
investigates psychological processes that contribute to major social problems
and how “wise” interventions that target these processes can address these
problems. These interventions can be brief but generate lasting effects.
For instance, one 1-h intervention he developed with Geoffrey Cohen to
bolster students’ feelings of social belonging in college raised the academic
achievement of ethnic minority students over the next 3 years. Other
research investigates the bases of academic motivation, how to promote
positive close and intergroup relationships and how to increase voter
turnout. In addition to his research, he teaches courses on psychology and
social problems, including one entitled “Wise Interventions.” He earned
his A.B. in Philosophy from Stanford and a PhD in Psychology from Yale
University. After graduate school, he worked for a year as a fellow in the
Office of Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton and then completed a postdoctoral
fellowship at the University of Waterloo.
RELATED ESSAYS
What Is Neuroticism, and Can We Treat It? (Psychology), Amantia Ametaj
et al.
Peers and Adolescent Risk Taking (Psychology), Jason Chein
Delusions (Psychology), Max Coltheart
Misinformation and How to Correct It (Psychology), John Cook et al.
Problems Attract Problems: A Network Perspective on Mental Disorders
(Psychology), Angélique Cramer and Denny Borsboom
Controlling the Influence of Stereotypes on One’s Thoughts (Psychology),
Patrick S. Forscher and Patricia G. Devine
Emerging Evidence of Addiction in Problematic Eating Behavior (Psychology), Ashley Gearhardt et al.
Insomnia and Sleep Disorders (Psychology), Elizabeth C. Mason and Allison
G. Harvey
Mental Imagery in Psychological Disorders (Psychology), Emily A. Holmes
et al.
Normal Negative Emotions and Mental Disorders (Sociology), Allan V.
Horwitz
Dissociation and Dissociative Identity Disorder (DID) (Psychology), Rafaële
J. C. Huntjens and Martin J. Dorahy
Computer Technology and Children’s Mental Health (Psychology), Philip C.
Kendall et al.

How Brief Social-Psychological Interventions Can Cause Enduring Effects

15

Understanding Risk-Taking Behavior: Insights from Evolutionary Psychology (Psychology), Karin Machluf and David F. Bjorklund
Disorders of Consciousness (Psychology), Martin M. Monti
Culture as Situated Cognition (Psychology), Daphna Oyserman
Cognitive Remediation in Schizophrenia (Psychology), Clare Reeder and Til
Wykes
Cognitive Bias Modification in Mental (Psychology), Meg M. Reuland et al.
Clarifying the Nature and Structure of Personality Disorder (Psychology),
Takakuni Suzuki and Douglas B. Samuel
Rumination (Psychology), Edward R. Watkins
Emotion Regulation (Psychology), Paree Zarolia et al.

556890
research-article2014

JEAXXX10.1177/0272431614556890Journal of Early AdolescenceKosovich et al.

Article

A Practical Measure
of Student Motivation:
Establishing Validity
Evidence for the
Expectancy-Value-Cost
Scale in Middle School

Journal of Early Adolescence
2015, Vol. 35(5-6) 790­–816
© The Author(s) 2014
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0272431614556890
jea.sagepub.com

Jeff J. Kosovich1, Chris S. Hulleman1,
Kenneth E. Barron2, and Steve Getty3

Abstract
We present validity evidence for the Expectancy-Value-Cost (EVC) Scale
of student motivation. Using a brief, 10-item scale, we measured middle
school students’ expectancy, value, and cost for their math and science
classes in the Fall and Winter of the same academic year. Confirmatory
factor analyses supported the three-factor structure of the EVC Scale,
as well as measurement invariance across gender, academic domain, and
time. Predictions of the EVC Scale’s relationship with domain-specific
future interest and prior achievement provide convergent and discriminant
validity evidence. The practical utility of the survey is highlighted by the
short administration time and the alignment between observed and latent
means, indicating that practitioners can use raw scores rather than latent
values. Finally, we discuss methods of how to use the EVC Scale to provide
actionable information for educational practitioners, such as identifying

1University

of Virginia, Charlottesville, USA
Madison University, Harrisonburg, VA, USA
3Colorado College, Colorado Springs, CO, USA
2James

Corresponding Author:
Jeff J. Kosovich, Center for Advanced Study of Teaching and Learning, University of Virginia,
405 Emmet Street South, PO Box 80078, Charlottesville, VA 22904-0784, USA.
Email: jk5ne@virginia.edu

Kosovich et al.	

791

which motivation interventions are most needed for students and if those
interventions are working.
Keywords
motivation, measurement, middle school, expectancy-value, cost
Striking a balance between developing high psychometric qualities, on the
one hand, and providing actionable information for practitioners, on the other
hand, is a conundrum faced by many researchers. For example, scale developers typically recommend measuring constructs with numerous items to
maximize scale reliability and content breadth. However, as the number of
items being measured increases, the usability of the measure in the field is
quickly limited due to such factors as time constraints and respondent fatigue
(Bryk et al., 2013). A tension arises because focusing too much on technical
specifications can result in a meaningful but unusable assessment, whereas
focusing too much on practical concerns can result in a usable but potentially
meaningless assessment. These tensions can produce confusion among
researchers, evaluators, and practitioners about how best to assess important
educational processes and outcomes.
Although a number of motivation scales have been developed, existing
measures have a variety of limitations for routine, widespread use. First, a
proliferation of theoretical constructs can make it difficult for practitioners to
know which measures to use (Murphy & Alexander, 2000). Second, motivational measures are often not validated across academic contexts (e.g., math
and science), across populations with different characteristics, or across time.
Third, the length of previous measures is not always practical for use in classrooms to quickly assess student motivation at a single time point, or to sample/measure motivation repeatedly over a longer period of time. Similarly,
the lack of a reliable and easy-to-use motivation measure renders it difficult
for researchers or program evaluators to assess the effectiveness of educational interventions designed to enhance student motivation.
In this article, we address technical concerns as well as practical applications for a rapid measure of student motivation, the Expectancy-Value-Cost
(EVC) Scale. We argue that a scale’s practical utility results from balancing
technical properties and practical concerns. Using latent variable modeling,
we demonstrate that the 10-item EVC Scale can measure three theoretically
separate and important motivational constructs. Furthermore, we provide evidence that practitioners can draw similar conclusions about motivational differences without sophisticated statistical modeling and without sacrificing a
large amount of class time.

792	

Journal of Early Adolescence 35(5-6)

Expectancy-Value Motivation and Assessment
Of the numerous motivation theories and constructs that appear in contemporary educational psychology, expectancy-value models (Eccles et al., 1983)
offer a comprehensive framework for understanding student motivation
(Brophy, 2010). The model proposes that motivation consists of two key factors that predict important educational outcomes (Eccles et al., 1983; Feather,
1988): expectancy and value. Expectancy, which is linked to achievement
outcomes (e.g., grades), reflects the extent to which a student thinks he or she
can be successful in a task. Value, which is linked to other academic outcomes (e.g., future interests), reflects the extent to which a student thinks a
task is worthwhile (Wigfield & Cambria, 2010).
Assessments of expectancy-value motivation have a long history in education research (Wigfield & Cambria, 2010). Eccles and her colleagues proposed that expectancy and value are separate factors that each can be further
distinguished into several dimensions (e.g., Eccles & Wigfield, 1995).
Specifically, Eccles and colleagues (1983) argued for two dimensions of
expectancy and four dimensions of value. The dimensions of expectancy
included ability beliefs (what students think they can do now) and expectancy
beliefs (what students think they will be able to do in the future). The dimensions of value are distinguished according to what enhances or undermines a
student’s overall value for the activity. Positive contributors include intrinsic
value (engaging in an activity because it is inherently enjoyable), utility value
(engaging in the activity because it helps achieve other short-term or longterm goals), and attainment value (engaging in the activity because it affirms
an important aspect of a student’s identity). In contrast, cost reflects negative
aspects of engaging in an activity, such as perceptions of the effort and time
required to be successful, the loss of engaging in other valued activities, or
negative psychological states such as struggling or failing at the activity.
Based on prior research, expectancy and value (with the exception of cost)
are typically positive correlated with each other, as well as with educational
outcomes such as achievement or student persistence (e.g., Durik, Vida, &
Eccles, 2006). Alternatively, cost is negatively related to expectancy, value,
and learning outcomes (for a review, see Barron & Hulleman, in press).
Research on existing expectancy-value scales indicate several challenges
that inform our current work. First, dimensions within each construct often
are correlated highly or load onto one factor (Eccles & Wigfield, 1995). As a
result, researchers tend to pool items across dimensions into an overall, combined expectancy or value scale (e.g., Jacobs, Lanza, Osgood, Eccles, &
Wigfield, 2002). Second, combined scales are often taken from a larger pool
of items that can vary across studies and contexts (e.g., items used in middle

Kosovich et al.	

793

school may differ from those used in high school or college). Third, although
Eccles experimented with cost scales as a dimension of value (see Parsons,
1980), cost scales generally have not been investigated further in subsequent
empirical work (for reviews, see Barron & Hulleman, in press; Flake, 2012).
As a result, less is known about how cost actually functions alongside expectancy and value, to influence student motivation. A newer conceptualization
of expectancy-value models, however, emphasizes an important distinction
between value and cost by relabeling the model as EVC (Barron & Hulleman,
in press). Recent empirical work across diverse samples also suggests that
cost separates into its own factor, and is negatively related to expectancy and
value (Conley, 2012; Flake et al., 2011; Grays, 2013; Trautwein et al., 2012).
Despite the theoretical suggestion that expectancy, value, and cost represent separate factors of motivation, relatively little research has focused on the
psychometric quality of these scales. Most often, a single study conducted by
Eccles and Wigfield (1995) is cited as providing support for expectancy-value
scales. However, the items in their study did not formally include items to
measure cost. In addition, the items were developed and validated to capture
multiple dimensions of expectancy and value, but are frequently combined to
measure expectancy and value each unidimensionally. The Eccles and
Wigfield study did not provide empirical evidence or tests of a shorter, more
practically useful scale that assesses expectancy, value, and cost as three separate, unidimensional scales. In this article, we present our initial work to
develop and validate a three-factor scale of EVC motivation to fill this gap.
The proposed EVC Scale builds on a body of developmental work piloting
the scale in a variety of classes with different student populations, ranging in
age from middle school through early college. Careful attention was paid to
the wording of items so the EVC Scale could be used across a variety of age
levels without additional editing. Similarly, the academic domain measured
by the scale can be easily altered by changing the reference (e.g., “math
class” to “science class”). The initial version of the EVC Scale included 24
items used in undergraduate general education courses (Flake et al., 2011;
Grays, 2013). This larger pool of items was reduced to 12 for use in evaluating an online intervention in high school science (Getty, Hulleman, Barron,
Stuhlsatz, & Marks, 2013). Subsequently, as part of a National Science
Foundation grant, a panel of experts critically evaluated the items, including
an analysis of whether or not the items aligned with the intended theoretical
constructs (i.e., face validity). Other formative data contributing to the EVC
Scale development were gleaned from qualitative research on cost (Flake,
2012), and by coding and comparing open-ended responses with Likert-type
scale item responses. Together, these studies form a basis for the current
10-item EVC Scale.

794	

Journal of Early Adolescence 35(5-6)

We also see the EVC Scale serving as a Tier I support scale as discussed
in the school-wide positive behavioral support approach to prevention
(Gresham, 2004). We intentionally draw a parallel between the EVC Scale
and Tier I supports because the latter work provides a useful framework for
identifying areas to target for intervention. Similar to Tier I behavioral supports for all students (Stewart, Benner, Martella, & Marchand-Martella,
2007), we offer the EVC Scale as a Tier I support to capture motivation levels
for students in a classroom, grade, or school. As such, the EVC Scale can
provide a quick “pulse” of what the motivational profile of a student, classroom, or school could be. For example, teachers and administrators could use
this scale to determine which motivational issues are of particular concern. In
one classroom, expectancy for math may be the issue; in another classroom,
value for science may be the issue. With such formative data, targeted interventions could be adopted or developed to address the particular motivational
issues that are identified (expectancy, value, and/or cost).
An emerging body of research highlights the potential for targeted psychological interventions to focus on certain elements of student motivation
(e.g., Yeager & Walton, 2011). Furthermore, different interventions should be
used to impact different motivational concerns. For example, Dweck and colleagues’ growth mindset intervention changes student perceptions about
whether they can be successful in a class through effort rather than inherent
ability (Blackwell, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2007; Dweck, 2006). As such,
the growth mindset intervention could be considered a type of expectancy
intervention (Hulleman, Barron, Kosovich, & Lazowski, in press). Similarly,
Hulleman and colleagues’ relevance intervention increases perceived utility
value for learning material (Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009). In addition,
Cohen and Garcia (2005) self-affirmation intervention decreases stereotype
threat (a cost for learning) and could be considered a cost intervention.
Recognizing that different types of interventions are needed for different
motivational concerns, we developed the EVC Scale to help practitioners
identify beneficial interventions for their students.

A Blended Approach to Measuring Motivation
In order to develop a scale that is both technically sound and practically
usable, we pursued a blended approach to measurement to evaluate the EVC
Scale. First, we focus on the technical specifications (i.e., validity evidence;
Messick, 1995) that address scale structure and item functionality from a
psychometric perspective. Second, we examine usability concerns such as
administration time and readily useable results from an applied perspective
(i.e., social validity; Gresham & Lopez, 1996). Our approach to measurement

Kosovich et al.	

795

Figure 1.  Competing factor structures of the EVC Scale.

Note. The diagram shows four possible models for the relationships among expectancy, value,
and cost. Model 1tests a single-factor model comprising all 10 items. Model 2 tests Eccles’s
original two-factor model in which expectancy items form a single factor while value and cost
items form another factor. In Model 3, expectancy and value items form a single factor, and
cost items form a separate factor. Model 4 tests a framework in which expectancy, value, and
cost are distinct latent factors (i.e., the EVC Scale). EVC = Expectancy-Value-Cost.

strengthens the argument that the EVC Scale is both meaningful (technically
and theoretically sound) and usable (easy to implement).
We use confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) to test the congruence between
the theoretical and observed scale structure. Based on different theoretical
possibilities about the relationships between expectancy, value, and cost, four
scale structures were tested for the EVC Scale (see Figure 1). In following
best practice guidelines for CFA model comparisons (Kline, 2011), the first
model tests a one-factor structure in which all of the items represent a single
construct (Motivation). The second model tests an additional two-factor
structure with an Expectancy factor and a combined value-cost factor
(Eccles’s Value; Eccles et al., 1983). The third model tests a two-factor structure in which expectancy and value form a single factor (Positive Motivation)
and Cost a separate factor. The final model tests a three-factor structure with
distinct Expectancy, Value, and Cost factors as proposed in the revised EVC
framework (Barron & Hulleman, in press).
An important issue when considering the practical utility of a scale is
whether or not it can provide accurate information without sophisticated statistical modeling. Unfortunately, there are a number of problems associated

796	

Journal of Early Adolescence 35(5-6)

with raw item information (Marsh, Scalas, & Nagengast, 2010), including
variation in how students respond to items across different groups (e.g., gender, age), that can influence the factor structure, factor loadings, item intercepts, and item error variances. One solution is to sequentially test increasingly
restrictive CFA models that constrain item parameters to be equal (measurement invariance; Vandenberg & Lance, 2000). Such tests of measurement
invariance allow us to examine the extent to which variations in scale scores
across students are due to real changes in a construct rather than systematic
variation across groups or across time. Configural invariance tests whether
the same-factor structure exists across groups or time. Metric invariance tests
whether factor loadings (of the items on their respective expectancy, value, or
cost factor) are equal across groups or time. Scalar invariance tests whether
item intercepts are equal across groups or time. Finally, equal error invariance tests whether the error variances (or item uniqueness) are equal across
groups or time. Establishing measurement invariance is integral to a scale’s
practical utility because it tests for differential item functioning between
groups or time and allows total scores to be calculated using raw data. If all
four types of invariance are tenable, strong evidence exists that observed
scores represent latent scores and differences in those scores are representative of actual construct differences.

The Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math
Context
Although we designed the EVC Scale to apply across content areas, the current study focuses on student motivation in science, technology, engineering,
and math (STEM) classes in middle school mathematics and science. STEM
subjects play a vital and direct role in a student’s ability to be successful in
school, to graduate from school, and to become a part of the STEM-related
workforce. Research in STEM education highlights declines in student motivation for math and science (Global Science Forum, 2006). The proportion of
students pursuing STEM fields in the United States has decreased despite a
growing need for individuals with STEM training for continued economic
competitiveness and success (National Research Council [NRC], 2010). One
fruitful approach to understanding, and possibly reversing, this trend is the
systematic study of non-cognitive skills and attitudes such as student motivation in STEM domains (Easton, 2013). Domain-specific motivation can predict course choice, educational persistence, and achievement (Durik et al.,
2006; Jacobs et al., 2002). Well-developed and practitioner-friendly scales of
motivation are needed toward this end.

Kosovich et al.	

797

Goals of the Current Study
Using a brief, 10-item scale, we measured middle school students’ expectancy, value, and cost for math and science in the Fall and again in the Winter
of the same academic year. There are four major goals of the current study.
First, we examined the dimensionality of the EVC Scale using CFA to determine whether the scale adheres to a three-factor structure or to alternative
one- or two-factor structures. Second, we used measurement invariance models to test if observed scores on the EVC Scale can accurately reflect observed
scores across gender, academic domain, and time. Third, we examined convergent and discriminant evidence by testing the extent to which the EVC
Scale correlates with standardized test scores, future interest in that academic
domain, and EVC Scale scores in other domains (i.e., math and science).
Finally, we examined average survey completion times to determine if the
scale was able to be administered quickly.

Method
Participants
The current study uses data collected from students at a diverse, public middle school in the southeast (59% free/reduced lunch, 45% limited English
proficiency, 40% White, 39% Hispanic, 10% African American). Of the 547
students enrolled in the middle school’s sixth, seventh, and eighth grades,
approximately 100 had no EVC Scale data due to logistical problems during
the first year of scale administration. In addition, some students were missing
data due to absences or data collection issues (e.g., illness, early release days,
snow days). Because we were interested in comparing math and science
motivation, our sample was further restricted to students who either had complete EVC Scale data in math and science in one academic year during Fall
2012 or Winter 2013. This resulted in an overall sample of 401 students.
Demographically, boys and girls were evenly represented in the final sample
(51.4% girls). The racial distribution was 51% White, 31% Hispanic, 9%
Black, 4% Asian, and 5% Mixed or Other.
Due to relatively small numbers of students within grades, the sample
included students from sixth (n = 114), seventh (n = 137), and eighth (n =
150) grades. Prior research suggests that sixth-, seventh-, and eighth-grade
students follow similar trajectories of motivation over time (Jacobs et al.,
2002). Preliminary CFAs and invariance analyses also suggested some support for invariance across grades (see Supplementary Material provided
online), but due to small sample size, we did not have sufficient statistical
power for a formal test of invariance across grade levels.

798	

Journal of Early Adolescence 35(5-6)

Procedure and Measures
Expectancy-Value-Cost Scale. Students completed the brief, 10-item EVC
Scale (see the appendix) through an online survey platform before participating in benchmark tests about that respective domain (math or science).
Some students who did not have access to a computer completed the survey
using paper and pencil. Response times were collected for all computer
administrations. Sample items include expectancy (three items, for example, “I know I can learn the material in my math/science class”), value
(three items, for example, “I value my math/science class”), and cost (four
items, for example, “My math/science classwork requires too much time”).
Items used a 6-point, Likert-type scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree)
to 6 (strongly agree).
Outcome measures. Separate three-item scales were used to assess future
interest in math (αFall = .81; αWinter = .86) and science (αFall = .87; αWinter = .88),
which were based on similar measures of future interest (Hulleman, Godes,
Hendricks, & Harackiewicz, 2010). The future interest scale consists of items
such as “I look forward to learning more about math/science,” “I want to take
more math/science classes in the future,” and “I want to have a job that
involves math/science someday.” Standardized test scores (i.e., the state’s No
Child Left Behind assessments) from Spring of the prior year were obtained
from school district data.

Data Analysis Plan
Confirmatory factor analysis.  To test different conceptualizations of the EVC
Scale, the four competing CFA models presented in Figure 1 were tested using
Mplus 7.1. In all models, the items were constrained to load only on their
respective factor (no cross loading), and the factors were allowed to correlate.
CFAs were conducted separately for math and science in both the Fall and
Winter samples. To assess the adequacy of global fit, we examined adjusted
chi-square difference tests (Satorra & Bentler, 2010) to compare nested models. We also examined root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA),
comparative fit index (CFI), and standardized root mean square residual
(SRMR) values that provide information about model misspecification,
improvement over a null model, and an average estimate of correlation residuals, respectively. Recommendations for good fit were ≤ .06 for RMSEA, ≥.95
for CFI, and ≤ .08 for SRMR (for a review, see Hooper, Coughlan, & Mullen,
2008). In addition, we further investigated model misspecification by examining model residuals. Following recommendations from Kline (2011), we

Kosovich et al.	

799

focused particularly on correlation and standardized residuals with values
greater than |.10| and |3.0|, respectively. Although these guidelines are provided, it is largely left to a researcher’s judgment to determine if the local
misfit is a concern and which index to use. We treated our measures as continuous indicators (Rhemtulla, Brosseau-Liard, & Savalei, 2012) and used
maximum likelihood estimation with robust standard errors (MLR) for all
CFA and invariance tests.
Measurement invariance. Three sets of measurement invariance were also
conducted. First, gender invariance was tested separately for math and science in both the Fall and Winter samples. Second, cross-domain invariance
was conducted to determine if the EVC Scale functions the same in math and
science. Finally, longitudinal invariance analyses were conducted separately
for math and science. In specifying the longitudinal invariance models, latent
standardization (i.e., setting latent means to 0 and latent variances to 1) was
used to set the scale of the latent factors. This method of standardization is
particularly useful in longitudinal invariance because the parameter estimates
of the latent means that are produced are analogous to Glass’s Δ (Little,
Slegers, & Card, 2006). The production of latent Glass’s Δ also enables us to
compare latent and observed effect sizes (i.e., examines whether or not practitioners can use the scale without advanced statistics).
Rather than testing if more restrictive models (i.e., metric and scalar)
improve fit, invariance testing is concerned with maintaining fit. Thus, more
restricted invariance models are considered to fit if they do not drastically
decrease the fit of models as measured by chi-square difference tests (p > .05)
and changes in CFI (≤.01; Cheung & Rensvold, 2002). Instead of using strict
accept/reject decision rules (Iacobucci, 2009; Steiger, 2007), we used assessments of global model fit, local model fit, and change in model fit between
competing models to make holistic judgments about the adequacy of tested
models.
Convergent and discriminant evidence.  One method for establishing convergent
and discriminant evidence for validity is assessing whether or not responses
to the EVC Scale for science differ from responses for math. To do this, we
examined the latent correlations of the EVC Scale in math class and science
class. To further assess convergent and discriminant evidence, we also correlated expectancy, value, and cost with another measure of domain-specific
motivation (future interest in each respective academic domain) as well as a
measure of domain-specific achievement (prior state standardized test
scores). These correlations were used to assess if the EVC Scale related to
future interest and prior achievement in expected directions at expected

800	

Journal of Early Adolescence 35(5-6)

magnitudes. The correlations with science achievement are based on smaller
samples due to missing data and the fact that only sixth-grade science
achievement scores were available.
Completion time.  To assess if the EVC Scale could be administered with relatively little time commitment, we calculated descriptive statistics for student
completion time of the scale.

Results
Descriptive Analyses
Individual item descriptive statistics were similar across domains and time
points. Expectancy and value items tended to have means of near 5.0 and
standard deviations of 1.0, whereas cost items tended to have means near 2.5
with standard deviations of 1.3 (see Supplementary Material). Given past
research on student levels of motivation (Jacobs et al., 2002), these high
means are not without precedent among middle school–aged students. The
full range of responses was used except for Winter math expectancy that did
not use the strongly disagree option. In terms of percentage of people who
chose each response category, expectancy and value items tended to have the
three disagree options chosen 5% to 15% of the time, whereas cost items had
slightly more spread across response options (see Supplementary Material).
Finally, when examining item correlations for math and science in Winter
and Fall (see Supplementary Material), items within the same construct
tended to be more highly correlated with each other than with items from
other constructs.

Confirmatory Factor Analyses
Model fit was assessed for all factor structures tested (see Figure 1). The onefactor model (Model 1) and the two-factor model of expectancy versus
Eccles’s value (Model 2) did not display adequate fit. Although the two-factor model of positive motivation versus cost (Model 3) typically displayed
adequate fit, the three-factor EVC model (Model 4) was championed in all
instances because it displayed superior fit (see Table 1). In the Fall, Model 4
displayed good fit in measuring math, χ2(32) = 30.46, p = .54; RMSEA < .01;
CFI > .99; SRMR = .02, and science, χ2(32) = 44.87, p = .07; RMSEA = .04;
CFI = .99; SRMR = .03, and demonstrated significantly better fit than Model
3 in both math, Δχ2(2) = 56.96, p < .01, and science, Δχ2(2) = 53.82, p < .01.
Similarly in the Winter, Model 4 displayed good fit in measuring math,

801

Kosovich et al.	

Table 1.  CFA Global Fit and Local Fit Summary Values for Math and Science in
Winter and Fall.
Residuals
Model tested

χ2

Math, Fall 2012
  Model 1
296.30*
274.63*
  Model 2d
85.10*
  Model 3e
30.46
  Model 4f
Science, Fall 2012
  Model 1
362.65*
314.15*
  Model 2d
97.99*
  Model 3e
44.87
  Model 4f
Math, Winter 2013
  Model 1
289.98*
398.13*
  Model 2d
189.69*
  Model 3e
40.58
  Model 4f
Science, Winter 2013
  Model 1
273.02*
187.49*
  Model 2d
74.71*
  Model 3e
42.70
  Model 4f

df

RMSEA

CFI

SRMR

35
34
34
32

.16
.15
.07
.00

0.72
0.74
0.95
1.00

.12
.12
.04
.02

35
34
34
32

.17
.17
.08
.04

0.66
0.70
0.93
0.99

.12
.10
.04
.03

35
34
34
32

.16
.20
.13
.03

0.68
0.57
0.81
0.99

.10
.12
.08
.03

35
34
34
32

.16
.13
.07
.04

0.72
0.81
0.95
0.99

.11
.09
.04
.03

SRa

0%

4%

7%

9%

CRb

Δχ2,c

7%

 
 
 
56.96*

4%

 
 
 
53.82*

7%

 
 
 
147.36*

0%

 
 
 
35.65*

Note. Total N = 401. n = 311 for math and science in Fall 2012. n = 270 for math and science
in Winter. Italicized lines indicate championed models. CFA = confirmatory factor analysis;
RMSEA = root mean square error of approximation; CFI = comparative fit index; SRMR =
standardized root mean square residual; SR = standardized residual; CR = correlation residual.
aSR indicates the percentage of standardized residuals greater than |3.00|.
bCR indicates the percentage of correlation residuals greater than |.10|.
cDifference tests were only conducted to compare models that displayed acceptable fit.
Models 1 and 2 displayed inadequate fit in all cases and fit values. dThis model tests Eccles’s
original two-factor model in which expectancy items form one factor while value and cost
items form a second factor.
eThis model tests a conventional wisdom two-factor model in which expectancy and value
items form one factor while and cost items form a second factor.
fThis model tests a three-factor model in which Expectancy, Value, and Cost form are
separate.
*p < .05.

χ2(32) = 40.58, p = .14; RMSEA = .03 CFI = .99; SRMR = .03, and science
motivation, χ2(32) = 42.70, p = .10; RMSEA = .04; CFI = .99; SRMR = .03,

802	

Journal of Early Adolescence 35(5-6)

and demonstrated better fit than Model 3 in both math, Δχ2(2) = 147.36, p < .01,
and science, Δχ2(2) = 35.65, p < .01. Based on these findings, we tested for
invariance of the three-factor model (Model 4), which represented separate
factors of expectancy, value, and cost.

Gender, Cross-Domain, and Longitudinal Invariance
Gender invariance. We concluded that some measurement invariance was
present when comparing gender (see Table 2, Gender). It is important to note
that in all cases, the global fit indices for the scalar models decreased only
slightly from the metric models. For example, when comparing the metric
model, χ2(71) = 104.53, p = .01; RMSEA = .06; CFI = .97; SRMR = .06, with
the scalar model, χ2(78) = 115.46, p < .01; RMSEA = .06; CFI = .97;
SRMR = .07, and Δχ2(7) = 11.13, p = .13, the fit indices were virtually identical. Despite areas of local misfit, we determined that the EVC Scale effectively displayed scalar invariance for gender. However, for equal error
invariance models, the SRMR values and percentages of large correlation
residuals increased substantially. Further inspection of correlation residuals
revealed that the model was overestimating the correlations between the first
and third expectancy items. The model also appeared to be overestimating
expectancy and cost item correlations, and underestimating the correlations
between some value and cost items, though these values tended to be closer
to |.10| and likely less problematic. The boys’ and girls’ models both displayed similar areas of local misfit, but the values tended to be larger for
boys. As a result, we caution comparing mean differences between boys and
girls without latent variable modeling.
Academic domain invariance.  Academic domain invariance (i.e., math vs. science) was more clearly supported than gender invariance (see Table 2, Invariance models, Academic domain). We judged the fit of the equal error
invariance model to be adequate in the Fall, χ2(169) = 253.01, p < .01;
RMSEA = .04; CFI = .97; SRMR = .06, and Δχ2(10) = 16.29, p = .09, as well
as in the Winter, χ2(169) = 284.29, p < .01; RMSEA = .05; CFI = .95; SRMR =
.06, and Δχ2(10) = 20.90, p = .02. Despite a decline in fit from the scalar
model to the equal error variance model, as indicated by significant chisquare difference tests, global and local fit were still quite good for the latter.
In terms of local misfit, the majority of larger residuals indicated over- or
underestimation within domain (though the actual residual values were still
quite small), rather than between domains.
In addition to testing measurement invariance, the academic domain
invariance models provided information about the domain specificity of

803

Kosovich et al.	
Table 2.  Invariance Modeling, Global Fit Indices, Local Fit Summaries, and Δχ2
Change.
Invariance models
 
Gender
Math
Fall
 
Gender
Science
Fall
 
Gender
Math
Winter
 
Gender
Science
Winter
 
Academic
domain
Fall
 
Academic
domain
Winter
 
 
Longitudinal
Math
 
 
Longitudinal
Science
 

Global fit

Model†

χ2

df

C
M
Sc
Ec
C
M
S
E
C
M
S
E
C
M
S
E
C
M
S
E
C
M
S
E
C
M
S
E
C
M
S
E

94.88*
104.53*
115.46*
121.68*
81.32
85.80
101.28*
126.92*
89.28*
91.55
101.84*
120.10*
57.53
65.30
69.98
81.71
157.41
172.07
235.40*
253.01*
213.97*
218.63*
256.45*
284.29*
178.83*
191.15*
214.29*
234.03*
195.14*
201.07*
206.41*
223.69*

64
71
78
88
64
71
78
88
64
71
78
88
64
71
78
88
145
155
159
169
145
155
159
169
145
155
159
169
145
155
159
169

Local fit

RMSEA CFI SRMR SRa
.06
.06
.06
.05
.04
.04
.04
.05
.05
.05
.05
.05
.00
.00
.00
.00
.02
.02
.04
.04
.04
.04
.05
.05
.02
.02
.03
.03
.03
.03
.03
.03

0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.98
0.99
0.98
0.96
0.97
0.98
0.97
0.97
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.96
0.95
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98

.04
.06
.07
.09
.04
.05
.06
.10
.05
.05
.06
.10
.03
.06
.07
.07
.03
.05
.05
.06
.04
.05
.05
.06
.03
.05
.05
.05
.03
.05
.05
.05

Change

CRb

Δχ2

2%
0%

19%
24%

9.62
11.13
13.71

6%
4%

20%
31%

4.30
18.81*
39.59*

2%
8%

17%
20%

1.96
10.70
30.95*

1%
3%

12%
9%

7.78
3.88
24.68*

4%
3%

6%
6%

14.37
136.22*
16.29

3%
3%

7%
11%

6.54
93.72*
20.90*

4%
4%

6%
6%

12.32
49.07*
17.35

1%
2%

4%
6%

6.35
5.52
14.84

df
 
7
7
10
 
7
7
10
 
7
7
10
 
7
7
10
 
10
4
10
 
10
4
10
 
10
4
10
 
10
4
10

Note. Italicized lines indicate championed models. RMSEA = root mean square error of approximation; CFI
= comparative fit index; SRMR = standardized root mean square residual; SR = standardized residual; CR =
correlation residual;
†Model: C = configural model; M = metric model; S = scalar model; E = equal error model.
aSR refers to the percentage of standardized residuals greater than |3.0|.
bCR refers to the percentage of correlation residuals greater than |.10|.
cGender in Fall math shows two plausible models.
*p < .05.

804	

Journal of Early Adolescence 35(5-6)

motivation constructs in the form of latent variable correlations. The patterns
of latent correlations demonstrate that math expectancy, value, and cost are
only somewhat related to science expectancy, value, and cost (see Table 2,
Academic domain invariance by Time). Cross-academic domain, same-factor motivation correlations (e.g., Fall math and science expectancy, r = .29)
were typically larger than cross-academic domain, different-factor correlations (e.g., Fall math value and Fall science expectancy, r = .19). One notable
exception was that cross-academic domain cost was moderately correlated in
both Fall, r = .57, and Winter, r = .57. The larger cross-domain cost correlations suggest that either cost is measured at a more domain-general level, or
that cost is a construct that is less dependent on domain. Following these
results, we tested for longitudinal invariance from Fall to Winter in science
and math.
Longitudinal invariance.  The EVC Scale also demonstrated observed longitudinal invariance (see Table 2, Longitudinal Math and Longitudinal Science).
Both the math, χ2(169) = 234.03, p < .01; RMSEA = .03; CFI = .98; SRMR =
.05, and Δχ2(10) = 17.35, p = .07, and science, χ2(169) = 223.69, p < .01;
RMSEA = .03; CFI = .98; SRMR = .05; Δχ2(10) = 14.84, p = .14, equal error
invariance models displayed excellent global fit (see Supplementary Material). Local misfit tended to be weak or nonexistent, though there may be
some underestimation between some expectancy and cost items as well as
between different cost items at different time points. As with the domain
invariance models, the chi-square difference tests suggest that the scalar
models fit worse that the metric models. However, both latent invariance and
observed invariance models display good fit in their own right.
Mean change over time.  The results of the longitudinal invariance analyses allowed us to compare the latent mean differences (ΔL) to the observed
mean differences (ΔO). Small or negligible discrepancies would allow
practitioners to use the observed change as reliable indicators of construct
change. The only notable discrepancy was between the latent and observed
effect size for science expectancy. Observed and latent change was otherwise comparable. Math expectancy did not change (ΔL = 0.01, p = .92; ΔO =
0.08, p = .36), but science expectancy showed a positive trend (ΔL = 0.08,
p = .16; ΔO = 0.20, p = .01). Math value did not change (ΔL = −0.05, p = .32;
ΔO = 0.08, p = .49), but science value again showed a small increase (ΔL =
0.14, p < .01; ΔO = 0.24, p < .01). In contrast, there was a decrease in both
math cost (ΔL = −0.18, p < .01; ΔO = −0.25, p < .01) and science cost (ΔL =
−0.17, p < .01; ΔO = −0.21, p = .01). These findings indicate that latent and
observed change is similar.

Kosovich et al.	

805

Reliability estimates.  Reliability estimates were calculated using coefficient
omega, which is a more accurate index of internal consistency than alpha
(Yang & Green, 2011). Because the error variances were constrained to be
equal, reliabilities for each construct were the same in the Fall and Winter.
Reliabilities were good for math, ωexpectancy = .88, ωvalue = .84, ωcost = .86, as
well as science, ωexpectancy = .88, ωvalue = .88, ωcost = .87. The EVC Scale also
displayed moderate to strong test-retest reliability at the latent level (see
Table 3, Longitudinal invariance by Domain), with the longitudinal correlations being slightly higher, for example, when comparing math expectancy,
rfall.winter= .74, to science expectancy, r fall.winter = .68.

Convergent and Discriminant Evidence
In an effort to test for convergent and discriminant evidence, we examined the
relationships between expectancy, value, and cost, future academic domain
interest, and domain-specific standardized achievement scores. Table 3 presents the latent within- and between-domain correlations for expectancy, value,
and cost. As expected, correlations among the subscales of the EVC Scale
were more strongly related within domain than across domain. For example,
math expectancy and math value are moderately correlated, r = .55, whereas
math expectancy and science value are less strongly correlated, r = .31.
Similarly, math expectancy and science expectancy are also weakly correlated, r = .29, indicating evidence for cross-domain discrimination between
constructs.
Results indicated that the predicted pattern of correlations in math held
between future interest and expectancy, value, and cost in the Fall (ri.e = .59,
ri.v = .68, ri.c = −.36) as well as in the Winter (ri.e = .53, ri.v = .70, ri.c = −.44).
A similar pattern of correlations in science emerged between future interest
and expectancy, value, and cost in the Fall (ri.e = .61, ri.v = .76, ri.c = −.38) as
well as in the Winter (ri.e = .70, ri.v = .76, ri.c = −.47).
In addition to interest, the EVC subscales were correlated with math and
science achievement. Reduced samples of students were used to calculate
these correlations because we were unable to obtain achievement scores for
all students. For example, the science test was only completed by sixth graders. For math achievement, there were expected correlation patterns with
expectancy, value, and cost in the Fall (rm.e = .18, rm.v = .14, rm.c = −.17; n =
305) and in the Winter (rm.e = .18, rm.v = .15, rm.c = −.17; n = 262). There were
similar correlation patterns for science achievement with expectancy, value,
and cost in the Fall (rs.e = .39, rs.v = .26, rs.c = −.29; n = 49) and in the Winter
(rs.e = .47, rs.v = .35, rs.c = −.41; n = 86).

806	

Journal of Early Adolescence 35(5-6)

Table 3.  Latent Correlation Matrices for Academic Domain Invariance and
Longitudinal Invariance (N = 401).
Academic domain invariance by Fall (below diagonal) and Winter (above diagonal)a
 
 

Math
Expectancy

Math
 Expectancy
 Value
 Cost
Science
 Expectancy
 Value
 Cost

Science

Value

Cost

Expectancy

Value

Cost

.55

–.62
–.54

.38
.36
–.35

.31
.43
–.36

–.29
–.27
.57

.86

–.63
–.56
 

.80
–.45

–.50

.29
.26
–.29

.19
.32
–.28

–.28
–.31
.57

.82
–.56

–.47

Longitudinal invariance by math (below diagonal) and science (above diagonal)b
 
 

Time 1 (Fall)
Expectancy

Time 1 (Fall)
 Expectancy
 Value
 Cost
Time 2 (Winter)
 Expectancy
 Value
 Cost

Time 2 (Winter)

Value

Cost

Expectancy

Value

Cost

.85

–.54
–.46

.68c
.56
–.48

.64
.73c
–.45

–.60
–.51
.62c

.84

–.64
–.58
 

.80
–.51

–.57

.74c
.59
–.50

.49
.75c
–.51

–.55
–.50
.82c

.64
–.60

–.56

aValues

below the diagonal in the domain correlations represent the Fall sample (n = 311) and
values above the diagonal represent the Winter sample (n = 270).
bValues below the diagonal in the longitudinal correlations represent math, and values above
the diagonal represent science.
cDenotes latent test–retest correlations for the construct.

Scale Completion Time
A desirable property of a practical scale is a short completion time—a property displayed by the EVC Scale. The average completion time in minutes for
both math, M = 4.00, SD = 0.97, and science, M = 3.36, SD = 0.89, was less
than 5 minutes. Times also decreased slightly after the first implementation

Kosovich et al.	

807

of the scale. It is important to note that as part of the administration of the
EVC Scale, additional demographic questions were included. As a result, the
time estimates are conservative and the EVC items alone would have taken
less time. Based on these results, practitioners could gain a relatively large
amount of information in little time.

Discussion
Building upon prior work, the EVC Scale offers a rapid, practical means to
measure student motivation. The current study provides validity evidence for
the EVC Scale in math and science classes. First, we examined the structural
properties of the EVC Scale. Second, we assessed if the observed values
could be used by practitioners without latent variable modeling by testing for
measurement invariance. Third, we examined whether or not responses to the
EVC Scale correlated with other measures of motivation and achievement in
expected ways. Finally, we assessed how efficiently the scale could be administered by examining completion time.

Structural Properties of the Expectancy-Value-Cost Scale
A revised, three-factor EVC framework (Barron & Hulleman, in press) was
supported through CFA, suggesting that expectancy, value, and cost are separate factors in both math and science. Furthermore, invariance testing offered
preliminary support that the three-factor model accurately reflected the
observed data. Thus, observed score results of the EVC Scale can be used by
practitioners without needing to rely on advanced statistical techniques. In
addition, the invariance analyses revealed that the EVC Scale can be used to
compare student motivation over time in both math and science. Reliability
estimates were also favorable at each measurement occasion. As mentioned,
the EVC Scale is intended to be used as a regularly administered, primary
support measure that can provide practitioners, evaluators, and researchers
with a general pulse of students’ motivation.

Convergent and Discriminant Evidence
The correlations presented between the EVC Scale in math and science, as
well as those between the EVC Scale and domain-specific achievement and
future interest provide convergent and discriminant evidence for the EVC
Scale. First, in line with the expectancy-value framework (Wigfield &
Cambria, 2010), correlating the EVC Scales for math and science provides
evidence that motivation is domain specific. Second, because future interest

808	

Journal of Early Adolescence 35(5-6)

is promoted by seeing value (Eccles et al., 1983), value should be highly correlated with future interest—in the current data, value and future interest
were highly correlated, providing some convergent evidence for the EVC
Scale. In contrast, expectancy and cost were more weakly correlated with
future interest, providing discriminant evidence. Moreover, correlations
between future interest, expectancy, and value also highlight how expectancy
and value are unique constructs, despite high expectancy-value correlations.
Finally, the expected pattern of relationships between EVC Scale subscales
and achievement was present—achievement correlated more strongly with
expectancy than value.

Practicality of the Expectancy-Value-Cost Scale
In terms of practicality, the EVC Scale can be completed quickly with minimal intrusion on class instruction. Most administrations occurred via an
online survey platform and required, on average, less than 5 minutes. This is
encouraging because two major barriers to psychological measurement in
applied settings are time limitations and delivery constraints (Bryk et al.,
2013). A rich body of work has investigated the role of non-cognitive skills in
learning and achievement, such as motivation, perseverance, academic
behaviors, or academic mindsets toward success in school (for reviews, see
Pintrich, 2003; Snipes, Fancsali, & Stoker, 2012). As such, the development
of the EVC Scale provides practitioners, researchers, and program evaluators
with a tool for quickly assessing three types of non-cognitive attributes.
Using the EVC Scale could help researchers identify how types of motivation connect to academic performance, or to a student’s future interest in
those domains. It is also possible that the EVC Scale could be used to track
or measure the effectiveness of a motivation intervention. For example, the
EVC Scale was used to evaluate the effectiveness of an online intervention in
student learning outcomes (Getty et al., 2013; Lazowski, Hulleman, Barron,
& Getty, 2012). In this case, the intervention replaced typical science instruction while the EVC Scale made it possible to assess student reactions to
online instructional materials. Not only did students react differently to the
computerized instruction across classrooms, but motivation during the threeweek period also predicted changes in learning outcomes. Specifically,
expectancy positively predicted science content knowledge, value positively
predicted future science interest, and cost negatively predicted science content knowledge.
Having information on expectancy, value, or cost problems can help
teachers tailor instruction based on classroom-wide or individual motivation
deficits. Interventions that increase student expectancy are different than

Kosovich et al.	

809

interventions focused on increasing value or decreasing cost. As noted earlier, growth mindset interventions (e.g., Blackwell et al., 2007) help convince
students that they can learn and get smarter through effort and engaging in
academic challenges. This type of intervention, which promotes expectancy,
is very different than an intervention designed to enhance students’ perceptions of value for the material. In contrast, a value intervention might ask
students to focus on how the material they are studying relates to their life
(Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009). These interventions improve motivation
by targeting different psychological processes that could be identified as
expectancy or value deficits. We propose administering the EVC Scale to
determine which intervention is needed by identifying which general motivational factors are most at risk for a particular classroom.
Finally, prior research has demonstrated that student motivation declines
over time as students progress through Grades K to 12 (e.g., Jacobs et al.,
2002). In particular, students undergoing academic transitions often suffer
the largest motivational declines, such as when transitioning to middle
school (Eccles & Wigfield, 2000), high school (Casillas et al., 2012), or
college (Silva & White, 2013). The EVC Scale could be utilized before,
during, and after these key transition points to help identify struggling students in need of motivational remediation. For example, the Carnegie
Foundation (Silva & White, 2013) has identified several key indicators of
student success in developmental mathematics courses in community colleges by using brief, practical measures of student beliefs and attitudes
about learning. These indicators have then been used to develop a set of
interventions to boost students’ expectancies and reduce perceived costs of
learning mathematics. This work has contributed to an increase in the completion rate of developmental math courses from 15% to 50% in just over
three years.

Limitations and Future Research
Despite the promising results present in the current study, there are several
limitations to this work. First, further testing is needed to assess whether
comparisons should be made across gender without latent variable modeling.
We plan to conduct qualitative studies to aid in further refinement of the EVC
Scale. Such data could provide valuable information about the differences
between how boys and girls complete the EVC Scale. However, scalar invariance results were strong, implying that the EVC Scale can be readily used by
researchers to investigate gender differences in motivation among middle
school students with latent modeling.

810	

Journal of Early Adolescence 35(5-6)

Second, although the global fit indices were generally good or acceptable,
there was some indication of local model misfit. The presence of such local
misfit suggests that, although the EVC Scale works well overall, there are
some specific items that could be further revised to improve the scale.
Specifically, we found presence of some positive correlation residuals (which
can suggest item redundancy), and presence of negative correlation residuals
(which can suggest a lack of unidimensionality). However, the relatively
inconsistent pattern of residuals may also indicate that the large residuals are
simply chance findings. Therefore, a next step is to cross-validate these models on another sample.
Third, small sample sizes for sub-groups of students limited our ability to
conduct more fine-grained invariance testing, such as comparing sixth, seventh, and eighth grades. These small sample sizes restrict the generalizability of our overall models because the observation/parameter ratios were
large. For example, the gender invariance models compared relatively small
groups of students in the Fall (nboys = 147, ngirls = 164) and Winter (nboys =
125, ngirls = 145). We also note that because of the small sample of students
for whom science achievement and interest data were available, these results
need to be replicated in larger samples, and with additional age groups and
domains.
Fourth, we did not have access to students’ classroom membership and
could not account for the nested structure of the data. Ignoring nesting can
result in smaller standard errors and increased Type I error rates as the intraclass correlation increases. As such, the effects of nesting on the EVC Scale
need to be addressed in future studies.
Finally, it will be important to determine how well the EVC Scale functions in other academic domains and samples, as well as to examine changes
in student motivation over longer periods of time than were investigated in
the current study. All of the frequency distributions for expectancy and cost
items were skewed in the current sample, resulting in relatively off-center
means, potentially masking change in some participants. The low usage of a
response category could also indicate that there may be too many response
categories, or that they need to be changed. In prior samples (Getty et al.,
2013), the full range of responses was used and the distributions were more
normal. Thus, further testing with middle school samples is required to assess
the efficacy of different response scales and students’ understandings of
them. It is possible that the time at which students are measured could also
affect responses. For example, testing key transition points, such as at the
beginning of middle school or high school, may highlight students who are at
particular risk of negative educational outcomes.

811

Kosovich et al.	

Conclusion
In this study, we present initial evidence for a tool that can be used by
researchers, practitioners, and program evaluators to get a pulse of three
types of domain-specific motivation: expectancy, value, and cost. In addition,
we offered a blended approach to measuring motivation that balanced traditional psychometric standards of what makes a good scale along with practical considerations to ensure that it could be used by a wider range of
stakeholders, most notably practitioners. We present this tool for researchers,
practitioners, and evaluators to determine where motivational interventions
could be targeted and potentially to assess the effectiveness of interventions
on motivation after they are administered.

Appendix
1
Strongly disagree
E1
E2
E3
V1
V2
V3
C1
C2
C3
C4

2

3

4

5

6

Disagree

Slightly disagree

Slightly agree

Agree

Strongly agree

I know I can learn the material in my [math or science] class.
I believe that I can be successful in my [math or science] class.
I am confident that I can understand the material in my [math or
science] class.
I think my [math or science] class is important.
I value my [math or science] class.
I think my [math or science] class is useful.
My [math or science] classwork requires too much time.
Because of other things that I do, I don’t have time to put into
my [math or science] class.
I’m unable to put in the time needed to do well in my [math or
science] class.
I have to give up too much to do well in my [math or science]
class.

Acknowledgment
We thank Daniel Kirwan and Joseph Taylor for their assistance with data collection
and scale development.

Authors’ Note
The opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not represent views of the
National Science Foundation, Institute of Education Sciences, or U.S. Department of
Education.

812	

Journal of Early Adolescence 35(5-6)

Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article: This research was supported by the
Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education, through Grant
#R305B090002 to the University of Virginia and the National Science Foundation
Grant DRL 1228661 awarded to Chris Hulleman, Kenneth Barron, and Steve
Getty.

References
Barron, K. E., & Hulleman, C. S. (in press). Expectancy-value-cost model of motivation. In J. S. Eccles & K. Salmelo-Aro (Eds.), International encyclopedia of
social and behavioral sciences: Motivational psychology (2nd ed.). New York:
NY: Elsevier.
Blackwell, L. S., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Implicit theories of
intelligence predict achievement across an adolescent transition: A longitudinal
study and an intervention. Child Development, 78, 246-263. doi:10.1111/j.14678624.2007.00995.x
Brophy, J. E. (2010). Motivating students to learn. New York, NY: Routledge.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-8535.2010.01135_2_1.x
Bryk, A. S., Yeager, D. S., Hausman, H., Muhich, J., Dolle, J. R., Grunow, A., …
& Gomez, L. (2013, June). Improvement research carried out through networked communities: Accelerating learning about practices that support more
productive student mindsets. In A White Paper prepared for the White House
meeting on “Excellence in Education: The Importance of Academic Mindsets.
Retrieved from http://www.carnegiefoundation.org/sites/default/files/improvement_research_NICs_bryk-yeager.pdf
Casillas, A., Robbins, S., Allen, J., Kuo, Y. L., Ann Hanson, M., & Schmeiser, C.
(2012). Predicting early academic failure in high school from prior academic
achievement, psychosocial characteristics, and behavior. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 104, 407-420. doi:10.1037/a0027180
Cheung, G. W., & Rensvold, R. B. (2002). Evaluating goodness-of-fit indexes for
testing measurement invariance. Structural Equation Modeling, 9, 233-255.
doi:10.1207/s15328007sem0902_5
Cohen, G. L., & Garcia, J. (2005). “ I am us”: negative stereotypes as collective
threats. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89(4), 566-582. doi:
10.1037/0022-3514.89.4.566
Conley, A. M. (2012). Patterns of motivational beliefs: Combining achievement goals
and expectancy-value perspectives. Journal of Educational Psychology, 1, 32-47.
doi:10.1037/a0026042

Kosovich et al.	

813

Durik, A. M., Vida, M., & Eccles, J. S. (2006). Task values and ability beliefs as
predictors of high school literacy choices: A developmental analysis. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 98, 382-393. doi:10.1037/0022-0663.98.2.382
Dweck, C. (2006). Mindset: The new psychology of success. New York, NY: Random
House, LLC. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.5860/choice.44-2397
Easton, J. Q. (2013, June). Using measurement as leverage between developmental
research and educational practice. Charlottesville, VA: Center for the Advanced
Study of Teaching and Learning.
Eccles, J. S., Adler, T. F., Futterman, R., Goff, S. B., Kaczala, C. M., Meece, J.
L., & Midgley, C. (1983). Expectancies, values, and academic behaviors. In J.
T. Spence (Ed.), Achievement and achievement motivation (pp. 74-146). San
Francisco, CA: W. H. Freeman.
Eccles, J. S., & Wigfield, A. (1995). In the mind of the actor: The structure of adolescents’ achievement task values and expectancy-related beliefs. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 21, 215-225. doi:10.1177/0146167295213003
Eccles, J. S., & Wigfield, A. (2000). Schoolings influences on motivation and achievement. In S. Danzinger & J. Waldfogel (Eds.), Securing the future: Investing in
children from birth to college (pp. 153-181). New York, NY: Russell Sage.
Feather, N. T. (1988). Values, valences, and course enrollment: Testing the role of
personal values within an expectancy-valence framework. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 80, 381-391. doi:10.1037/0022-0663.80.3.381
Flake, J. K. (2012). Measuring cost: The forgotten component of expectancy value
theory (Unpublished master’s thesis). James Madison University, Harrisonburg,
VA.
Flake, J. K., Barron, K. E., Hulleman, C. S., Lazowski, R. A., Grays, M. P., & Fessler,
D. (2011, May 26-29). Evaluating cost: The forgotten component of expectancyvalue theory. Poster presented at the 23rd annual convention for the Association
for Psychological Sciences, Washington, DC.
Getty, S. R., Hulleman, C. S., Barron, K. E., Stuhlsatz, A. M., & Marks, J. C.
(April, 2013). Factors that affect learning in high school science; measuring
motivation, achievement, and interest in science. Paper presented at the meeting of the National Association for Research in Science Teaching, San Juan,
Puerto Rico.
Global Science Forum. (2006). Encouraging student interest in science and technology studies. OECD.
Grays, M. P. (2013). Measuring motivation for coursework across the academic
career: A longitudinal invariance study (Unpublished doctoral dissertation).
James Madison University, Harrisonburg, VA.
Gresham, F. M. (2004). Current status and future directions of school-based behavioral interventions. School Psychology Review, 33, 326-343. Retrieved from
http://www.nasponline.org/publications/spr/index-list.aspx
Gresham, F. M., & Lopez, M. F. (1996). Social validation: A unifying concept for
school-based consultation research and practice. School Psychology Quarterly,
11, 204-227. doi:10.1037/h0088930

814	

Journal of Early Adolescence 35(5-6)

Hooper, D., Coughlan, J., & Mullen, M. R. (2008). Structural equation modelling:
Guidelines for determining model fit. Electronic Journal of Business Research
Methods, 6, 53-59. Retrieved from http://www.ejbrm.com/main.html
Hulleman, C. S., Barron, K. E., Kosovich, J. J., & Lazowski, R. A. (in press)
Expectancy-value models of achievement motivation in education. To appear
in: A. A. Lipnevich, F. Preckel, & R. D. Robers (Eds.), Psychosocial skills and
school systems in the Twenty-First century: Theory, research, and applications.
New York, NY: Springer.
Hulleman, C. S., Godes, O., Hendricks, B., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2010). Enhancing
interest and performance with a utility value intervention. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 102, 880-895. doi:10.1037/a0019506
Hulleman, C. S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2009). Promoting interest and performance in high school science classes. Science, 326, 1410-1412. doi:10.1126/science.1177067
Iacobucci, D. (2009). Everything you always wanted to know about SEM (structural
equations modeling) but were afraid to ask. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 19,
673-680. doi:10.1016/j.jcps.2009.09.002
Jacobs, J. E., Lanza, S., Osgood, D. W., Eccles, J. S., & Wigfield, A. (2002). Changes
in children’s self-competence and values: Gender and domain differences across
grades one through twelve. Child Development, 73, 509-527. doi:10.1111/14678624.00421
Kline, R. B. (2011). Principles and practice of structural equation modeling (3rd ed.).
New York, NY: Guilford.
Lazowski, R. A., Hulleman, C. S., Barron, K. E., & Getty, S. (2012, September).
Development of an expectancy-value scale for an online science curriculum.
Paper presented at the Motivation Retreat, University of Tubingen, Germany.
Little, T. D., Slegers, D. W., & Card, N. A. (2006). A non-arbitrary method of identifying latent variables in SEM and MACS models. Structural Equation Modeling,
13, 59-72. doi:10.1207/s15328007sem1301_3
Marsh, H. W., Scalas, L. F., & Nagengast, B. (2010). Longitudinal tests of competing factor structures for the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale: Traits, ephemeral
artifacts, and stable response styles. Psychological Assessment, 22, 366-381.
doi:10.1037/a0019225
Messick, S. (1995). Validity of psychological assessment: Validation of inferences
from persons’ responses and performances as scientific inquiry into score meaning. American Psychologist, 50, 741-749. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.50.9.741
Murphy, P. K., & Alexander, P. A. (2000). A motivated exploration of motivation
terminology. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 25(1), 3-53. doi:10.1006/
ceps.1999.1019
National Research Council. (2010). Rising above the gathering storm, revisited:
Rapidly approaching category 5. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Parsons, J. E. (1980). Self-perceptions, task perceptions, and academic choice: Origins
and change (Unpublished final technical report, ERIC Document Reproduction
Service No. ED 186577). Washington, DC: National Institute of Education.

Kosovich et al.	

815

Pintrich, P. R. (2003). A motivational science perspective on the role of student motivation in learning and teaching contexts. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95,
667-686. doi:10.1037/0022-0663.95.4.667
Rhemtulla, M., Brosseau-Liard, P. E., & Savalei, V. (2012). When can categorical
variables be treated as continuous? A comparison of robust continuous and categorical SEM estimation methods under suboptimal conditions. Psychological
Methods, 17, 354-373. doi:10.1037/a0029315
Satorra, A., & Bentler, P. M. (2010). Ensuring positiveness of the scaled difference
chi-square test statistic. Psychometrika, 75, 243-248. doi:10.1007/s11336-0099135-y
Silva, E., & White, T. (2013). Pathways to improvement: Using psychological strategies to help college students master developmental math. Stanford, CA: Carnegie
Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching.
Snipes, J., Fancsali, C., & Stoker, G. (2012). Student academic mindset interventions:
A review of the current landscape. San Francisco, CA: The Stupski Foundation.
Steiger, J. H. (2007). Understanding the limitations of global fit assessment in structural equation modeling. Personality and Individual Differences, 42, 893-898.
doi:10.1016/j.paid.2006.09.017
Stewart, R. M., Benner, G. J., Martella, R. C., & Marchand-Martella, N. E. (2007).
Three-tier models of reading and behavior: A research review. Journal of Positive
Behavior Interventions, 9, 239-253. doi:10.1177/10983007070090040601
Trautwein, U., Marsh, H. W., Nagengast, B., Lüdtke, O., Nagy, G., & Jonkmann, K.
(2012). Probing for the multiplicative term in modern expectancy–value theory:
A latent interaction modeling study. Journal of Educational Psychology, 104,
763-777. doi:10.1037/a0027470
Vandenberg, R. J., & Lance, C. E. (2000). A review and synthesis of the measurement invariance literature: Suggestions, practices, and recommendations for organizational research. Organizational Research Methods, 3, 4-70.
doi:10.1177/109442810031002
Wigfield, A., & Cambria, J. (2010). Expectancy-value theory: Retrospective and
prospective. In T. C. Urdan & S. A. Karabenick (Eds.), The decade ahead:
Theoretical perspectives on motivation and achievement (Vol. 16, pp. 74-146).
Bingley, UK: Emerald Group Publishing Limited.
Yang, Y., & Green, S. (2011). Coefficient alpha: A reliability coefficient for
the 21st century? Journal of Psychoeducational Assessment, 29, 377-392.
doi:10.1177/0734282911406668
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological interventions in education: They’re not magic. Review of Educational Research, 81, 267-301.
doi:10.3102/0034654311405999

Author Biographies
Jeff J. Kosovich is a PhD student in the Educational Psychology: Applied
Developmental Science program at the University of Virginia. He earned his MA in

816	

Journal of Early Adolescence 35(5-6)

quantitative psychology at James Madison University in 2013 and his BA in psychology at Northern Illinois University in 2011.
Chris S. Hulleman is a research associate professor in the Department of Educational
Leadership, Policy, and Foundations in the Curry School of Education and the Center
for Advanced Study of Teaching and Learning at the University of Virginia. He also
co-coordinates the Motivation Research Institute at James Madison University. He
received his PhD in social and personality psychology from the University of
Wisconsin–Madison.
Kenneth E. Barron is a professor of psychology at James Madison University where
he co-coordinates the Motivation Research Institute and is a faculty affiliate in the
Center for Faculty Innovation. He received his PhD in social and personality psychology from the University of Wisconsin–Madison.
Steve Getty is the director of the Quantitative Reasoning Center at Colorado College,
Colorado Springs, Colorado. He has a BS in geology from University of Notre Dame,
a MS in geological sciences from Brown University, and a PhD in geological sciences
from Brown University.

Chapter 11

How the Subjective Relationship Between
the Self, Others, and a Task Drives Interest
Allison Master, Lucas P. Butler, and Gregory M. Walton

Allison Master and Lucas P. Butler contributed equally to this
work.

The present chapter explores the hypothesis that an important influence on interest
is the perceived or subjective social context in which a task is completed.
There is an irony in this focus. When people evaluate their interest in a task, they
typically do so with qualities of the task and themselves in mind (Sansone, Thoman,
& Smith, 2010): Is this task novel or appealing? Do I feel capable at it? Is it relevant
to my identity in some way? This focus on the intersection of a person and a task is
also evident in people's experience of being engrossed by a task in the height of
interest (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975). We also typically talk about interest in terms of
the qualities of people (e.g., "She is interested in biology, but he is interested in history") and of tasks (e.g., "Reading my psychology textbook is more interesting than
reading my economics textbook"). Correspondingly, classic theories have emphasized the person-task intersection, such as self-efficacy theory, which emphasizes
people's self-assessed ability on a task or in a setting (Bandura, 1997). Current theories of interest have also incorporated situational factors, such as the objective social

Allison Master and Lucas P. Butler contributed equally to this work.
A. Master (l8l)
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
e-mail: almaster@uw.edu
L.P. Butler
University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA
e-mail: lpbutler@umd.edu
G.M. Walton
Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
e-mail: gwalton@stanford.edu
©Springer International Publishing AG 2017
P.A. 0' Keefe, J.M. Harackiewicz (eds.), The Science of Interest,
DOl 10.1007/978-3-319-55509-6_11

209

210

A. Master et a!.

context in which a person engages with a task, as contributing to interest (Knogler,
Harackiewicz, Gegenfurtner, & Lewalter, 2015; Renninger & Hidi, 2016; Sansone
& Thoman, 2005).
Extending this approach, we focus on the subjective social context in which a
task is completed-simply people's perception of the relationship between themselves, a task, and other people engaged in the task. We call this the triadic relationship in which a task is completed. In general, we theorize that when people perceive
themselves to be connected to others engaged in a task, or working with others on
the task rather than separately, this will inspire greater interest and engagement.
Consistent with our theorizing, research shows that both children and adults experience greater interest when working with or alongside a partner (Isaac, Sansone, &
Smith, 1999). But the social context is also subjective-that is, people perceive and
draw inferences about their relationships with other people in the setting-and these
inferences can be consequential (e.g., Steele, 1997). Imagine going for a hike with
another person. Even if the other person walks ahead of you out of sight, your experience is fundamentally different than if you were truly alone because the experience is shared. The subjective social context can also shift in substantive ways even
when people engage in a personal task. Consider a student sitting down to work on
her math homework. She may be physically alone, yet aware of her friends working
through the same problems. She could think of herself and her friends as working
on the problems together, for instance if she talked with her friends about the problems earlier in the day or anticipates going through them together the next day in
school. Alternately, without such communications, she could think of herself and
her friends as working on the same assignment but separately. As this case illustrates, even when people work alone, they may do so on terms defined by their
understanding of how the activity is situated in a broader social context.
This chapter focuses primarily on how the triadic relationship between the self,
a task, and others engaged in the task gives rise to situational interest, a psychological state influenced by the situation the person is in. This is distinguished from
individual interest, an enduring characteristic of the person (Hidi & Renninger,
2006). Interest emerges from a person's affective and cognitive responses to particular content that contribute to a desire to reengage with that content in the future
(Hidi & Harackiewicz, 2000; Renninger & Hidi, 2016). While interest is sometimes
used interchangeably with intrinsic motivation (Schiefele, 1999), we define the latter as a tendency to engage in activities for their own sake (Sansone & Thoman,
2005). We view interest and intrinsic motivation as having a recursive relationship-increased interest can lead people to increased intrinsic motivation (as measured by greater persistence and goal pursuit, even in the face of challenge), and the
experience of being intrinsically motivated can lead to greater interest (Renninger &
Hidi, 2016).

11

How the Subjective Relationship Between the Self, Others, and a Task ...

211

The Objective and Subjective Social Context
In focusing on the subjective social context, our argument implies that the social
context always plays a part in interest, and a larger part than many existing theories
credit. When previous theories have examined the role of the social context, they
have tended to emphasize the objective social context. These include the physical
presence of others, which can facilitate dominant responses to a task (e.g., Zajonc,
1965); cooperation or competition with others who are physically present
(Murayama & Elliot, 2012; Plass, O'Keefe et al., 2013; Tauer & Harackiewicz,
2004); social comparison information, which shows that people often work harder
when they compare themselves to someone more capable (Festinger, 1954; Kerr
et al., 2007; Taylor & Lobel, 1989); and situations in which people's inputs to a collective task are unmarked, which can elicit social loafing, or in which outcomes are
codependent with others who appear incompetent, which can elicit compensatory
motivation (Williams & Karau, 1991; Williams, Karau, & Bourgeois, 1993).
Alternately, previous theories have emphasized the role of inherently important
people, like one's mother, who may be associated with specific motivations
(Fitzsimons & Bargh, 2003; Iyengar & Lepper, 1999), or broad threats to one's
belonging in general, which can undermine self-regulated goal pursuit (Baumeister,
Twenge, & Nuss, 2002).
Complementing these approaches, we argue that the subjective sense that one is
connected to others engaged in a task--even to new interaction partners-can transform a person's interest (see Fig. 11.1). This transformation hinges on at least two
aspects of an individual's psychological experience of the social context. The first is
their perception of the personal connection they have (or do not have) to others
engaged with the task. People can automatically take on the goals of others (Aarts,

Task
Fig. 11.1 The triadic relationship. Interest is not just a function of the relationship between a
person and a task, but also the perceived relationship between a person, a task, and other people

212

A. Master et al.

Gollwitzer, & Hassin, 2004); we suggest that when people feel connected to others,
they will be more likely to incorporate their interests as their own. The second is a
person's perception of the relationship between themselves, others engaged in the
task, and the task. When people feel they are working together on a shared task,
their interest may increase. This approach emphasizes interest as arising not just
from the intersection between a person and a task-such as a person's confidence in
their ability-but as a consequence of the triadic relationship among a person, a
task, and the other people in the social context.
A primary feature of our approach is that it highlights people's subjective construal of the social situation-the situation as understood by the actor. It is this
construal that most directly shapes people's behavior (Ross & Nisbett, 1991). In
some cases people make sense of their relationships with others in a setting from
objective aspects of the social context (e.g., much of the developmental work; Isaac
et al., 1999). But we also examine how these perceived relationships can arise from
simple symbolic cues. These cues can create a sense of social connection with others engaged in a task or a sense of belonging in a performance domain, holding
constant actual interaction and the objective social setting (Carr & Walton, 20 14;
Murphy, Steele, & Gross, 2007; Walton, Cohen, Cwir, & Spencer, 2012).
In this chapter, we explore how the triadic relationship between the self, a task,
and others in the social context shapes situational interest and intrinsic motivation
at different stages of development. In infancy, the importance of the social context
is clearly illustrated in the overt, visible scaffolding between infants, adults, and
learning contexts, as seen in situations involving social referencing and joint attention to an object (Baldwin, 1991; Sorce, Emde, Campos, & Klinnert, 1985) and the
use of an adult as a secure base for exploration (Ainsworth, Blehar, Waters, & Wall,
1978). Next, we argue that this triadic relationship remains important for adults, but
can also arise in more subtle and complicated forms later in life. Finally, we discuss
implications for our understanding of interest, including possible targets for "wise"
interventions that could capitalize on triadic relationship processes to boost children's and adults' interest in important academic tasks (see Walton, 2014).

Theoretical Background
Why should the triadic relationship influence interest? An important reason involves
the automatic tendency of people to connect to others, the benefits of doing so, and
the fact that in doing so people often develop a shared orientation toward important
aspects of the world (see Walton & Cohen, 2011b). The need to belong is a basic
source of human motivation for adults (Baumeister & Leary, 1995) and children
(Over, 2016). One indicator of its importance is in the consequences when it is disrupted. Indeed, when people imagine themselves excluded, they experience emotional and cognitive distress, even in trivial situations (Baumeister et al., 2002;
Williams & Nida, 2011). Moreover, from infancy people show a basic orientation

11

How the Subjective Relationship Between the Self, Others, and a Task ...

213

toward and coordination with others (Csibra, 2010; Farroni et al., 2005; Morton &
Johnson, 1991). Adults unconsciously mimic the behavior of others, and this mimicry both causes social connections and results from social connections (Chartrand
& Bargh, 1999). People also overcome barriers to coordinate behavior with others.
In one study, people sitting in rocking chairs synchronized their rocking speeds with
each other, even when their chairs were designed to rock at different frequencies
(Richardson, Marsh, Isenhower, Goodman, & Schmidt, 2007). The pronouns "we"
and "us" further have a positive emotional significance that is activated automatically and unconsciously (Perdue, Dovidio, Gurtman, & Tyler, 1990). In close relationships, representations of the self and other can even merge, so that people get
the characteristics of the self confused with the characteristics of the relationship
partner (Aron et al., 2004).
People also have inclinations to share attention, behavior, and cognitions with
others when responding to events in the world or when engaged in tasks. Similar
neural mechanisms are involved in monitoring one's own and others' performance,
creating parallel responses to events that occur to one person (Sebanz, Bekkering, &
Knoblich, 2006). As noted, goals (e.g., to be helpful) can spread from one person to
another automatically (Aarts et al., 2004). Suggesting that one function of this sharing is to cement social relationships, these tendencies can be increased by even
subtle recognition of the social connections between people. In one study, participants who felt socially connected to a peer (due to shared personal preferences)
experienced more similar emotional and physiological states as that peer, and this
effect was mediated by their sense of connectedness to that person (Cwir, Carr,
Walton, & Spencer, 2011). When people simply believe that they are paying attention to or experiencing something with other people this intensifies responses to that
object or event, particularly when people feel connected to these co-observers (see
Shteynberg, 2015). In a series of studies, participants made quicker and more accurate judgments about stimuli when they believed similar others were also evaluating
the same stimuli, compared to dissimilar others or different stimuli (Shteynberg,
2010). Similarly, sharing goals or emotions with similar others (compared to dissimilar others) intensifies the pursuit of those goals and the experience of those
emotions (Shteynberg & Galinsky, 2011; Shteynberg et al., 2014).
This sensitivity to cues that connect a person to others engaged in a task is functional. It brings people closer to others and builds a sense of belonging to a community (Aron, Norman, Aron, McKenna, & Heyman, 2000; Aronson, 2004;
Baumeister & Leary, 1995). And it helps people accomplish goals that would be
impossible to accomplish alone (Asch, 1952; Vygotsky, 1978). Indeed, theorists
suggest that the capacity and desire to share intentions with others confers human
many advantages, including the development and transmission of culture and language, and sets us apart from other primates (Tomasello, Carpenter, Call, Behne, &
Moll, 2005).
Together, this evidence indicates the importance of social connections to our
experiences. The next sections explore empirical evidence for the triadic relationship in more detail.

214

A. Master et al.

Evidence from Development
Many theories of development emphasize the way in which adults create social situ. ations that engage infants and young children with tasks that promote exploration
and learning (e.g., Ainsworth et al., 1978; Vygotsky, 1978). This tradition suggests
that the triadic relationship between an individual, a task, and others in the subjective social context may play a fundamental role in interest from an early age. If so,
even young children may be more interested in tasks that are perceived to involve
social connection or engagement, and we may see continuity in this effect over the
course of development.
Indeed, from the very earliest days of life, infants selectively attend to social
stimuli such as eyes and faces, preferentially orienting towards them rather than to
non-social stimuli (Csibra, 2010; Farroni et al., 2005; Morton & Johnson, 1991).
This early sensitivity sets the stage for the essential role of social relationships and
interactions in development. From an early age, infants show a surprisingly sophisticated understanding of the social world. As early as 5 months of age, infants attend
to the goals underlying the actions of others (Woodward, 1998). During the second
year of life if not earlier they recognize that others are "like them," and that others'
actions will be based on their perceptions, just as their own actions are (Meltzoff,
2007). They also draw inferences about others' desires and preferences (Kushnir,
Xu, & Wellman, 2010; Repacholi & Gopnik, 1997). Finally, they seek to imitate
others in order to affiliate and build social bonds, for example more closely imitating when they have been primed with cues of rejection (Over & Carpenter, 2013).
Thus, from early in development, children are attentive to social stimuli and motivated to engage with others to infer others' goals, and to build relationships. From
an early age, then, children are equipped to share interests and goals with others.
Moreover, it is clear that this early sociality plays an important role in young
children's interest, and that the triadic relationship between the self, a task, and others in the social context is at its core. In the first 2 years of life, as soon as they are
capable, children are particularly interested in engaging socially with others on joint
tasks. For instance, 12-month-olds point informatively to make others aware of
something new (Liszkowski, Carpenter, & Tomasello, 2007) or to locate hidden
objects (Liszkowski et al., 2008). Fourteen-month-olds imitate others' goal-directed
actions (Meltzoff, 1995) and help others achieve their goals (Over & Carpenter,
2009; Warneken & Tomasello, 2006, 2007). In addition, 2-year-olds are highly
interested in collaborative social games (Dunham & Moore, 1995; Ross & Lollis,
1987; Warneken, Chen, & Tomasello, 2006), urging partners to continue participating even when they can accomplish the task alone (Warneken, Grafenhain, &
Tomasello, 2012). They also spontaneously help adults achieve their instrumental
(Warneken & Tomasello, 2006) and social goals (Beier, Over, & Carpenter, 2014).
Children are also interested not only in engaging with others or helping others
with their goals, but in collaborating on a shared task. They show some basic cooperative skills at 14 months, coordinating their actions with an adult partner in order

11

How the Subjective Relationship Between the Self, Others, and a Task ...

215

to achieve a goal such as retrieving a toy (Warneken & Tomasello, 2007). Between
ages 2 and 3 they begin to collaboratively solve simple physical problems (Ashley
& Tomasello, 1998; Brownell & Carriger, 1990). By 3 they prefer to work cooperatively rather than work alone (Rekers, Haun, & Tomasello, 2011). This preference
may confer benefits. In one study, 4- and 5-year-olds who worked on a task in pairs
showed more positive affect, performed better on the task, and remembered it better
than children who worked alone, especially the 5-year-olds (Perlmutter, Behrend,
Kuo, & Muller, 1989). And children who made music together (i.e., had a shared
goal in their music playing, by drumming together rather than independently) were
more likely to spontaneously engage in prosocial behavior later, suggesting a link
between social connection around a task and later social motivations (Kirschner &
Tomasello, 2010). Finally, it appears that children are sensitive to cues in interpersonal interactions that help to define their relationships with others. In one study,
preschoolers showed significantly more helping behavior when the person needing
help had first engaged them in reciprocal, rather than parallel play (Barragan &
Dweck, 2014). By middle school, the relationship may be more complex. In one
study, middle-school students showed higher situational interest when they engaged
socially in a math game, either competitively or cooperatively, than when they
played individually (Plass, O'Keefe et al., 2013). When taken together, these streams
of research show that children have a drive not only to engage socially with others
from birth but to do so in a collaborative, cooperative manner centered around the
triadic relationship between the self, a task, and other people in the social context.
These past studies have focused on the objective social context; however, recent
research also finds that young children are also responsive to subtle cues that shape
the subjective social context in which they complete a task and, moreover, these
cues inspire motivation and interest. One set of studies focused on the connection a
child may feel with peers engaged in a task (Master & Walton, 2013). Preschoolers
were given the opportunity to work on a challenging puzzle for as long as they liked.
Before beginning, children in one condition were told they were part of "the puzzles
group," thus giving them a group identity associated with the task; children in the
other condition were told that they were "the puzzles child," giving them a personal
identity associated with the task. All children then worked on the puzzle on their
own. Those in the group condition persisted nearly 30% longer than children in the
non-social identity condition. A second study found that merely being assigned to a
group but one not associated with puzzles did not produce the same increase in
motivation. Only when the group identity was associated with puzzles, creating a
triadic relationship between the self, the task, and other children, did motivation
increase. A third study extended the findings to word learning: children assigned to
a group associated with a task learned more from the task than children assigned a
personal identity associated with a task. Follow-up studies find that children also
report greater enjoyment for and are more likely to prefer tasks completed as part of
a task-oriented group (Master, Cheryan, & Meltzoff, 2017). These studies illustrate
how the triadic relationship between the self, a task, and others in the social context
can boost persistence, learning, and interest early in development.

216

A. Master et al.

A second set of studies examined whether cues that merely represent one as
working together on a task, even absent a group identity, might have similar effects
(Butler & Walton, 2013). As in the studies just described, preschool-aged children
were given the opportunity to work for as long as they liked on a challenging puzzle
and did so on their own. In one condition, however, children first viewed a video of
a child in another room starting to work on the puzzle, were told the video was live
and were told that they and the other child were "doing the puzzle together." In the
other condition, children saw the same video but were told that this was a recording
from a different day when the other child had also done the puzzle. Thus, as in the
studies on belonging to a group, the objective situation was identical across conditions--children worked alone on a puzzle task-but the construal of the situation
varied. Children led to see the situation as one in which they were collaborating
with another child worked more than 40% longer on the puzzle than children led to
think of themselves as simply working on the same task another child had also
worked on; they also reported enjoying the task more. A second study found that the
working-together condition also increased persistence and enjoyment relative to a
second control condition, one in which another child worked on the same puzzle at
the same time but without creating the same triadic relationship--one where children were told they were taking turns with the other child.
These studies provide promising evidence that perceived triadic relationships
may play an important role in even young children's situational interest.

Evidence from Adulthood
The previous section showed that the triadic relationship between the self, a task,
and others in the social context is present and psychologically meaningful early in
childhood. Cues that encourage young children simply to construe a situation as one
in which they are connected to others associated with a task or jointly engaged on a
task boosts children's motivation and situational interest.
We now turn to relevant evidence in adulthood. It is certainly possible that the
triadic relationship between the self, a task, and others in the social context wanes
in importance as adults become more independent and autonomous. Indeed, as we
grow older, we are less likely to need overt scaffolding from others. However, we
argue that the social context and real and perceived relationships with others remain
important, and do so even when they operate in the background as people focus on
a task (Csikszentrnihalyi, 1975). This may be most likely when people are considering a new, unfamiliar domain or task. First, we discuss evidence that people value
objects and experiences more if they are connected to others. We then examine
whether people show greater interest and motivation for tasks that are social, even
as a consequence of subtle cues.

11

How the Subjective Relationship Between the Self, Others, and a Task ...

217

Do We Value Social Objects and Experiences More?
Pablo Neruda's Ode to Things describes a love for all things because they "bear the
trace of someone's finger" (Neruda, 1994). Of course, we do not assign more value
to used objects, which might be less useful, or objects like t-shirts that have been
physically touched by others, which might be off-putting (Argo, Dahl, & Morales,
2006). But we perceive more value in objects that belonged to someone admirable,
such as Albert Einstein, and less value in those that belonged to someone evil like
Hitler (Newman, Diesendruck, & Bloom, 2011), an effect shown even by young
children (Gelman, Frazier, Noles, Manczak, & Stilwell, 2015). And obviously
objects that are handmade and thus less common can be more valuable than objects
from a factory. But holding all of those things constant, the mere idea that an object
has a social history, that a person, even a generic stranger, contributed to its creation,
makes it more appealing. In one study participants learned that a product was "made
by people using machines in a small factory in Nebraska," prioritizing the role of
people. This "social trace" caused people to value those objects more than objects
"made by machines run by people in a small factory in Nebraska" (Job, Nikitin,
Zhang, Carr, & Walton, 2017). Simply prioritizing the social history of the object
increased its value.
We also value activities more when they are social. One study gave adults a
choice between completing a "dull" activity (e.g., listening to audio-tones) or a
parallel "appealing" activity (e.g., listening to music). When both activities would
be done alone, unsurprisingly participants strongly preferred the appealing activity.
When the dull activity could be done with others, however, participants' preference
for that activity relative to the appealing activity rose by 40% and they reported a
smaller difference in how enjoyable they anticipated the activities being (described
in Walton & Cohen, 2011b). When a task is social, it affords opportunities for social
connections, exchanging emotions, and collaborating, placing it in a different light.
Thus, both objects and activities take on additional value and become more interesting when connected to others.

Does Social Connection Increase Our Interest and Motivation?
Objective features of the social context in which people complete a task that facilitate connections with others can increase interest and intrinsic motivation. As mentioned previously, simply working with another person increases interest in an
activity (Isaac et al., 1999). The experience of talking with others about an activity
or class can also increase people's current and future interest in that activity or class
(Thoman, Sansone, Fraughton, & Pasupathi, 2012; Thoman, Sansone, & Pasupathi,
2007). Other research has found that membership in academic groups in real-world
classrooms can promote learning and achievement (Aronson & Osherow, 1980;
Johnson & Johnson, 2009), while feeling socially connected to peers and teachers

218

A. Master et al.

in school in general predicts greater intrinsic motivation for academic tasks (e.g.,
Furrer & Skinner, 2003; Goodenow, 1992; Hamre & Pianta, 2005).
These studies examined real social interactions. However, echoing the recent
developmental research presented earlier (Butler & Walton, 2013; Master & Walton,
2013), subjective social cues can also define a triadic relationship between a person,
a task, and others in the social context and thereby increase interest. As in the developmental work, research with adults has examined cues that convey two important
representations of this triadic relationship: a sense of connection to others associated with a domain and a sense of working together with another person.

How Social Belonging Boosts Interest and Motivation Even minimal cues that
establish a sense of social connection with others can facilitate the social sharing of
interest and motivation. We call these cues "mere belonging."
One series of studies tested this hypothesis in the context of students' motivation
for math (Walton et al., 2012). In one study, participants read an article about a math
major who either shared their birthday or did not. Those for whom the math major
shared their birthday persisted longer on a math puzzle and reported greater interest
in math, an effect mediated by a greater sense of connection to math. In another
study, participants told they were part of a minimal "numbers group" persisted longer on an insoluble math puzzle than participants told they were the "numbers person." In a third study, participants who read that the math department offered
opportunities for collaboration and positive social interactions likewise showed
greater motivation in math.
These findings and follow-up studies on goal activation (Walton et al., 2012) suggest an active process in which a social connection with others increases the activation of others' goals and interest in pursuing them (see also Brannon & Walton,
2013; Cwir et al., 2011; Master & Walton, 2013). This effect can be observed even
when people's behavior is freely chosen and in private, suggesting that people have
internalized the interests and motivations of others for themselves.
How Working Together Boosts Interest and Motivation Another important representation of the triadic relationship is whether people think of themselves as working with others or separately from others. Although working together can be created
by the objective social context (Isaac et al., 1999), subtle cues can also signal a state
of working together and facilitate interest and intrinsic motivation (e.g., Butler &
Walton, 2013). For example, as noted earlier students may study on their own for a
class but, having exchanged tips and encouragement on the material with peers,
may thereby experience a feeling of working together as they study. Absent such
communications, even students working on a group project may construe their personal labor as separate from even if coordinated with other students' labor. We
argue adults as well as young children respond to cues that evoke the feeling of
working together with increased interest and motivation, and do so over and above
simply working at the same time on the same task as others.
Testing this hypothesis, in one series of studies, participants worked alone on an
insoluble puzzle. However, some participants were treated as partners working with
others on the task, while others were treated as working in parallel with others-at

11

How the Subjective Relationship Between the Self, Others, and a Task ...

219

the same time, in the same environment, and on the same task, but not as together
(Carr & Walton, 2014). Participants came to the laboratory in small groups, met,
and then went to individual rooms where they were assigned to a condition. In the
working-together condition, the experimenter told participants that the study concerned tips and puzzles and that they were "working together" with the other participants. The experimenter then explained that a coin flip (ostensibly determined by
chance) would determine whether the participant would write a tip to another participant or receive a tip from one. All participants in this condition were then told
that they had been assigned to receive a tip. The control condition was identical
except that participants were not told that they were "working together" and believed
they would write a tip for or receive a tip from the experimenter rather than another
participant. In this condition participants thus learned that they would be working at
the same time and on the same task as others in the same environment but without
cues that signaled a state of working together.
This procedure held constant an array of other factors. The recipient of the tip
was ostensibly random, and thus not a signal of the perceived ability of the recipient. The tip participants received in both conditions was provided quickly and
recounted an unsuccessful strategy for the puzzle; it thus provided minimal information about the other person's performance. In both conditions, participants also
worked alone, in separate rooms, on their own task.
Across five experiments, participants in the working-together condition persisted
48-64% longer on the puzzle, rated the task as more enjoyable, were more likely to
say that they had worked hard on it because it was interesting, were more engaged
in the task (as shown by better memory for it later), and performed better on it.
Why did the feeling of working together increase interest, intrinsic motivation,
and performance? It was not because of external pressures-there was no difference
in participants' feelings of obligation to others or sense of competition with others.
It was also not because of negative emotions-there was no evidence that working
together increased worries about being evaluated or judged based on their performance. Instead, cues of working together created a feeling of working together with
others on a challenging task. When we engage in a task jointly with others, the task
takes on social meaning that can help turn work into play (see also Shteynberg &
Galinsky, 2011).

Applications and Intervention
We have argued that the triadic relationship between the self, a task or domain, and
other people in the subjective social context can have a powerful effect on interest
and motivation from our earliest days through adulthood. In incorporating the subjective social context, this perspective complements previous research on interest
and motivation that focuses on the relationship between a person and a task, such as
how choice (Cordova & Lepper, 1996) and beliefs about individual autonomy and
competence (e.g., Bandura, 1997; Carver & Scheier, 2001) drive interest, as well as

220

A. Master et a!.

recent work emphasizing the importance of the objective social context (Knogler
et al., 2015; Renninger & Hidi, 2016; Sansone & Thoman, 2005). The crux of our
proposal is that individuals' construal of a task as one in which they feel connected
with others and jointly engaged with others can have major impacts on interest, even
from the earliest years of development.
Taken together, this research suggests promising potential targets for interventions to raise interest and motivation in important school, work, and other contexts.
Such interventions would harness the power of this triadic relationship. Although
not narrowly targeted at the triadic relationship we have discussed here, research
demonstrates that interventions to promote students' sense of belonging in school
can have powerful and lasting effects on motivation and achievement (Walton &
Cohen, 2007, 2011a; Walton, Logel, Peach, Spencer, & Zanna, 2015; Yeager et al.,
2016).
These interventions are predicated on research indicating that students who face
social stigma, negative stereotypes, or the underrepresentation of their group in
school can, as a consequence, harbor persistent doubts about whether they belong
(Walton & Cohen, 2007). This question of social belonging can lead students to
infer from even commonplace negative events like feeling lonely or receiving critical academic feedback that they do not belong in general in school. This prevents
students from engaging with others in school and developing interest in coursework
(Cheryan, Master, & Meltzoff, 2015; Mendoza-Denton, Downey, Purdie, Davis, &
Pietrzak, 2002). To address this worry, the social-belonging intervention offers students a more hopeful narrative for making sense of daily adversities. Through stories from older students, first-year students learn that worries about belonging are
normal in an academic transition and improve with time, not proof of a lack of
belonging. Students then have the opportunity to reflect on these ideas and write
about how this process of change has been true for them. In one trial, this exercise
completed in an hour-long session in the first year of college raised African
American students' achievement through graduation, halving the racial achievement gap over this 3-year period (Walton & Cohen, 201la). Although interest was
not measured, it is likely that feeling a secure sense of belonging allowed students
to relax and pursue their academic interests. Such benefits have been observed in a
variety of groups that are marginalized in academic settings, including among
women in male-dominated engineering fields (Walton et al., 2015) and among
diverse disadvantaged ethnic-minority groups and first-generation college students
(Stephens, Hamedani, & Destin, 2014; Yeager et al. 2016). This research illustrates
the importance of how students make sense of their social relationships in school.
What might an intervention that targeted the triadic relationship precisely look like?
Such an intervention would help people see themselves as connected to others
engaged in a setting or a task, or as working with others in or on it. Importantly, this
may be done through subjective cues that signal the relationships among the self, a
task, and others-it may not require a change in the objective social context (Wing
& Jeffery, 1999). This area of research is growing rapidly; here are some promising
early examples.

11

How the Subjective Relationship Between the Self, Others, and a Task ...

221

Extending the research we presented earlier on "mere belonging" (Walton et al.,
2012), one intervention provided 9th grade teachers information about personal
similarities they shared with a random subset of their students (Gehlbach et al.,
2016), which presumably led teachers to interact with these students in ways that
facilitated stronger relationships. This raised course grades for Black and Latino
students, for whom personal relationships in school may otherwise be weakest,
reducing the achievement gap between those students and White and Asian students
by 60%.
Or consider social-norm interventions. People are often thought to conform to
social norms merely because what others do is taken as a sign of what is effective
and what is sanctioned (Cialdini & Trost, 1998). However, normative appeals can
also often represent a collective effort toward a common goal and invite people to
work together toward this goal. For instance, Goldstein, Cialdini, and Griskevicius
(2008) induced more hotel guests to reuse towels with a normative appeal that
explicitly invited people to work together ("JOIN YOUR FELLOW GUESTS IN
HELPING TO SAVE THE ENVIRONMENT. Almost 75% of guests ... [reuse] their
towels more than once," capitalized in the original) as compared to an appeal that
focused only on the environmental benefits ("HELP SAVE THE ENVIRONMENT").
Did the aspect of the appeal that invited people to "join" with others to accomplish
a goal evoke a feeling of working together and contribute to its effectiveness?
Testing this hypothesis, Howe, Carr, and Walton (under review) manipulated
whether appeals in three contexts merely provided normative information ("Most
people do X") or also invited people to "join in" and "do it together." As predicted,
as compared to both a no-norm control condition and mere normative information,
participants expressed greater interest in giving to a charity and greater motivation
to reduce personal carbon emissions when exposed to working-together normative
appeals; these effects were further mediated by greater feelings of working together
with others toward a goal. Finally, in a field experiment, restrooms on a college
campus randomly assigned stickers that combined normative information with an
appeal to work together to reduce paper towel use showed significantly greater
reductions in paper towel use over 2 weeks than restrooms where the stickers provided only identical normative information.
These results suggest the power of the perceived triadic relationship to motivate
behavior in prosocial and environmental contexts. They raise intriguing questions
about past research, such as whether classic interventions commonly understood as
demonstrating the power of normative influence also evoked a sense of working
with others toward a goal (e.g., Lewin's [1947] "cheap meat" intervention). Finally,
although these studies have not examined interest and motivation in school or work
settings, in combination with laboratory research (Carr & Walton, 2014) they suggest the potential promise of working-together interventions in these settings and
the importance of research that pursues this question.

222

A. Master et al.

Conclusion
From early in life the subjective social context shapes children's approach to learning and sets the stage for the development of interest into adolescence and adulthood. Clearly more research is needed both to deepen our theoretical understanding
of these processes and to translate these lessons into interventions that can promote
students' development. However, it is clear that creating a sense of personal connection can help students develop interest and thrive in academic contexts.

References
Aarts, H., Gollwitzer, P.M., & Hassin, R. R. (2004). Goal contagion: Perceiving is for pursuing.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87, 23-37.
Ainsworth, M. D. S., Blehar, M. C., Waters, E., & Wall, S. (1978). Patterns of attachment: A psychological study of the strange situation. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Argo, J. J., Dahl, D. W., & Morales, A. C. (2006). Consumer contamination: How consumers react
to products touched by others. Journal of Marketing, 70, 81-94.
Aron, A., McLaughlin-Volpe, T., Mashek, D., Lewandowski, G., Wright, S. C., & Aron, E. N.
(2004). Including others in the self. European Review of Social Psychology, 15, 101-132.
Aron, A., Norman, C. C., Aron, E. N., McKenna, C., & Heyman, R. (2000). Couples' shared
participation in novel and arousing activities and experienced relationship quality. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 273-284.
Aronson, E. (2004). Reducing hostility and building compassion: Lessons from the jigsaw classroom. In A. G. Miller (Ed.), The social psychology of good and evil (pp. 469-488). New York:
Guilford Press.
Aronson, E., & Osherow, N. (1980). Cooperation, prosocial behavior, and academic performance:
Experiments in the desegregated classroom. In L. Bickerman (Ed.), Applied social psychology
annual (pp. 163-196). Beverley Hills, CA: Sage.
Asch, S. E. (1952). Social psychology. New York: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Ashley, J., & Tomasello, M. (1998). Cooperative problem-solving and teaching in preschoolers.
Social Development, 7, 143-163.
Baldwin, D. A. (1991). Infants' contribution to the achievement of joint reference. Child
Development, 62, 874-890.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: W. H. Freeman.
Barragan, R. C., & Dweck, C. S. (2014). Rethinking natural altruism: Simple reciprocal interactions trigger children's benevolence. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Ill,
17071-17074.
Baumeister, R. F., & Leary, M. R. (1995). The need to belong: Desire for interpersonal attachments
as a fundamental human motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 117, 497-529.
Baumeister, R. F., Twenge, J. M., & Nuss, C. K. (2002). Effects of social exclusion on cognitive
processes: Anticipated aloneness reduces intelligent thought. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 83,817-827.
Beier, J. S., Over, H., & Carpenter, M. (2014). Young children help others to achieve their social
goals. Developmental Psychology, 50, 934-940.
Brannon, T. N., & Walton, G. M. (2013). Enacting cultural interests: How intergroup contact
reduces prejudice by sparking interest in an out-group's culture. Psychological Science, 24,
1947-1957.

11

How the Subjective Relationship Between the Self, Others, and a Task ...

223

Brownell, C. A., & Carriger, M.S. (1990). Changes in cooperation and self-other differentiation
during the second year. Child Development, 61, 1164-1174.
Butler, L. P., & Walton, G. M. (2013). The opportunity to collaborate increases preschoolers'
motivation for challenging tasks. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 116,953-961.
Carr, P. B., & Walton, G. M. (2014). Cues of working together fuel intrinsic motivation. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 53, 169-184.
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (2001). On the self-regulation of behavior. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Chartrand, T. L., & Bargh, J. A. (1999). The chameleon effect: The perception-behavior link and
social interaction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 893-910.
Cheryan, S., Master, A., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2015). Cultural stereotypes as gatekeepers: Increasing
girls' interest in computer science and engineering by diversifying stereotypes. Frontiers in
Psychology, 6, 49.
Cialdini, R. B., & Trost, M. R. (1998). Social influence: Social norms, conformity and compliance.
In D. T. Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), The handbook of social psychology, Vols. 1
and 2 (4th ed., pp. 151-192). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Cordova, D. I., & Lepper, M. R. (1996).lntrinsic motivation and the process oflearning: Beneficial
effects of contextualization, personalization, and choice. Journal of Educational Psychology,
88,715-730.
Csibra, G. (2010). Recognizing communicative intentions in infancy. Mind & Language, 25,
141-168.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1975). Beyond boredom and anxiety. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Cwir, D., Carr, P. B., Walton, G. M., & Spencer, S. J. (2011). Your heart makes my heart move:
Cues of social connectedness cause shared emotions and physiological states among strangers.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 47, 661-664.
Dunham, P. J ., & Moore, C. ( 1995). Current themes in research on joint attention. In C. Moore &
P. J. Dunham (Eds.), Joint attention: Its origins and role in development (pp. 15-28). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Farroni, T., Johnson, M. H., Menon, E., Zulian, L., Faraguna, D., & Csibra, G. (2005). Newborns'
preference for face-relevant stimuli: Effects of contrast polarity. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 102, 17245-17250.
Festinger, L. (1954 ). A theory of social comparison processes. Human Relations, 7, 117-140.
Fitzsimons, G. M., & Bargh, J. A. (2003). Thinking of you: Nonconscious pursuit of interpersonal
goals associated with relationship partners. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84,
148-164.
Furrer, C., & Skinner, E. (2003). Sense of relatedness as a factor in children's academic engagement and performance. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95, 148-162.
Gehlbach, H., Brinkworth, M. E., King, A.M., Hsu, L. M., Mcintyre, J., & Rogers, T. (2016).
Creating birds of similar feathers: Leveraging similarity to improve teacher-student relationships and academic achievement. Journal of Educational Psychology, 108, 342-352.
Gelman, S. A., Frazier, B. N., Noles, N. S., Manczak, E. M., & Stilwell, S.M. (2015). How much
are Harry Potter's glasses worth? Children's monetary evaluation of authentic objects. Journal
of Cognition and Development, 16, 97-117.
Goldstein, N.J., Cia1dini, R. B., & Griskevicius, V. (2008). A room with a viewpoint: Using social
norms to motivate environmental conservation in hotels. Journal of Consumer Research,
Special Issue: Consumer Welfare, 35, 472-482.
Goodenow, C. (1992). Strengthening the links between educational psychology and the study of
social contexts. Educational Psychologist, 27, 177-196.
Hamre, B. K., & Pianta, R. C. (2005). Can instructional and emotional support in the first-grade
classroom make a difference for children at risk of school failure? Child Development, 76,
949-967.
Hidi, S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2000). Motivating the academically unmotivated: A critical issue
for the 21st century. Review of Educational Research, 70, 151-179.

224

A. Master et a!.

Hidi, S., & Renninger, K. A. (2006). The four-phase model of interest development. Educational
Psychologist, 41,111-127.
Howe, L. C., Carr, P. B., & Walton, G. M. (Under review). Normative appeals that invite people to
work together toward a common cause are more effective.
Isaac, J.D., Sansone, C., & Smith, J. L. (1999). Other people as a source of interest in an activity.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 35, 239-265.
Iyengar, S. S., & Lepper, M. R. (1999). Rethinking the role of choice: A cultural perspective on
intrinsic motivation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 349-366.
Job, V., Nikitin, J., Zhang, S. X., Carr, P. B., & Walton, G. M. (2017). Social Traces of Generic
Humans Increase the Value of Everyday Objects. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
43(6), 785-792.
Johnson, D. W., & Johnson, R. T. (2009). An educational psychology success story: Social interdependence theory and cooperative learning. Educational Researcher. 38, 365-379.
Kerr, N. L., Messe, L. A., Seok, D., Sambolec, E. J., Lount, R. B., & Park, E. S. (2007).
Psychological mechanisms underlying the Kohler motivation gain. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 33, 828-841.
Kirschner, S., & Tomasello, M. (2010). Joint music making promotes prosocial behavior in 4-yearold children. Evolution and Human Behavior; 31, 354-364.
Knogler, M., Harackiewicz, J. M., Gegenfurtner, A., & Lewalter, D. (2015). How situational is situational interest? Investigating the longitudinal structure of situational interest. Contemporary
Educational Psychology, 43, 39-50.
Kushnir, T., Xu, F., & Wellman, H. M. (2010). Young children use statistical sampling to infer the
preferences of other people. Psychological Science, 21, 1134-1140.
Lewin, K. (1947). Group decision and social change. Readings in Social Psychology, 3, 197-211.
Liszkowski, U., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2007). Pointing out new news, old news, and
absent referents at 12 months of age. Developmental Science, 10, Fl-F7.
Liszkowski, U., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2008). Twelve-month-olds communicate helpfully and appropriately for knowledgeable and ignorant partners. Cognition, 108, 732-739.
Master, A., Cheryan, S., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2017). Social group membership increases STEM
engagement among preschoolers. Developmental Psychology, 53, 201-209.
Master, A., & Walton, G. M. (2013). Minimal groups increase young children's motivation and
learning on group-relevant tasks. Child Development, 84, 737-751.
Meltzoff, A. N. (1995). Understanding the intentions of others: Re-enactment of intended acts by
18-month-old children. Developmental Psychology, 31, 838-850.
Meltzoff, A. N. (2007). 'Like me': A foundation for social cognition. Developmental Science, 10,
126-134.
Mendoza-Denton, R., Downey, G., Purdie, V. J., Davis, A., & Pietrzak, J. (2002). Sensitivity to
status-based rejection: Implications for African American students' college experience. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 896-918.
Morton, J., & Johnson, M. H. (1991). CONSPEC and CONLERN: A two-process theory of infant
face recognition. Psychological Review, 98, 164-181.
Murayama, K., & Elliot, A. J. (2012). The competition-performance relation: A meta-analytic
review and test of the opposing processes model of competition and performance. Psychological
Bulletin, 138, 1035-1070.
Murphy, M. C., Steele, C. M., & Gross, J. J. (2007). Signaling threat: How situational cues affect
women in math, science, and engineering settings. Psychological Science, 18, 879-885.
Neruda, P. (1994). Odes to common things. Boston: Little, Brown, and Company.
Newman, G. E., Diesendruck, G., & Bloom, P. (2011). Celebrity contagion and the value of
objects. Journal of Consumer Research, 38,215-228.
Over, H. (2016). The origins of belonging: Social motivation in infants and young children.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 371, 20150072.
Over, H., & Carpenter, M. (2009). Eighteen-month-old infants show increased helping following
priming with affiliation. Psychological Science, 20, 1189-1193.

11

How the Subjective Relationship Between the Self, Others, and a Task.,.

225

Over, H., & Carpenter, M. (2013). The social side of imitation. Child Development Perspectives,
7, 6-11.
Perdue, C. W., Dovidio, J. F., Gurtman, M. B., & Tyler, R. B. (1990). Us and them: Social categorization and the process of intergroup bias. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59,
475.
Perlmutter, M., Behrend, S. D., Kuo, F., & Muller, A. (1989). Social influences on children's problem solving. Developmental Psychology, 25,744-754.
Plass, J., O'Keefe, P. A., Homer, B. D., Case, J., Hayward, E., Stein, M., & Perlin, K. (2013). The
impact of individual, competitive, and collaborative mathematics game play on learning, performance, and motivation. Journal of Educational Psychology, 105, 1050--1066.
Rekers, Y., Haun, D. B., & Tomasello, M. (2011). Children, but not chimpanzees, prefer to collaborate. Current Biology, 21, 1756-1758.
Renninger, K. A., & Hidi, S. (2016). The power of interest for motivation and learning. New York;
Routledge.
Repacholi, B. M., & Gopnik, A. (1997). Early reasoning about desires: Evidence from 14-and
18-month-olds. Developmental Psychology, 33, 12-21.
Richardson, M. J., Marsh, K. L., Isenhower, R. W., Goodman, J. R., & Schmidt, R. C. (2007).
Rocking together: Dynamics of intentional and unintentional interpersonal coordination.
Human Movement Science, 26, 867-891.
Ross, H. S., & Lollis, S. P. (1987). Communication within infant social games. Developmental
Psychology, 23, 241-248.
Ross, L., & Nisbett, R. E. (1991). The person and the situation: Perspectives of social psychology.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Sansone, C., & Thoman, D. B. (2005). Interest as the missing motivator in self-regulation.
European Psychologist, 10, 175-186.
Sansone, C., Thoman, D. B., & Smith, J. L. (2010). Interest and self-regulation: Understanding
individual variability in choices, efforts and persistence over time. In R. Hoyle (Ed.), Handbook
~f personality and self-regulation (pp. 192-217). Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Schiefele, U. (1999). Interest and learning from text. Scientific Studies of Reading, 3, 257-280.
Sebanz, N., Bekkering, H., & Knoblich, G. (2006). Joint action: Bodies and minds moving
together. Trends in Cognitive Science, 10, 70--76.
Shteynberg, G. (2010). A silent emergence of culture: The social tuning effect. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 99, 683-689.
Shteynberg, G. (2015). Shared attention. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 10, 579-590.
Shteynberg, G., & Galinksy, A. D. (2011). Implicit coordination: Sharing goals with similar others
intensifies goal pursuit. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 47, 1291-1294.
Shteynberg, G., Hirsh, J. B., Apfelbaum, E. P., Larsen, J. T., Galinsky, A. D., & Roese, N.J. (2014).
Feeling more together: Group attention intensifies emotion. Emotion, 14, 1102-1114.
Sorce, J. F., Emde, R.N., Campos, J. J., & Klinnert, M.D. (1985). Maternal emotional signaling:
Its effect on the visual cliff behavior of 1-year-olds. Developmental Psychology, 21, 195-200.
Steele, C. M. (1997). A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape intellectual identity and performance. American Psychologist, 52, 613-629.
Stephens, N. M., Hamedani, M.G., & Destin, M. (20 14). Closing the social class achievement gap:
A difference-education intervention improves first-generation students' academic performance
and all students' college transition. Psychological Science, 25, 943-953.
Tauer, J. M., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2004 ). The effects of cooperation and competition on intrinsic
motivation and performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 86, 849-861.
Taylor, S. E., & Lobel, M. (1989). Social comparison activity under threat: Downward evaluation
and upward contacts. Psychological Review, 96, 569-575.
Thoman, D. B., Sansone, C.. Fraughton, T., & Pasupathi, M. (2012). How students socially evaluate
interest: Peer responsiveness influences evaluation and maintenance of interest. Contemporary
Educational Psychology, 37, 254-265.
Thoman, D. B., Sansone, C., & Pasupathi, M. (2007). Talking about interest: Exploring the role of
social interaction for regulating motivation and the interest experience. Journal of Happiness
Studies, 8, 335-370.

226

A. Master et a!.

Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., Call, J., Behne, T., & Moll, H. (2005). Understanding and sharing
intentions: The origins of cultural cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 28, 675-735.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher mental processes. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Walton, G. M. (2014). The new science of wise psychological interventions. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 23, 73-82.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2007). A question of belonging: Race, social fit, and achievement.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 82-96.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011a). A brief social-belonging intervention improves academic
and health outcomes of minority students. Science, 331, 1447-1451.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (20llb). Sharing motivation. In D. Dunning (Ed.), Social motivation (pp. 79-101). New York: Psychology Press.
Walton, G. M., Cohen, G. L., Cwir, D., & Spencer, S. J. (2012). Mere belonging: The power of
social connections. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102, 513-532.
Walton, G. M., Loge!, C., Peach, J. M., Spencer, S. J., & Zanna, M.P. (2015). Two brief interventions to mitigate a "chilly climate" transform women's experience, relationships, and achievement in engineering. Journal of Educational Psychology, 107, 468-485.
Warneken, F., Chen, F., & Tomasello, M. (2006). Cooperative activities in young children and
chimpanzees. Child Development, 77, 640-663.
Warneken, F., Grafenhain, M., & Tomasello, M. (2012). Collaborative partner or social tool? New
evidence for young children's understanding of joint intentions in collaborative activities.
Developmental Science, 15,54-61.
Warneken, F., & Tomasello, M. (2006). Altruistic helping in human infants and young chimpanzees. Science, 311, 1301-1303.
Warneken, F., & Tomasello, M. (2007). Helping and cooperation at 14 months of age. Infancy, 11,
271-294.
Williams, K. D., & Karau, S. J. (1991). Social loafing and social compensation: The effects of
expectations of co-worker performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61,
570-581.
Williams, K. D., Karau, S. J., & Bourgeois, M. J. (1993). Working on collective tasks: Social loafing and social compensation. In M. A. Hogg & D. Abrams (Eds.), Group motivation: Social
psychological perspectives (pp. 130-148). Hertfordshire, England: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Williams, K. D., & Nida, S. A. (2011). Ostracism consequences and coping. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 20,71-75.
Wing, R. R., & Jeffery, R. W. (1999). Benefits of recruiting participants with friends and increasing
social support for weight loss and maintenance. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
67, 132-138.
Woodward, A. L. ( 1998). Infants selectively encode the goal object of an actor's reach. Cognition,
69, 1-34.
Yeager, D. S., Walton, G. M., Brady, S. T., Akcinar, E. N., Paunesku, D., Keane, L., Kamentz,
D., Ritter, G., Duckworth, A. L., Urstein, R., Gomez, E., Markus, H. R., Cohen, G. L., &
Dweck, C. S. (2016). Teaching a lay theory before college narrows achievement gaps at
scale. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 113,
E3341-E3348.
Zajonc, R. B. (1965). Social facilitation. Science, 149, 269-274.

Clinical Psychological Science
http://cpx.sagepub.com/

Preventing Symptoms of Depression by Teaching Adolescents That People Can Change: Effects of a
Brief Incremental Theory of Personality Intervention at 9-Month Follow-Up
Adriana Sum Miu and David Scott Yeager
Clinical Psychological Science published online 15 September 2014
DOI: 10.1177/2167702614548317
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://cpx.sagepub.com/content/early/2014/09/15/2167702614548317

Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com

On behalf of:

Association for Psychological Science

Additional services and information for Clinical Psychological Science can be found at:
Email Alerts: http://cpx.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Subscriptions: http://cpx.sagepub.com/subscriptions
Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav

>> OnlineFirst Version of Record - Sep 15, 2014
What is This?

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

548317

research-article2014

CPXXXX10.1177/2167702614548317Miu, YeagerImplicit Theories and Depression

Empirical Article

Preventing Symptoms of Depression by
Teaching Adolescents That People Can
Change: Effects of a Brief Incremental
Theory of Personality Intervention at
9-Month Follow-Up

Clinical Psychological Science
﻿1­–18
© The Author(s) 2014
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/2167702614548317
cpx.sagepub.com

Adriana Sum Miu1 and David Scott Yeager2
1

Department of Psychology, Emory University, and 2Department of Psychology, University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
The transition to high school coincides with an increase in the prevalence of depressive symptoms. Could this be
due in part to increasing beliefs about the fixedness of personal traits at a time of frequent social setbacks? And
could teaching adolescents that people can change help prevent the increase in depressive symptoms? A longitudinal
intervention experiment involved three independent samples of students entering high school (N = 599). A brief selfadministered reading and writing activity taught an incremental theory of personality—the belief that people’s socially
relevant characteristics have the potential to change. The intervention reduced the incidence of clinically significant
levels of self-reported depressive symptoms 9 months postintervention by nearly 40% among adolescents assigned
to the intervention condition, compared with control participants. Analyses of symptom clusters, measures of selfesteem, and measures of natural language use explored the outcomes that did and did not show treatment effects.
Moderation analyses confirmed theoretical expectations. Among adolescents assigned to the control condition, those
who endorsed more of an entity theory of personality—believing people cannot change—showed greater increases in
depressive symptoms during the year. The effect of this risk factor was eliminated by the intervention.
Keywords
cognitive theories of depression, implicit theories, universal prevention, developmental psychopathology,
psychological interventions
Received 12/3/13; Revision accepted 7/16/14

Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a serious publichealth and human-capital problem (Kessler, Chiu,
Demler, & Walters, 2005; Mathers, Fat, & Boerma, 2008).
Many lifelong cases have their origins in midadole­
scence, when the prevalence of depression rises
­substantially (Merikangas et al., 2010). Indeed, adolescence is a developmental period characterized by
school transitions filled with social adversity (Barber &
Olsen, 2004; Benner, 2011; Newman, Newman, Griffen,
O’Connor, & Spas, 2007) as well as by pubertal and
cognitive changes (Avenevoli & Steinberg, 2002). These
factors may contribute to the onset of depressive symptoms as well as eventual diagnoses of MDD (Newman
et al., 2007).

Many programs have attempted to prevent increases in
the prevalence of MDD and other internalizing symptoms
during adolescence (Muñoz, Cuijpers, Smit, Barrera, &
Leykin, 2010; Stice, Shaw, Bohon, Marti, & Rohde, 2009).
Selective and indicated preventative interventions lasting
many weeks and requiring intensive training have had
small to medium effect sizes on average (Garber et  al.,
2009; Gillham, Hamilton, Freres, Patton, & Gallop, 2006;
Horowitz & Garber, 2006). Yet universal preventative
Corresponding Author:
David Scott Yeager, Department of Psychology, University of Texas at
Austin, 108 E. Dean Keeton Stop A8000, Austin, Texas 78712
E-mail: dyeager@utexas.edu

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Miu, Yeager

2	
interventions—those delivered to large groups of adolescents regardless of level of risk—have so far yielded a
disappointing meta-analytic average (d = 0.02; Stice et al.,
2009). For example, Spence, Sheffield, and Donovan
(2003) delivered a universal preventative intervention lasting eight classroom sessions to more than 1,000 high
school students. The intervention unfortunately increased
the incidence of clinically significant levels of depressive
symptoms a year later by 2 percentage points (also see
Sheffield et al., 2006; Wong et al., 2012). This type of result
raises the possibility that there are underlying causes of
adolescence-onset depression that are not fully understood or successfully targeted by existing universal prevention approaches (see McLaughlin, 2011). A crucial
scientific and public-health objective is to close this gap in
knowledge (see Muñoz et al., 2010).
To do this, we build on cognitive theories of depression (Beck, 1976, 2008; Disner, Beevers, Haigh, & Beck,
2011; Gotlib & Joormann, 2010; Lakdawalla, Hankin, &
Mermelstein, 2007). These theories emphasize that the
hopelessness and despair that feed into depression can
result in part from the belief that one’s social adversities
are likely to be a fixed, stable part of one’s future
(Abramson, Seligman, & Teasdale, 1978; Janoff-Bulman,
1979; also see Graham & Juvonen, 1998; Tangney,
Stuewig, & Mashek, 2007). We propose that if despair has
its basis in a worldview that negative events cannot
change, then perhaps teaching adolescents about the
potential for change could provide a foundation for hope.
This might prevent adolescents from developing symptoms of depression during times of social adversity, such
as the 1st year of high school (see Benner, 2011; Crosnoe,
2011).
Indeed, a large amount of past research has focused
on implicit theories of personality, which are people’s
underlying assumptions about the malleability of personal characteristics (Chiu, Hong, & Dweck, 1997; Dweck,
1999; Erdley, Loomis, Cain, & Dumas-Hines, 1997; Yeager,
Trzesniewski, Tirri, Nokelainen, & Dweck, 2011). Past
research has consistently shown that if adolescents or
adults hold a theory that people’s traits are fixed and
unchangeable—called an entity theory of personality—
then they are more likely to show helpless responses to
peer victimization or exclusion (saying, for instance,
“Maybe I’m just not a likable person”; Erdley et al., 1997;
Yeager al., 2011; also see Rudolph, 2010; Yeager, Miu,
Powers, & Dweck, 2013). However, if adolescents are
taught a theory that people’s traits have the potential to
change and be developed—called an incremental theory
of personality—then helplessness is less likely to follow
(Yeager et  al., 2011; Yeager, Trzesniewski, & Dweck,
2013). It stands to reason then that an intervention that
teaches an incremental theory of personality—by providing teens with a belief system that facilitates their ability

to see negative social events as changeable—might prevent or slow the onset of symptoms of depression.

Implicit Theories Are Meaning Systems
That Shape Responses to Adversity
Research on implicit theories grows out of a long line of
experiments reaching back to early research on learned
helplessness in humans (Diener & Dweck, 1978; Dweck,
1975; Dweck & Leggett, 1988). Implicit theories have
been applied to understanding helpless responses to
social situations (Beer, 2002; Chiu et  al., 1997; Yeager
et al., 2011) as well as to academic situations (e.g., Dweck
& Leggett, 1988). Looking broadly across these findings,
implicit theories are known to operate as schemas for
understanding the world, acting as a “lens” for focusing
attention on fixed versus changeable causes of events
(Chiu et al., 1997; Dweck & Leggett, 1988; Molden, Plaks,
& Dweck, 2006). Following an adverse event, this focus
can lead to a corresponding set of helpless versus resilient causal attributions, emotions, and behaviors (e.g.,
Dweck, 1999; Molden & Dweck, 2006; Yeager & Dweck,
2012; for a meta-analysis of effects on motivation and
behavior, see Burnette, O’Boyle, Vanepps, Pollack, &
Finkel, 2013).
Although the current research looks directly at the
impact of implicit theories of personality on symptoms of
depression during the transition to high school and does
not explore the psychological processes that might contribute to this effect, here we present a background on
proximal social-cognitive consequences of implicit theories. Research on implicit theories of intelligence provides a helpful analogy (see, e.g., Dweck & Elliott-Moskwa,
2010). Specifically, an entity theory of intelligence—­the
belief that “smartness” is a fixed trait that you either have
or do not have—has been associated with maladaptive
explanations for failures in school (Ahmavaara &
Houston, 2007; Blackwell, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2007;
Hong, Chiu, Dweck, Lin, & Wan, 1999; Robins & Pals,
2002). This includes self-talk, such as “I’m failing because
I’m stupid” (Robins & Pals, 2002) or “I guess I’m not very
smart” (Dweck & Leggett, 1988; see Dweck, 1999).
Individuals with more of an entity theory, compared with
those with less, also show more helpless patterns of
behavior, such as avoiding challenges, hiding deficiencies, or just giving up (Blackwell et al., 2007). Moreover,
interventions that teach students an incremental, malleable theory of intelligence allow students to show greater
resilience when making a difficult school transition. In
one study, students who participated in an incremental
theory workshop in school showed a clear rebound in
their declining academic achievement roughly 3 months
posttreatment, which signified greater resilience
(Blackwell et al., 2007; see Yeager & Dweck, 2012).

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Implicit Theories and Depression	

3

Implicit Theories of Personality
Analogously, a number of past investigations have suggested that it may be possible for an implicit theory of
personality to increase risk for depression. First, implicit
theories measured on a questionnaire reliably predict
adverse responses to a social conflict. Yeager et al. (2011,
Study 1) measured an entity theory of personality and
asked adolescents to write about a time during which
they felt left out or excluded by an acquaintance.
Individuals with more of an entity theory were significantly more likely to say that they “felt bad about” themselves. Similarly, Yeager et al. (2014) found that an entity
theory of personality predicted greater negative emotionality (negative self-feelings, stress, and anxiety) after an
experience of peer exclusion—that is, ostracism by peers
during the Web-based game Cyberball (Williams & Jarvis,
2006).
Short-term experimental studies have confirmed a
causal role for implicit theories of personality. Yeager
et al. (2011, Study 3) showed that a brief “teen self-help”
article that had an incremental theory of personality
embedded within it could alter adolescent participants’
implicit theories and reduce helpless responses to a bullying scenario, including fewer reports of shame. Yeager,
Miu, et al. (2013, Study 2) used a slightly more elaborate
manipulation. Teens read a scientific article that conveyed the possibility of personality change, which was
followed by quotes from older students who endorsed
the same message. Participants then wrote a brief essay
reiterating the incremental theory. This changed implicit
theories of personality and attributions in response to a
hypothetical peer conflict. Furthermore, Yeager et  al.
(2014) showed that this incremental theory intervention
could reduce negative affect (negative self-feelings, stress,
and anxiety) after an experience of peer exclusion.
Finally, incremental theory interventions have induced
changes in responses to social difficulties up to 1 month
later. Yeager, Trzesniewski, and Dweck (2013) implemented a face-to-face school-based incremental theory
workshop that lasted six classroom sessions during a
3-week period. As expected, at a 2-week follow-up, the
incremental theory group changed their implicit theories,
whereas the control group did not. One month later, adolescents completed a seemingly unrelated activity in
which they were excluded by a peer (again, via Cyberball).
Compared with control participants, incremental theory
participants reacted less negatively and more prosocially.
Furthermore, the six-session classroom intervention
reduced depressive symptoms among victimized adolescents at a 2-week follow-up (Yeager, Trzesniewski, &
Dweck, 2013).
In sum, individual differences in an entity theory of
personality consistently predict negative affect and

helpless behavior during social adversities. Furthermore,
teaching its opposite—an incremental theory of personality—can improve short-term reactions to a peer conflict, including behavioral and self-reports of depressive
symptoms. The present research builds on this and
focuses on whether the single-session intervention used
in our earlier study (Yeager, Miu, et al., 2013) could alter
levels of depressive symptoms many months later across
the socially difficult transition to high school.

Implicit Theories During the
Transition to High School
Implicit theories may be particularly important during a
sensitive developmental period, such as high school transition. Adolescents entering high school think more about
peer relationships (e.g., Richards, Crowe, Larson, & Swarr,
1998) and are more likely to face uncertainty in peer
relationships, given that 50% of casual friendships change
during each month of freshmen year of high school
(Chan & Poulin, 2007). Without a stable social network in
a new environment, freshmen are more likely to feel anxious about the possibility of being socially excluded,
which threatens their social status ( Juvonen & Graham,
2014). In response to potential social conflicts, high
school students, compared with younger children, are
more likely to interpret social attributes as fixed and
unchangeable (e.g., Killen, Kelly, Richardson, & Jampol,
2010), which means that they are more likely to believe
social adversities or setbacks to be stable. Given the
increase of uncertainty in peer relationships and the
belief in fixed attributes, implicit theories can be especially relevant in interpreting social uncertainties during
high school transition. Building on this idea, we propose
that one helpful strategy for preventing the onset of
depressive symptoms might be to teach an incremental
theory of personality.

Brief Psychological Interventions
Somewhat in contrast to the nonsignificant effects of
comprehensive and time-intensive universal preventative
interventions for adolescents (Stice et al., 2009), the literature has produced many examples of brief but theoretically precise psychological interventions that have
affected mental and physical health or academic achievement over time (for reviews, see Cohen & Sherman, 2014;
Walton, 2014; Yeager & Walton, 2011). For instance,
research by Pennebaker (1997) and Petrie, Booth, and
Pennebaker (1998) has shown that expressive writing
exercises that last just a few minutes can affect reports of
stress and health weeks or months later and improve
immune functioning. Walton and Cohen (2011) found

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Miu, Yeager

4	
that a 1-hr attributional retraining intervention conducted
in the 1st year of college could improve minority students’ health, happiness, and grade point averages 3.5
years later at the end of senior year (for many other
examples, see Wilson, Damiani, & Shelton, 2002). Even
though the mediating mechanisms for these psychological interventions are not fully understood, they have an
important status in clinical and social psychological theory (Pennebaker, 2004; Walton, 2014).
Informed by these past studies, the present research is
the first to test the effect of a brief implicit-theories-ofpersonality intervention on longer-term depressive symptoms. This is critical to test because it is a scientific priority
to identify scalable, brief, and low-cost preventative interventions for depression (Muñoz et al., 2010). Even modest preventative effects, occurring during a critical
developmental juncture, can have important psychological and policy implications. Such effects can slow or stop
depression from gaining momentum, thus preventing
long-term losses in wages or human-capital development
(e.g., Frieden, 2010; Glasgow, Lichtenstein, & Marcus,
2003; also see Abelson, 1985; Cohen, Garcia, PurdieVaughns, Apfel, & Brzustoski, 2009). In many cases, this
possibility justifies the economic cost of even time- and
labor-intensive preventative interventions. However, the
marginal cost of teaching an incremental theory to an
adolescent over the Internet approaches zero. This means
that if the present brief intervention produced even modest treatment effects, it would have important implications for public health and human capital.

Overview of Present Research
The present research used a longitudinal, randomized
intervention experiment to test the causal effect of an
incremental theory of personality on levels of depressive
symptoms. Because the incidence of adolescent depression approximately doubles during the high school transition (Costello, Mustillo, Erkanli, Keeler, & Angold, 2003;
Lewinsohn, Rohde, & Seeley, 1998; Merikangas et  al.,
2010), we recruited ninth graders at the beginning of the
school year, before increases in depressive symptoms
were likely to occur. We hypothesized that adolescents
who did not receive the treatment would show the typical increase in depressive symptoms but that those who
learned, in the 1st few weeks of the school year, that
people can change, might be protected.
The present research involves nearly identical experiments carried out in three independent samples totaling
roughly 600 adolescents. The first experiment was small,
involving just 77 adolescents. The second, a replication,
was larger, involving 143 students. Both of these were
conducted to test other research hypotheses. However,
both included measures of depressive symptoms that

have not been reported elsewhere. Wishing to confirm
these results, we conducted another experiment, this
time involving more students (n = 379). We aggregated
the data from these three studies in what was, in effect, a
raw-data meta-analysis of original experiments. Thus,
more reliable effect size estimates were possible (for
descriptions of raw-data meta-analysis, see Cooper &
Patall, 2009; Schimmack, 2012).
These studies used a strict, active-placebo control
group. In past research, we have compared an incremental theory group with a group receiving no message or
with a group receiving a more conventional treatment,
such as a coping-skills treatment (Yeager et  al., 2011;
Yeager, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2013). Thus, in those
past studies, it was not possible to rule out the alternative
hypothesis that observed differences between the treatment and control groups were due to the possible benefits of receiving any optimistic message about growth
and improvement from senior and junior students. To
overcome this limitation, in some research, we have used
control conditions that taught an optimistic message
about change but not specifically about traits relevant to
peer exclusion or victimization (e.g., study skills or athletic ability; Yeager et al., 2014; Yeager, Miu, et al., 2013).
In the present study, we did this as well.

Method
Participants
Participants came from three schools in Northern
California (N = 599; 48% female, 52% male). Two schools
(providing Samples 1 and 3) were in upper-middle-class
neighborhoods and were generally high performing.
Students were predominately White (43%) or Asian
American (46%). Only 6% of these students were eligible
for free or reduced-price lunch, an indicator of low socioeconomic status. A third school (providing Sample 2) was
one of the lowest-income and poorest-performing
schools in the San Francisco Bay Area. Of these students,
80% were Hispanic/Latino, and 73% were eligible for free
or reduced-price lunch.1
Despite these differences in the samples, social adversities were common across samples; on a survey we conducted in the 3rd week of the school year, many students
(75%) reported being the victim of at least some physical, verbal, or social aggression, and this was not significantly different across schools. Even those students who
did not experience victimization might be aware of the
possibility that they could be “next.” Indeed, of the
minority of students reporting no victimization at baseline, nearly half reported at least some victimization at
the 9-month follow-up. Thus, there were ample opportunities for all students to experience—or at least worry

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Implicit Theories and Depression	

5
ll

l
l

l
l

l

l
l

l

n

l
l

l
l

l

ll

n
l I

l

l

n

l

l
l
l

Fig. 1.  Flowchart of experimental procedures. CDI = Children’s Depression Inventory.

about experiencing—social adversity involving peers
(also see Crosnoe, 2011), which could contribute to
depression in the absence of our intervention (Newman
et al., 2007).
Sample 1 was the first study we conducted. We
recruited all of the students in Algebra 1 in the school,
which is a lower-performing math class. All provided
consent: 82 students provided baseline data, and 77 provided follow-up depressive-symptoms data and constituted the analytic sample. Sample 2 was a replication and
involved all of the students in Algebra 1 at a different,
lower-performing school; 95% provided consent. Of the
161 students who completed the baseline survey, 143
also provided depressive-symptoms data in May. In Study
3, students entering ninth grade—regardless of math
placement—were recruited, and 96% provided consent;
427 provided baseline data and of these, 379 provided
longitudinal data. Nearly all of the students who did not
provide longitudinal data were either chronically truant
or had dropped out of high school or moved. Across
studies, 66 students did not complete both the baseline
and the follow-up studies; these students were excluded
from analyses, but the statistical significance of the results
was no different when we imputed values and included
them. A chart that details all data included or excluded
from analysis is presented in Figure S1 in the Supplemental
Material available online.

Procedure
In the 1st week of the school year, in September, parental
consent was obtained for all students. In the 3rd week,
students assented and completed an initial survey that
measured baseline characteristics (e.g., demographics
and levels of depressive symptoms). One week later, students were randomly assigned to the intervention. In
May, at the end of the school year, roughly 9 months
later, students were again surveyed to assess depressive

symptoms (see Fig. 1 for a flowchart of experimental procedures). Some of the students in Sample 2 had poor
English skills, so we provided them the option of reading
the intervention in Spanish (which had been translated
by native Spanish speakers); 7% of Sample 2 participants
chose to read the intervention in Spanish, and this did
not differ by condition and did not have an effect on
experimental outcomes.
In the current, early stage investigation of the incremental theory intervention, the primary outcome was
self-reported symptoms of depression—consistent with
many universal prevention evaluations (Stice et al., 2009).
Advantages of this approach involve the reduced possibility of sample attrition due to burdens of study participation and the resulting increase in statistical power.
Disadvantages, of course, involve the need to rely on
only one measure—for example, meeting a clinical
threshold on a self-reported measure—to assess the presence of problematic levels of depressive symptoms, as
well as an inability to assess impact within clinically diagnosed subgroups.
The intervention procedure is described in greater
detail in our previous studies (e.g., Yeager, Trzesniewski,
& Dweck, 2013) and in the Detail on the Experimental
Intervention section in the Supplemental Material. A brief
overview follows.
In the 3rd week of the school year, using a true random-number generator (www.Random.org), researchers
randomly assigned participants within classrooms—that
is, at the individual level—into intervention or control
groups. During normal class time, participants in each
group completed either an experimental intervention or
a control activity on paper (Sample 1) or computer
(Samples 2 and 3) quietly for one class period. The average completion time for the intervention was approximately 25 min. Research assistants who administered the
interventions were different from those who administered the surveys, and all members of the research team

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Miu, Yeager

6	
were blind to participants’ assigned condition throughout
the study. Teachers were blind to study hypotheses and
students’ assigned experimental conditions.2 All that was
required of the teachers or research assistants was to
keep the class working quietly. No staff person who
interacted with students (research assistants, teachers)
was briefed on any of the content of the intervention.
The treatment intervention taught an incremental theory of personality by presenting evidence that individuals
have the potential to change. It conveyed that (a) if you
are excluded or victimized, it is not due to a fixed, personal deficiency on your part; and (b) people who
exclude or victimize you are not fixed, bad people but,
instead, have complicated motivations that are subject to
change. Participants were then asked to read a brief article on actual neuroscience studies that showed that
behaviors are controlled by “thoughts and feelings in
their brains” and that such pathways in the brain can be
changed. This was done to provide adolescents with a
scientific basis for believing in the potential for change
(rather than telling adolescents the platitude that “people
can change”). Afterward, participants read two quotes
purportedly written by senior and junior students who
had previously read the same article and endorsed its
conclusions. As with the scientific summaries, the testimonials were designed to bring credibility to the incremental theory via admired role models (i.e., seniors and
juniors in one’s high school).
Finally, participants were asked to write their own version of such a narrative to share with future ninth graders
by drawing on the examples they had just read from the
seniors and juniors or on their own experiences in high
school or middle school. This “saying-is-believing” activity has been shown to facilitate the internalization of the
intervention message (see Aronson, 1999; Walton &
Cohen, 2011) and has been implemented before (e.g.,
Yeager, Trzesniewski & Dweck, 2013). After this one-time
activity, the intervention was not mentioned again to students by researchers or teachers.
The control condition was designed to be exactly parallel to the experimental condition, except that the control condition focused on malleability of athletic ability, a
nonpersonality domain that was never linked directly to
responses to exclusion or victimization, as the treatment
was. Nevertheless, athletic ability was also thought to be
important to adolescents, thus eliminating the possibility
that simple optimism about the potential for growth in
any important domain might account for our results. And,
of course, an entity-theory-of-personality control group
would have been unethical and, furthermore, would not
have allowed us to separate the negative effects of learning an entity theory from the positive effects of learning
an incremental theory.

Measures
Depressive symptoms. To measure depressive symptoms, we administered the 10-item short form of the Children’s Depression Inventory (CDI:S; Kovacs, 1992) on
the September and May surveys.3 Each CDI:S item asked
participants which of three levels of a symptom described
them best (e.g., 2 = I feel like crying every day, 1 = I feel
like crying many days, 0 = I feel like crying once in a
while). The 10 items were summed and showed adequate internal consistency (preintervention α = .82, postintervention α = .87). CDI:S scores were first analyzed
dichotomously; participants were categorized into clinically significant and nonsignificant symptom levels. We
selected a cut point of 6 out of 20 points, which corresponds to the 81st to 87th percentile of depressive symptoms (for boys and girls, respectively; Kovacs, 1992),4
because it best approximates the cut point identified by
past research as striking the optimal balance between
false positives and false negatives (Timbremont, Braet, &
Dreessen, 2004). Dichotomization of continuous measures can sometimes result in misleading conclusions if
the results are not robust to different cut points and if
they do not replicate across multiple independent samples (MacCallum, Zhang, Preacher, & Rucker, 2002).
Therefore, sensitivity analyses were conducted with a cut
point of 7 out of 20 points, and we present results for all
three replication samples in Table 1.
To supplement this primary analysis, we conducted continuous depressive-symptom analyses on each of the subscales of the CDI:S. These subscales were based on factor
analyses of the full CDI scale reported in the literature (e.g.,
Helsel & Matson, 1984; Kovacs, 1992; Saylor, Finch, Spirito,
& Bennett, 1984; Weiss & Weisz, 1988; Weiss et al., 1991).
Kovacs (1992) reported five factors, including negative
mood (e.g., I am sad all the time), ineffectiveness (e.g., I do
everything wrong), anhedonia (e.g., I feel alone all the
time), and negative self-esteem (e.g., I hate myself). The
fifth factor (Kovacs, 1992), interpersonal problems, had no
items on the CDI:S. We aggregated the relevant items corresponding to the four factors following standard procedures, thereby producing four separate subscales, each of
which ranged from 0 to 2. Exact items for each of the four
subscales are presented in the Depressive Symptoms section in the Supplemental Material.
Self-esteem. Supplementing the CDI:S items, two selfesteem items were administered on the September and
May surveys: “I feel that I am a person of worth, at least
on an equal basis with others” and “I feel that I have a
number of good qualities”; responses were made using a
scale from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree).
Items were averaged and, as expected, were negatively

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

7

49
16
304

295

304

295

75
25

42
14

54
18

Control Intervention

7.90

2.24

χ2

.005

.134

p

36

13
36

36

13
36

χ2
p

Baseline (September)
5
12
6.12 .013
41
Follow-up (May)
6
15
4.76 .029
41

Control Intervention

Sample 1

73

18
25

73

13
18

70

10
14

70

12
17

Control Intervention

Sample 2

2.44

0.01

χ2

.118

.917

p

186

44
24

186

28
15

193

33
17

193

25
13

Control Intervention

Sample 3

2.5

0.35

χ2

 
 
.113
 

 
 
.556
 

p

Note: The table presents raw data. To designate status as meeting clinically significant levels of depressive symptoms, we used a cut point of 6 out of 20 points on the short form of the
Children’s Depression Inventory; this corresponds to the 81st to 87th percentile for boys and girls, respectively (Kovacs, 1992).

n above cut point
% above cut point
 
Total n

n above cut point
% above cut point
 
Total n

Measure

All participants

Table 1.  Participants Who Met the Threshold for Clinically Significant Levels of Depressive Symptoms at Baseline and 9 Months Postintervention by Condition and
Sample

Miu, Yeager

8	
correlated with the negative self-esteem CDI:S subscale
(September: r = –.47, p < .001). In Sample 1, self-esteem
was assessed in May only. Sample 1 data could not be
used in the analyses of change scores but were used in
analyses of year-end levels.
Textual analysis of self-descriptions. In Samples 2
and 3 only, the first question on the September and May
surveys was “In general, what do people in your grade at
school think about you? Type as many or as few words
that people in general might think about you in the box
below.” Responses to this question were first spellchecked to correct common errors and increase match
rates for the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count software
(LIWC; Pennebaker, Booth, & Francis, 2007). Next, the
default LIWC dictionaries were applied to each response.
At each time point, we averaged three categories to create an index of linguistic styles that signal maladaptive
self-views: negative emotion or trait words (hurt, ugly,
nasty), past tense (went, ran, had), and discrepant thinking (should, would, could). It was predicted that thinking
of the self in terms of negative emotions or traits, dwelling on the past, and engaging in counterfactual thinking
about what one should or could be would signal maladaptive self-views (and the latter category, discrepant
thinking, has been correlated with poorer mental and
physical health in much past research; Higgins, Vookles,
& Tykocinski, 1992; Pennebaker & King, 1999). Supporting this theory, in the present research, the composite
negative self-views index from the September preintervention survey was significantly correlated with preintervention levels of depressive symptoms, r = .16, p < .001,
and self-esteem, r = –.17, p < .001.
Covariates and moderators. On the September preintervention survey, participants reported sex, race/­
ethnicity, entity theories of personality (Yeager et  al.,
2011), and self-reported frequency of bullying (for details
on the two measures, see the Implicit Theories of Personality and Peer Victimization sections in the Supplemental
Material). From school records, we obtained test scores
earned the prior year, in eighth grade.

Results
Analytic plan
All analyses were intent to treat and did not drop participants who wrote brief or incomplete summaries of the
intervention materials. Thus, the results are conservative.
Our primary interest was in a person-centered analysis
of whether the intervention prevented clinically significant levels of depressive symptoms. Treatment effects on
the incidence of serious depressive symptoms are one

policy-­
relevant analysis (Muñoz et  al., 2010) because
real-world diagnosis and treatment of MDD involves
individuals, not variables (Farrington & Loeber, 2000;
Rutter, 2003). Obtaining effect sizes that are relevant to
the real-world use of a measure is one of the rare cases
when dichotomization of continuous variables is appropriate (DeCoster, Iselin, & Gallucci, 2009).5 Treatment
effects on incidence rates are also essential for estimating the cost-­effectiveness of an intervention.
Our secondary interest was in developing theory about
the generality or specificity of effects of implicit theories
on different groupings of depressive symptoms. Thus, we
conducted variable-centered analyses of which symptom
subgroups were most affected by the incremental theory
intervention. We extended these analyses by conducting
analyses of explicit and implicit measures of individuals’
construals of themselves: explicit self-esteem and linguistic categories that signal implicit negative self-views.
Third, we carried out moderation analyses to understand the predicted mechanisms for the results. We
examined whether, as expected, the incremental theory
of personality intervention had its effects by preventing
those individuals with more of an entity theory at baseline from developing higher levels of depressive symptoms during the year. Results for all outcomes are
presented in Table 2, which presents the raw means and
proportions as well as statistical tests from models with
a number of covariates (see Tables S2 through S5 for full
regression models with and without covariates, see the
Supplemental Material).

Preliminary analyses
Randomization was effective. There were no significant
main effects of condition on covariates measured at baseline, including sex, race/ethnicity, academic test scores,
depressive symptoms (coded continuously), implicit theories, or bullying (see Table S1 in the Supplemental
Material). However, an examination of the incidence of
clinically significant depressive symptoms yielded a significant baseline difference in Sample 1 but not Samples
2 and 3 (see Table 1). Therefore, we also carried out
supplemental analyses that excluded Sample 1 (see the
Supplementary Analyses section in the Supplemental
Material).
Next, students did in fact appear to learn the incremental theory. Two coders, who were blind to experimental hypotheses and to participant identities and
characteristics, independently and reliably judged
whether participants’ responses appeared to answer the
writing prompts in the intervention materials sufficiently.
The interrater reliability was adequate (Krippendorff’s
α = .85), and inconsistencies were resolved by consensus. More than 94% of responses were judged to have

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Implicit Theories and Depression	

9

Table 2.  Effects of a Brief Implicit-Theories-of-Personality Intervention on Depressive Symptoms and Self-Views at 9-Month
Follow-Up
Treatment
Outcome at 9-month follow-up

Raw %

Clinically significant depressive
symptom
Continuous depressive symptom
Negative mood
Anhedonia
Ineffectiveness
Negative self-esteem
Self-esteem
Negative self-view

16

Control
M

Statistical test from model with covariates
M

Raw %
25

2.89
0.26
0.31
0.17
0.32
5.72
0.91

(3.54)
(0.42)
(0.47)
(0.43)
(0.40)
(1.24)
(2.46)

z

t(df)

2.67
3.44
0.35
0.34
0.26
0.36
5.56
1.86

(4.02)
(0.50)
(0.48)
(0.53)
(0.45)
(1.35)
(5.19)

p
.008

1.77
2.44
1.00
2.01
1.43
2.51
2.60

(581)
(579)
(577)
(574)
(578)
(577)
(504)

.077
.015
.317
.044
.154
.012
.009

Note: Standard deviations shown in parentheses. Effects estimated in separate regressions that controlled for a number of variables predicted to
reduce error variance in the outcome: sample, baseline values of the outcome, sex, state test scores, race/ethnicity, baseline victimization, and
baseline entity theories. For full regression models that assess treatment effects with and without covariates, see Tables S2 through S5 in the
Supplemental Material. Negative self-views only available for Samples 2 and 3.

sufficiently answered the prompt and referred to a belief
in the potential for change.
Sample responses in the treatment condition include
People can change and be a better person then [sic]
before and I think those people just try to do that
because they used to get picked on in school.
They all have a different personality and it could
change as they go on in school. For example, a
bully that is always picking on kids can be doing
that because he’s having trouble with his grades,
but if he gets help and gets better grades he can
realize what he’s done and change the way he is.
I knew that they would one day change but I didn’t
know when. I always thought . . . maybe they were
going through a hard time.
People could change over time. Maybe they had a
bad day or something.
Seeing that individuals wrote about the incremental theory as expected, we proceeded to test our primary
hypotheses concerning long-term depressive symptoms
(for other sample excerpts, see the Additional Unedited
Written Samples From Treated Students section in the
Supplemental Material).

Preventing the incidence rates of
clinically significant depressive
symptoms
In the control group, the incidence of clinically significant levels of depressive symptoms rose from September

to May by roughly 39% (September raw data: 18% above
the clinically significant cut point of 6; May: 25%), a significant increase (test of equality of proportions: z = 2.07,
p = .038). This is similar to the proportional increase typically seen for adolescents across the transition to high
school (Merikangas et  al., 2010). However, among students assigned to the incremental theory intervention
condition—who learned at the beginning of the year that
people’s socially relevant characteristics are not fixed but
have the potential for change—there was no significant
increase during the year in the prevalence of clinical levels of depressive symptoms (September: 14%; May: 16%;
z = 0.54, p = .592). As a result, at the May follow-up,
participants assigned to the incremental theory condition
were roughly 40% less likely to report clinical levels of
depressive symptoms than were participants assigned to
the control condition (16% vs. 25%), χ2(1, N = 599) =
7.90, p = .005, odds ratio = 0.55 (see Table 1). Logistic
regressions that controlled for baseline depressive symptoms and a number of additional covariates supported
this significant effect, z = 2.67, p = .008, odds ratio = 0.50
(see Table 2). The treatment effect remained even after
we excluded from analysis those participants who met
clinical levels of depressive symptoms at baseline (see
Table S8 in the Supplemental Material). Treatment effects
were significant (at p < .05) when we analyzed a cut
point of 7 out of 20 points as opposed to 6 out of 20 or
when we limited analyses to Samples 2 and 3 only (see
Table S7 in the Supplemental Material). It is interesting
that the treatment effect was not significantly moderated
by sample, level of victimization, sex, or race (all interaction effect ps > .10; exact tests are reported in Table S6 in
the Supplemental Material).
Note that the incremental theory intervention did not
reduce depressive symptoms so much as it statistically

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Miu, Yeager

10	
halted age-related increases in depressive symptoms.
This is consistent with existing theory that brief psychological interventions affect long-term outcomes by slowing negative, self-reinforcing processes before they gain
momentum (e.g., Cohen et al., 2009; Walton, 2014; Yeager
& Walton, 2011).

Effects on specific symptom clusters
To provide a more theoretically precise understanding of
these overall treatment effects, we next tested for treatment effects on subscales assessing symptom groups,
with each analyzed as continuous variables. There was a
marginally significant omnibus effect of the incremental
theory intervention on the full, continuous CDI:S, b =
−0.44, t(581) = 1.77, p = .077, d = −0.15 (see Table 2 and
Fig. S2 in the Supplemental Material). However, this marginal effect masked important heterogeneity across
symptom clusters.
In separate linear regression analyses predicting continuous subscales, there was a significant treatment effect
on May values of negative mood (I am sad all the time; I
feel like crying everyday; Things bother me all the time),
b = −0.08, t(579) = 2.44, p = .015, d = −0.20, and ineffectiveness (I do everything wrong), b = −0.08, t(574) = 2.01,
p = .044, d = −0.17 (see Table 2). The treatment effect on
May values of anhedonia (I feel alone all the time; I do not
have any friends) was not close to significant, b = −0.04,
t(577) = 1.00, p = .317, d = −0.08. The nonsignificant treatment effect on anhedonia is perhaps unsurprising because
anhedonia has a genetic and temperamental component
(Hasler, Drevets, Manji, & Charney, 2004; Loas, 1996).
Finally, the effect on negative self-esteem (Nothing will
ever work out for me; I hate myself; I look ugly; Nobody
really loves me) approached but did not reach significance, b = −0.04, t(578) = 1.43, p = .154, d = −0.12 (see
Table 2 and Fig. S3 in the Supplemental Material).
The nonsignificant finding regarding negative selfesteem was surprising. Fortunately, however, it was possible to use an additional measure of September and May
self-esteem to directly test the notion that negative selfesteem was unaffected by the intervention (recall that
self-esteem was assessed at both waves only in Samples
2 and 3). Participants assigned to the control condition
reported significantly lower self-esteem in May as compared with September (September: M = 6.11, SD = 1.02;
May: M = 5.66, SD = 1.35), t(253) = 4.89, p < .001, d =
−0.61. This signals a strong loss of self-esteem during the
year. But for participants assigned to the treatment condition, the decrease in self-esteem during the year was
present but did not reach significance at a .05 level
(September: M = 6.00, SD = 1.13; May: M = 5.83, SD =
1.24), t(262) = −1.78, p = .08, d = −0.22 (see Fig. S4 in the
Supplemental Material). A comparison of change scores

(May values minus September values) showed that the
incremental theory intervention was in fact more effective
at warding off a decline in self-esteem during the year, b =
0.26, t(514) = 2.44, p = .015, d = 0.22. Confirming this,
using data from all three samples and imputing baseline
values for Sample 1, we found a significant main effect of
the intervention on higher self-esteem in May, b = 0.24,
t(577) = 2.51, p = .012, d = 0.21 (see Table 2). Thus, the
nonsignificant finding for negative self-esteem in the
CDI:S subscale did not capture an effect that became
more apparent using this supplemental measure.

Linguistic indicators of maladaptive
self-views
Analyses of more indirect negative self-views assessed
through subtle features of language mirrored the selfreported self-esteem results. Prior to the intervention, in
September, there were no differences between participants assigned to the treatment and control conditions on
the linguistic indicators of maladaptive self-views (i.e.,
negative emotion words, talking in the past tense, and
talking in terms of what “could” or “should” have been;
raw data, incremental theory condition: M = 1.10, SD =
3.00; raw data, control condition: M = 1.35, SD = 3.50),
t(505) = 0.89, p = .374, d = 0.08 (recall that self-views
were assessed in Samples 2 and 3 only). However, in
May, at the end of the year, treated students described
themselves in significantly less maladaptive ways (raw
data, incremental theory condition: M = 0.91, SD = 2.46;
raw data, control condition: M = 1.86, SD = 5.19), t(520) =
2.60, p = .009, d = 0.23. In an ordinary least squares
regression predicting May self-views and controlling for
September self-views and a number of additional covariates (i.e., those reported in Table S2 and Fig. S5 in the
Supplemental Material), the condition effect remained
significant, b = −0.90, t(504) = 2.60, p = .009, d = 0.23.
Thus, the finding that the intervention prevented a worsening of negative self-views was confirmed by using this
more indirect assessment: nonconscious use of linguistic
categories that signal negative self-construals.

Moderation by baseline implicit
theories?
Our theory leads to the expectation that the incremental
theory intervention should have its effect chiefly by preventing an entity theory from undermining resilience and
fueling depressive symptoms. Therefore, individuals with
more of an entity theory at baseline should benefit most
(Yeager et  al., 2014, Study 3; also see Blackwell et  al.,
2007). Moderation analyses tested this possibility using
the full, continuous measure of depressive symptoms to
increase statistical precision.

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Implicit Theories and Depression	

Number of Depressive Symptoms Reported
on the CDI:S (Range: 0 to 20)

5

11
Control: Baseline Entity Theory
Treatment: Baseline Entity Theory
Control: Baseline Incremental Theory
Treatment: Baseline Incremental Theory

4.5
4.16

4
3.5
3
2.5
2

3.12
3.03

3.09
2.80
2.78

2.32
2.07

1.5
1

September

May

Assessment Occasion
Fig. 2. Results: changes in depressive symptoms from September to May of ninth grade, by
baseline implicit theories and experimental condition. Baseline implicit theories correspond to
estimated values at 1 SD above or below the mean for that scale, from models removing fixed
effects for sample. Error bars represent standard errors. CDI:S = short form of Children’s Depression Inventory.

Within the control group, an entity theory in September
was correlated with significantly more depressive symptoms at the May follow-up, b = 0.60, t(292) = 2.67, p =
.008, β = 0.14. This relation was eliminated in the treatment group, b = 0.12, t(301) = 0.68, p = .500, β = 0.04, and
the difference in correlations was significant, evidenced
by a significant Incremental Intervention × Baseline Entity
Theory interaction, b = −0.51, t(590) = 2.14, p = .033, β =
−0.10, in a model controlling for September levels of
depressive symptoms and with fixed effects for sample.
Figure 2 illustrates this interaction using values estimated at 1 SD above and below the mean in terms of
baseline theories, adjusting for sample fixed effects. It
shows that in September, before the intervention, treatment and control participants did not differ in terms of
their depressive symptoms. Furthermore, Figure 2 shows
that baseline implicit theories were a strong predictor of
baseline depressive symptoms (i.e., symptoms differed as
a function of theories in September). Next, among individuals with more of an entity theory at baseline who
participated in the control activity, there were also marked
increases in levels of depressive symptoms during the
year. Yet among adolescents with an entity theory at
baseline who were assigned to the incremental theory
intervention condition, levels were flat over time; the

intervention statistically halted the normative increase in
depressive symptoms during the freshman year (see
Fig. 2). Thus, by May, there was a treatment effect on the
continuous measure of depressive symptoms among students who began the year with more of an entity theory
(+1 SD), simple effect b = −0.93, t(590) = 2.58, p = .010,
d  = 0.21. Those students who began the year with an
incremental theory did not differ as a function of whether
they were assigned to the treatment or control condition
(see Fig. 2).
Note that the intervention did not seem to treat
depression—­that is, depressive symptoms did not appear
to decrease in any group of students over time. Instead,
the incremental theory intervention seems to have had its
effects by neutralizing a risk factor’s effects, thereby preventing an entity theory from increasing risk for depression over time.

Discussion
If the seed of depression is the belief that negative events
cannot improve, then one way to prevent depressive
symptoms from growing might be to teach the idea that
people can change. This might prevent depression from
taking root in a way that, absent timely intervention, can

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Miu, Yeager

12	
be difficult to reverse during the ensuing decades of life.
To investigate this possibility, we used a double-blind,
active-placebo-controlled, individual-level, universal, preventative experimental design. Across three replications
that included nearly 600 adolescents, a one-time intervention teaching an incremental theory of personality in
September of participants’ ninth-grade year appeared to
reduce the prevalence of clinical levels of depressive
symptoms in May of that school year by approximately
40%. This finding was robust to a number of sensitivity
analyses (see Tables S2 through S8 in the Supplemental
Material). Analyses of self-esteem mirrored these findings.
Finer-grained examinations of CDI:S symptom subscales
showed significant treatment effects on negative mood
and ineffectiveness but not on anhedonia.
Textual analyses (Pennebaker et  al., 2007) further
explored the psychological impact of the intervention on
adolescents’ self-views. Assessing subtle linguistic clues
in response to an open-ended writing prompt, we found
that treated teens were less likely to use negative emotion and trait words, to talk about the past, and to talk
about discrepancies (linguistic indicators of maladaptive
counterfactual thinking) in their self-descriptions during
the May follow-up. This index was also correlated with
depressive symptoms at baseline and at follow-up. This
means that the intervention may have influenced individuals’ self-schemata, perhaps even changing their
unconscious perceptions about themselves during times
of difficulty. This finding opens up new avenues for
research on the effects of implicit theories as well as on
mechanisms that sustain treatment effects on depressive
symptoms.
Furthermore, moderation analyses supported our theoretical account for these effects. Adolescents with more
of an entity theory of personality at baseline showed
marked increases in depressive symptoms during the
year if they were assigned to the control group. However,
those individuals who were assigned to the incremental
theory of personality intervention showed no such
increase, which suggests that the intervention was particularly effective for people with an entity belief.
Conversely, the current study did not find a significant
sex moderation of the treatment effect on depressive
symptoms or depression subscales, even though past
research has shown that females develop adolescent
depression at a higher rate than do males, possibly as a
result of greater peer stressors and stress reactivity among
females (Cyranowski, Frank, Young, & Shear, 2000;
Hankin et  al., 1998; Hankin, Mermelstein, & Roesch,
2007). Nevertheless, regardless of sex, the intervention
precisely targeted one contributor to the onset of depressive symptoms during the transition to high school—an
entity theory of personality—and reduced its impact on
depressive symptoms.

Limitations
There are clear limitations to this research. First, these
studies did not show that teaching adolescents that people can change treats depression. We found no evidence
that levels of depressive symptoms decreased for any
group of students. Instead, the intervention seemed to
slow the normative increase in depressive symptoms,
especially among students with an entity theory at
baseline.
Next, the current research does not speak to the issue
of whether an incremental theory intervention would be
helpful in therapy. Our intervention was, very intentionally, quite “stealthy” (Yeager & Walton, 2011). That is, we
did not directly tell students that it is in their best interest
to believe people can change or that it would help them
be less stressed or depressed. Instead, the intervention
asked students to author the intervention content by writing notes to future students, avoiding the implication that
they were getting treatment for depression. This sayingis-believing tactic can be helpful for promoting deeper
processing of the material and avoiding stigma (Aronson,
1999; Walton, 2014; Yeager & Walton, 2011).
Moreover, it is unknown whether individuals who are
currently depressed or who are at high risk for depression—for example, individuals who have a mother with a
history of MDD (Goodman & Gotlib, 1999)—will benefit
from an incremental theory intervention. Furthermore, we
have not documented whether pubertal timing can interact with the treatment effects on depressive symptoms.
Relatedly, it is crucial to emphasize the context dependency and developmental dependency of the present
intervention strategy. We do not expect that an incremental theory of personality would prevent risk for depression in all contexts or during all developmental periods.
Our study was built on a precise theory of the role of
social-cognitive interpretations of social adversity in spurring recursive thoughts that increase the risk for depression during high school. We predicted that if social
difficulties, such as peer exclusion, rumormongering, and
other forms of social aggression, are nearly ubiquitous—
as in the transition to high school (Barber & Olsen, 2004;
Crosnoe, 2011)—then there will be a greater tendency for
many teens to engage in thoughts that could increase
vulnerability to depression. During those times, students
may be more likely to develop depression unless they are
given a framework for understanding social events that
prevents them from engaging in those thoughts. An
implication of this account is that, potentially, the present
intervention might have little or no effect on depression
if the timing were different, perhaps even if it were delivered just a few weeks later in the first semester of high
school when negative thinking may have already taken
root (see Cook, Purdie-Vaughns, Garcia, & Cohen, 2012).

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Implicit Theories and Depression	

13

As with other brief psychological interventions that are
a part of the canon of strategies available to clinical psychologists (see Pennebaker, 2004), the mechanisms that
produced a sustained effect of this brief intervention are
not fully understood. For instance, did teens clearly
remember the specific content of the incremental theory
message during the year, or did they forget it but only
after it affected their self-schemata and began to provide
a new lens for interpreting social adversity? Or did the
intervention have the short-term effect of causing teens
to make more friends, thereby buffering them from
depressive symptoms and maladaptive self-schemas in
the long run? The intervention may also have been effective as a result of biological mechanisms, such as stress
reactivity, a predictor of higher rates of depression (e.g.,
Gotlib, Joormann, Minor, & Hallmayer, 2008). Indeed,
Yeager et al. (2014) found that ninth graders who received
an incremental theory intervention reported less stress in
response to peer ostracism. These possibilities and others
warrant further investigation (see Walton, 2014; Yeager &
Walton, 2011).
Another limitation is our use of only a brief self-report
measure of depressive symptoms. This is, of course, common in large-scale, light-touch studies like the present
research, in part because the CDI has shown convergent
validity with a clinical diagnostic interview despite its
convenience and efficiency (Timbremont et  al., 2004).
Yet it is possible that adolescents may not have full insight
into their depressive symptoms. Future research would
greatly benefit from additional measures, such as a clinical diagnostic interview or a parent report of depressive
symptoms, which would reduce false positive and false
negative rates. Although we found treatment effects 8
months later, it is always possible that the intervention
requires a booster session for even longer-term effects.
Administering booster sessions and engaging in a longerterm follow-up may be informative about treatment
effects on depressive diagnoses over time.
A final set of limitations is analytic rather than theoretical. First, the smallest of our three samples (Sample 1),
which represented 13% of our data, happened to show
significant baseline condition differences, by chance, but
only for the dichotomized measure of depressive symptoms and not for the continuous measure of depressive
symptoms. We did not exclude that sample entirely from
the present report because systematically omitting data
on the basis of the findings can lead to publication bias.
Instead, we used a number of analytic methods to show
that our conclusions did not depend on that baseline difference. Next, the treatment effect on continuous depressive symptoms in the full sample was marginally
significant (p = .07), whereas there were significant effects
(at p < .05) on the dichotomized clinically significant

symptoms variable, two of the four symptom clusters,
and the continuous depressive symptoms among students with an entity theory at baseline. Of course, a CDI:S
measure would produce greater measurement error than
would the full long-form CDI; thus, some inconsistency
across analyses should be expected as a result of random
variability alone. However, this result highlights the more
general need to replicate the present study’s results and
to more fully understand their boundary conditions
before it would be responsible to apply them broadly in
clinical or educational settings.

Implications
Although we acknowledge the limitations of this research,
it is important to emphasize a number of potential implications of this study for mental-health policy. First, the
intervention appears to have been effective at reducing
the overall percentage of students with significant levels
of depressive symptoms. Although it may be more effective to have a targeted treatment for students with an
entity theory, researchers may have difficulty in categorizing students into entity theorists reliably, given that our
study measured implicit theory on a continuous scale.
Moreover, students with an entity theory may feel stigmatized if they are pulled from class to receive the intervention. Instead, our past studies have shown that the
intervention helps reduce aggression, stress, and health
for students regardless of baseline theories (Yeager et al.,
2014; Yeager, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2013). Thus, the
intervention appears to be best used as a “universal prevention” for all students—something that has been very
difficult to accomplish in past studies (Stice et al., 2009).
In fact, Stice et al. (2009) stated, “It may be prudent to . . .
discontinue evaluation of universal prevention programs”
(p. 499). The potential suggested by the present early
stage research will hopefully breathe new life into universal prevention efforts.
Second, the present intervention was cost-effective
and highly scalable. In the two larger samples—Samples
2 and 3—the intervention was delivered via the Internet
in the school computer lab with no specialized training
of school staff. It involved only one class period (although
some students also received a background session about
the brain that, as noted, did not seem to enhance treatment effects). This does not mean that the intervention
had zero cost. In fact, a great deal of work was done in
the piloting phase to customize the intervention for the
given populations—for instance, changing the normative
quotes from peers to match local colloquialisms and programming the intervention to seem like a normal survey
that students would complete in the course of everyday
schooling (see Yeager & Walton, 2011). Effort also went

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Miu, Yeager

14	
into designing procedures that fit within the fabric of the
school day so that the experimental session could be carried out with high treatment fidelity. Nevertheless, the
intervention had near-zero marginal cost. That is, after
initial customization, there was little or no additional cost
of giving the intervention to more students within the
school. Given the relatively small investment of time and
effort, and the possibility of saving many tens of thousands of dollars in lost productivity over a lifetime for a
person who is prevented from depression in adolescence, the present intervention (or an improved version
of it) may, after replication and extension, eventually
prove to be a cost-effective option for educators and
policymakers.
The present research also has a number of theoretical
implications. First, this research reinforces social-cognitive theories of development (Olson & Dweck, 2008).
Historical data have suggested that dramatic increases in
depression during the transition to high school are inevitable (e.g., the control group in the present study; see
Benner et  al., 2011; Merikangas et  al., 2010; Newman
et al., 2007). Yet the present research confirms the classic
notion that adversities in life do not have a direct effect
on poor mental health but, instead, are filtered through a
person’s social-cognitive style (Beck, 1976). This provides
an important opportunity for intervention. It suggests that
it can be possible to weaken the effect of an environmental risk on mental health by precisely targeting relevant
social-cognitive factors before negative, self-reinforcing
patterns of thinking have an opportunity to gain momentum (Cohen & Sherman, 2014). In the present research,
we attempted to alter an implicit theory that, in much
past research, has been shown to give rise to negative
responses to social adversity, and we did it at a time
known to be laden with difficulties, such as exclusion
and victimization.6 We showed that when this was done,
the typical increases in depressive symptoms during
freshman year were slowed substantially.
Second, this research adds to a growing number of
experimental studies that have shown that, when
attempts are made to address important social problems
that have a psychological component, sometimes “less is
more.” For example, in some cases, 2 to 5 min of expressive writing exercises can be more effective than extensive counseling sessions for individuals coping with
trauma (Pennebaker, 2004), and a 7-min writing exercise
can halt the year-over-year decrease in marital satisfaction (Finkel, Slotter, Luchies, Walton, & Gross, 2013; for
many more examples, see Walton, 2014, or Wilson,
2011). It is interesting that the Stice et al. (2009) metaanalysis of depression prevention programs showed that
briefer programs were more effective than longer

programs at preventing depression and that programs
that involved homework—requiring individuals to write
at home—were more effective than those that did not.
Coincidentally, the present implicit-theories intervention
involved expressive writing and was brief. Viewed from
that perspective, the present findings are quite consistent with existing best practices.

Conclusion
It is important to replicate and extend these findings to
deepen our understanding of the moderating and mediating mechanisms of the specific symptom clusters that
are affected. Doing so is the most responsible next step
before broader application. Nonetheless, it is encouraging that the present theoretically informed strategy of
intervening to teach an incremental theory of personality
appears to have made some headway on a seemingly
intractable issue—universal prevention for depressive
symptoms during adolescence.
Author Contributions
D. S. Yeager developed the study concept and study design and
supervised all data collection, entry, and coding. A. S. Miu analyzed the data under the supervision of D. S. Yeager. A. S. Miu
prepared all tables and figures and drafted the manuscript and
the Supplemental Material. D. S. Yeager provided critical revisions. Both authors approved the final version of the manuscript for submission.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the students and teachers involved in this
research for their cooperation. We also thank Cary Catching,
April House, Ahmad Saleh, Kerry Morrissey, Shannon Morrissey,
Joseph Powers, Brian Spitzer, Rebecca Johnson, April Scott, and
Hector Villalpando for their help with data collection and entry.
We are also grateful to Chris Beevers, David Sherman, James
Pennebaker, Kali Trzesniewski, Carol Dweck, and Patricia
Brennan for their feedback or suggestions. All remaining errors
are the authors’.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The authors declared that they had no conflicts of interest with
respect to their authorship or the publication of this article.

Funding
This work received funding from the Thrive Foundation for
Youth, the Spencer Foundation, and the Raikes Foundation.

Supplemental Material	
Additional supporting information may be found at http://cpx
.sagepub.com/content/by/supplemental-data

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Implicit Theories and Depression	

15

Notes
1. Students with school-reported learning disabilities (e.g., dyslexia) or autism spectrum disorders were excluded because
they were not expected to be able to successfully self-administer the theory-change intervention in the allotted time without
any support from a teacher or researcher.
2. Students in Sample 1 and some but not all of the students in
Samples 2 and 3 participated in a preintervention workshop in
which teachers taught both the experimental and the control
groups about how the brain changes with learning. This was
done to provide a greater basis for the claim that personality lives in the brain and can be changed and to facilitate the
uptake of the treatment message. However, analyses of the data
from Samples 2 and 3 showed that participation in the preintervention workshop did not increase treatment effect sizes and
did not have a measurable impact on depressive symptoms.
3. The CDI:S was used instead of the long-form CDI because
in a prior study (Yeager, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2013), we
discovered that the long form was distressing when delivered
to nonclinical, universal populations of high school students
and resulted in participant complaints and, ultimately, sample
attrition. To minimize distress and reduce attrition rates from
the study, we used the CDI:S (note, however, that the shorter
form, if anything, should result in greater measurement error
and make it more difficult to reject the null hypothesis).
4. There is unfortunately no consensus on the clinical cut point
for the CDI:S, although a number of analysts have assessed cut
points for the long form of the CDI. For nonclinical populations, analysts have suggested long-form CDI cut points ranging from 16 to 19 of 44 possible points (Timbremont, Braet,
& Dreessen, 2004), corresponding roughly to the 80th to 90th
percentile (depending on gender) for adolescents in our target
age range (Kovacs, 1992). Our cut points approximated this as
best as possible.
5. Indeed, DeCoster et  al. (2009, p. 357) showed that at high
levels of reliability (above .8), the type of theory-driven dichotomization conducted here can outperform continuous analyses.
6. For a correlational, mediational analysis of the effects of
implicit theories on depression through maladaptive social
cognitions, using baseline survey data, see Figure S6 in the
Supplemental Material. Unfortunately, the same social-cognitive
variables were not assessed postintervention.

References
Abelson, R. P. (1985). A variance explanation paradox: When a
little is a lot. Psychological Bulletin, 97, 128–132.
Abramson, L. Y., Seligman, M. E., & Teasdale, J. D. (1978).
Learned helplessness in humans: Critique and reformulation. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 87, 49–74.
Ahmavaara, A., & Houston, D. M. (2007). The effects of selective schooling and self-concept on adolescents’ academic
aspiration: An examination of Dweck’s self-theory. British
Journal of Educational Psychology, 77, 613–632.
Aronson, E. (1999). The power of self-persuasion. American
Psychologist, 54, 875–884.
Avenevoli, S., & Steinberg, L. (2002). The continuity of depression across the adolescent transition. Advances in Child
Development and Behavior, 28, 139–173.

Barber, B. K., & Olsen, J. A. (2004). Assessing the transitions
to middle and high school. Journal of Adolescent Research,
19, 3–30.
Beck, A. T. (1976). Cognitive therapy and the emotional disorders. New York, NY: International Universities Press.
Beck, A. T. (2008). The evolution of the cognitive model of
depression and its neurobiological correlates. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 165, 969–977.
Beer, J. (2002). Implicit self-theories of shyness. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 1009–1024.
Benner, A. (2011). The transition to high school: Current knowledge, future directions. Educational Psychology Review, 23,
299–328.
Blackwell, L. S., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007).
Implicit theories of intelligence predict achievement across
an adolescent transition: A longitudinal study and an intervention. Child Development, 78, 246–263.
Burnette, J. L., O’Boyle, E. H., Vanepps, E. M., Pollack, J. M.,
& Finkel, E. J. (2013). Mind-sets matter: A meta-analytic
review of implicit theories and self-regulation. Psychological
Bulletin, 139, 655–701.
Chan, A., & Poulin, F. (2007). Monthly changes in the composition of friendship networks in early adolescence. MerrillPalmer Quarterly, 53, 578–602.
Chiu, C. Y., Hong, Y. Y., & Dweck, C. S. (1997). Lay dispositionism and implicit theories of personality. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 19–30.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Apfel, N., &
Brzustoski, P. (2009). Recursive processes in self-affirmation: Intervening to close the minority achievement gap.
Science, 324, 400–403.
Cohen, G. L., & Sherman, D. K. (2014). The psychology of
change: Self-affirmation and social psychological intervention. Annual Review of Psychology, 65, 333–371.
Cook, J. E., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L.
(2012). Chronic threat and contingent belonging: Protective
benefits of values affirmation on identity development.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102, 479–496.
Cooper, H., & Patall, E. A. (2009). The relative benefits of metaanalysis conducted with individual participant data versus
aggregated data. Psychological Methods, 14, 165–176.
Costello, E. J., Mustillo, S., Erkanli, A., Keeler, G., & Angold,
A. (2003). Prevalence and development of psychiatric disorders in childhood and adolescence. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 60, 837–844.
Crosnoe, R. (2011). Fitting in, standing out: Navigating the
social challenges of high school to get an education. New
York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Cyranowski, J. M., Frank, E., Young, E., & Shear, M. K. (2000).
Adolescent onset of the gender difference in lifetime rates
of major depression: A theoretical model. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 57, 21–27.
DeCoster, J., Iselin, A. M. R., & Gallucci, M. (2009). A conceptual and empirical examination of justifications for dichotomization. Psychological Methods, 14, 349–366.
Diener, C. I., & Dweck, C. S. (1978). An analysis of learned
helplessness: Continuous changes in performance, strategy,
and achievement cognitions following failure. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 36, 940–952.

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Miu, Yeager

16	
Disner, S. G., Beevers, C. G., Haigh, E. A., & Beck, A. T. (2011).
Neural mechanisms of the cognitive model of depression.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 12, 467–477.
Dweck, C. S. (1975). The role of expectations and attributions in the alleviation of learned helplessness. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 31, 674–685.
Dweck, C. S. (1999). Self-theories: Their role in motivation, personality, and development. Philadelphia, PA: Psychology
Press.
Dweck, C. S., & Elliott-Moskwa, E. (2010). Self-theories: The
roots of defensiveness. In J. E. Maddux & J. P. Tangney
(Eds.), Social psychological foundations of clinical psychology (pp. 136–156). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Dweck, C. S., & Leggett, E. L. (1988). A social-cognitive
approach to motivation and personality. Psychological
Review, 95, 256–273.
Erdley, C. A., Loomis, C. C., Cain, K. M., & Dumas-Hines, F.
(1997). Relations among children’s social goals, implicit
personality theories, and responses to social failure.
Developmental Psychology, 33, 263–272.
Farrington, D. P., & Loeber, R. (2000). Some benefits of dichotomization in psychiatric and criminological research.
Criminal Behaviour and Mental Health, 10, 100–122.
Finkel, E. J., Slotter, E. B., Luchies, L. B., Walton, G. M., & Gross,
J. J. (2013). A brief intervention to promote conflict reappraisal preserves marital quality over time. Psychological
Science, 24, 1595–1601.
Frieden, T. R. (2010). A framework for public health action: The
health impact pyramid. American Journal of Public Health,
100, 590–595.
Garber, J., Clarke, G. N., Weersing, V. R., Beardslee, W. R.,
Brent, D. A., Gladstone, T. R., . . . Iyengar, S. (2009).
Prevention of depression in at-risk adolescents: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical
Association, 301, 2215–2224.
Gillham, J. E., Hamilton, J., Freres, D. R., Patton, K., & Gallop,
R. (2006). Preventing depression among early adolescents
in the primary care setting: A randomized controlled study
of the Penn Resiliency Program. Journal of Abnormal Child
Psychology, 34, 195–211.
Glasgow, R. E., Lichtenstein, E., & Marcus, A. C. (2003). Why
don’t we see more translation of health promotion research
to practice? Rethinking the efficacy-to-effectiveness transition. American Journal of Public Health, 93, 1261–1267.
Goodman, S. H., & Gotlib, I. H. (1999). Risk for psychopathology in the children of depressed mothers: A developmental model for understanding mechanisms of transmission.
Psychological Review, 106, 458–490.
Gotlib, I. H., & Joormann, J. (2010). Cognition and depression: Current status and future directions. Annual Review of
Clinical Psychology, 6, 285–312.
Gotlib, I. H., Joormann, J., Minor, K. L., & Hallmayer, J. (2008).
HPA axis reactivity: A mechanism underlying the associations among 5-HTTLPR, stress, and depression. Biological
Psychiatry, 63, 847–851.
Graham, S., & Juvonen, J. (1998). Self-blame and peer victimization in middle school: An attributional analysis.
Developmental Psychology, 34, 587–599.

Hankin, B. L., Abramson, L. Y., Moffitt, T. E., Silva, P. A.,
McGee, R., & Angell, K. E. (1998). Development of depression from preadolescence to young adulthood: Emerging
gender differences in a 10-year longitudinal study. Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 107, 128–140.
Hankin, B. L., Mermelstein, R., & Roesch, L. (2007). Sex differences in adolescent depression: Stress exposure and reactivity models. Child Development, 78, 279–295.
Hasler, G., Drevets, W. C., Manji, H. K., & Charney, D. S.
(2004). Discovering endophenotypes for major depression.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 29, 1765–1781.
Helsel, W. J., & Matson, J. L. (1984). The assessment of
depression in children: The internal structure of the Child
Depression Inventory (CDI). Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 22, 289–298.
Higgins, E. T., Vookles, J., & Tykocinski, O. (1992). Self and
health: How “patterns” of self-beliefs predict types of emotional and physical problems. Social Cognition, 10, 125–150.
Hong, Y. Y., Chiu, C. Y., Dweck, C. S., Lin, D. M., & Wan, W.
(1999). Implicit theories, attributions, and coping: A meaning system approach. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 77, 588–599.
Horowitz, J. L., & Garber, J. (2006). The prevention of depressive symptoms in children and adolescents: A meta-analytic
review. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 74,
401–415.
Janoff-Bulman, R. (1979). Characterological versus behavioral
self-blame: Inquiries into depression and rape. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 37, 1798–1809.
Juvonen, J., & Graham, S. (2014). Bullying in schools: The
power of bullies and the plight of victims. Annual Review
of Psychology, 65, 159–185.
Kessler, R. C., Chiu, W. T., Demler, O., & Walters, E. E. (2005).
Prevalence, severity, and comorbidity of 12-month DSM-IV
disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 617–627.
Killen, M., Kelly, M. C., Richardson, C., & Jampol, N. S. (2010).
Attributions of intentions and fairness judgments regarding
interracial peer encounters. Developmental Psychology, 46,
1206–1213.
Kovacs, M. K. (1992). Children’s Depression Inventory-Short
Form (CDI). New York, NY: Multi-Health Systems.
Lakdawalla, Z., Hankin, B. L., & Mermelstein, R. (2007).
Cognitive theories of depression in children and adolescents: A conceptual and quantitative review. Clinical Child
and Family Psychology Review, 10, 1–24.
Lewinsohn, P. M., Rohde, P., & Seeley, J. R. (1998). Major
depressive disorder in older adolescents: Prevalence,
risk factors, and clinical implications. Clinical Psychology
Review, 18, 765–794.
Loas, G. (1996). Vulnerability to depression: A model centered
on anhedonia. Journal of Affective Disorders, 41, 39–53.
MacCallum, R. C., Zhang, S., Preacher, K. J., & Rucker, D. D.
(2002). On the practice of dichotomization of quantitative
variables. Psychological Methods, 7, 19–40.
Mathers, C. D., Fat, D. M., & Boerma, J. (2008). The global burden of disease: 2004 update. Geneva, Switzerland: World
Health Organization.

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Implicit Theories and Depression	

17

McLaughlin, K. A. (2011). The public health impact of major
depression: A call for interdisciplinary prevention efforts.
Prevention Science, 12, 361–371.
Merikangas, K. R., He, J. P., Burstein, M., Swanson, S. A.,
Avenevoli, S., Cui, L., . . . Swendsen, J. (2010). Lifetime prevalence of mental disorders in US adolescents: Results from
the National Comorbidity Survey Replication–Adolescent
Supplement (NCS-A). Journal of the American Academy of
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 49, 980–989.
Molden, D. C., & Dweck, C. S. (2006). Finding “meaning” in
psychology: A lay theories approach to self-regulation,
social perception, and social development. American
Psychologist, 61, 192–203.
Molden, D. C., Plaks, J. E., & Dweck, C. S. (2006). “Meaningful”
social inferences: Effects of implicit theories on inferential
processes. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 42,
738–752.
Muñoz, R. F., Cuijpers, P., Smit, F., Barrera, A. Z., & Leykin, Y.
(2010). Prevention of major depression. Annual Review of
Clinical Psychology, 6, 181–212.
Newman, B., Newman, P., Griffen, S., O’Connor, K., & Spas,
J. (2007). The relationship of social support to depressive
symptoms during the transition to high school. Adolescence,
42, 441–459.
Olson, K. R., & Dweck, C. S. (2008). A blueprint for social cognitive development. Perspectives on Psychological Science,
3, 193–202.
Pennebaker, J. W. (1997). Writing about emotional experiences
as a therapeutic process. Psychological Science, 8, 162–166.
Pennebaker, J. W. (2004). Theories, therapies, and taxpayers:
On the complexities of the expressive writing paradigm.
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 11, 138–142.
Pennebaker, J. W., Booth, R. J, & Francis, M. E. (2007). Linguistic
Inquiry and Word Count: (LIWC2007): A computer-based
text analysis program [Computer software]. Retrieved from
http://liwc.net
Pennebaker, J. W., & King, L. A. (1999). Linguistic styles:
Language use as an individual difference. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 1296–1312.
Petrie, K. J., Booth, R. J., & Pennebaker, J. W. (1998). The
immunological effects of thought suppression. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 1264–1272.
Richards, M. H., Crowe, P. A., Larson, R., & Swarr, A. (1998).
Developmental patterns and gender differences in the
experience of peer companionship during adolescence.
Child Development, 69, 154–163.
Robins, R. W., & Pals, J. L. (2002). Implicit self-theories in the
academic domain: Implications for goal orientation, attributions, affect, and self-esteem change. Self and Identity, 1,
313–336.
Rudolph, K. D. (2010). Implicit theories of peer relationships.
Social Development, 19, 113–129.
Rutter, M. (2003). Categories, dimensions, and the mental
health of children and adolescents. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences, 1008, 11–21.
Saylor, C. F., Finch, A. J., Spirito, A., & Bennett, B. (1984). The
Children’s Depression Inventory: A systematic evaluation
of psychometric properties. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 52, 955–967.

Schimmack, U. (2012). The ironic effect of significant results
on the credibility of multiple-study articles. Psychological
Methods, 17, 551–556.
Sheffield, J. K., Spence, S. H., Rapee, R. M., Kowalenko, N.,
Wignall, A., Davis, A., & McLoone, J. (2006). Evaluation
of universal, indicated, and combined cognitive-behavioral
approaches to the prevention of depression among adolescents. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 74,
66–79.
Spence, S. H., Sheffield, J. K., & Donovan, C. L. (2003).
Preventing adolescent depression: An evaluation of the
Problem Solving for Life program. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 71, 3–13.
Stice, E., Shaw, H., Bohon, C., Marti, C. N., & Rohde, P. (2009).
A meta-analytic review of depression prevention programs
for children and adolescents: Factors that predict magnitude of intervention effects. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 77, 486–503.
Tangney, J. P., Stuewig, J., & Mashek, D. J. (2007). Moral emotions and moral behavior. Annual Review of Psychology,
58, 345–372.
Timbremont, B., Braet, C., & Dreessen, L. (2004). Assessing
depression in youth: Relation between the Children’s
Depression Inventory and a structured interview. Journal
of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 33, 149–157.
Walton, G. M. (2014). The new science of wise psychological
interventions. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
23, 73–82.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A brief social-belonging
intervention improves academic and health outcomes of
minority students. Science, 331, 1447–1451.
Weiss, B., & Weisz, J. R. (1988). Factor structure of self-reported
depression: Clinic-referred children versus adolescents.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 97, 492–495.
Weiss, B., Weisz, J. R., Politano, M., Carey, M., Nelson, W. M.,
& Finch, A. J. (1991). Developmental differences in the
factor structure of the Children’s Depression Inventory.
Psychological Assessment: A Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 3, 38–45.
Williams, K. D., & Jarvis, B. (2006). Cyberball: A program for
use in research on interpersonal ostracism and acceptance.
Behavior Research Methods, 38, 174–180.
Wilson, T. D. (2011). Redirect: The surprising new science of
psychological change. New York, NY: Little, Brown.
Wilson, T. D., Damiani, M., & Shelton, N. (2002). Improving
the academic performance of college students with brief
attributional interventions. In J. Aronson (Ed.), Improving
academic achievement: Impact of psychological factors on
education (pp. 88–108). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Wong, P. W., Fu, K. W., Chan, K. Y., Chan, W. S., Liu, P. M.,
Law, Y. W., & Yip, P. S. (2012). Effectiveness of a universal school-based programme for preventing depression
in Chinese adolescents: A quasi-experimental pilot study.
Journal of Affective Disorders, 142, 106–114.
Yeager, D. S., & Dweck, C. S. (2012). Mindsets that promote
resilience: When students believe that personal characteristics can be developed. Educational Psychologist, 47, 1–13.
Yeager, D. S., Johnson, R., Spitzer, B. J., Trzesniewski, K. H.,
Powers, J., & Dweck, C. S. (2014). The far-reaching effects

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

Miu, Yeager

18	
of believing people can change: Implicit theories of personality shape stress, health, and achievement during adolescence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
106, 867–884.
Yeager, D. S., Miu, A. S., Powers, J., & Dweck, C. S. (2013).
Implicit theories of personality and attributions of hostile
intent: A meta-analysis, an experiment, and a longitudinal
intervention. Child Development, 84, 1651–1667.
Yeager, D. S., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2013).
An implicit theories of personality intervention reduces

a­dolescent aggression in response to victimization and
exclusion. Child Development, 84, 970–988.
Yeager, D. S., Trzesniewski, K. H., Tirri, K., Nokelainen, P.,
& Dweck, C. S. (2011). Adolescents’ implicit theories predict desire for vengeance after peer conflicts: Correlational
and experimental evidence. Developmental Psychology, 47,
1090–1107.
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological
interventions in education: They’re not magic. Review of
Educational Research, 81, 267–301.

Downloaded from cpx.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on September 16, 2014

571017
research-article2015

PSSXXX10.1177/0956797615571017Paunesku et al.A Scalable Intervention for Academic Underachievement

Research Article

Mind-Set Interventions Are a
Scalable Treatment for Academic
Underachievement

Psychological Science
2015, Vol. 26(6) 784–793
© The Author(s) 2015
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0956797615571017
pss.sagepub.com

David Paunesku1, Gregory M. Walton1, Carissa Romero1,
Eric N. Smith1, David S. Yeager2, and Carol S. Dweck1
1

Stanford University and 2University of Texas, Austin

Abstract
The efficacy of academic-mind-set interventions has been demonstrated by small-scale, proof-of-concept interventions,
generally delivered in person in one school at a time. Whether this approach could be a practical way to raise school
achievement on a large scale remains unknown. We therefore delivered brief growth-mind-set and sense-of-purpose
interventions through online modules to 1,594 students in 13 geographically diverse high schools. Both interventions
were intended to help students persist when they experienced academic difficulty; thus, both were predicted to be
most beneficial for poorly performing students. This was the case. Among students at risk of dropping out of high
school (one third of the sample), each intervention raised students’ semester grade point averages in core academic
courses and increased the rate at which students performed satisfactorily in core courses by 6.4 percentage points. We
discuss implications for the pipeline from theory to practice and for education reform.
Keywords
academic achievement, motivation, intervention, educational psychology, adolescent development
Received 6/25/14; Revision accepted 1/12/15

Every year, high-quality articles published in the finest
journals demonstrate the power of psychological interventions to bring about meaningful change in academic
achievement (e.g., J. Aronson, Fried, & Good, 2002;
Blackwell, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2007; Cohen, Garcia,
Purdie-Vaughns, Apfel, & Brzustoski, 2009; Good, Aronson,
& Inzlicht, 2003; Harackiewicz, Rozek, Hulleman, & Hyde,
2012; Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009; Jamieson, Mendes,
Blackstock, & Schmader, 2010; Sherman et  al., 2013;
Walton & Cohen, 2011; Wilson & Linville, 1982, 1985). Yet
a critical limitation of these interventions is they are rarely
tested in ways that can be readily scaled up. They often
require that researchers be extensively and personally
involved at school sites to ensure appropriate delivery of
the intervention (see Yeager & Walton, 2011). It is therefore unclear whether any published psychological intervention can move beyond a boutique remedy to raise
achievement or close achievement gaps for large numbers
of students. In the study reported here, we addressed that
issue. We tested, for the first time, whether psychological
interventions could practically be deployed to raise academic achievement on a wide-scale.

Our focus is on underperformance in U.S. high
schools. Millions of students drop out of high school
every year. They tend to be unprepared for either college
or the workforce and consequently suffer poorer job
prospects, worse health, and higher incarceration rates
than people who complete high school (Dianda, 2008).
President Obama recently identified improvement in
educational outcomes as one of the highest domestic priorities in the United States (U.S. Department of Education,
2014). Of course, many reforms have been tried, including improvements to teacher training, accountability
mechanisms, school structures, and curricula, often at
high cost and with limited success (e.g., Fullan, 2001;
Glazerman et  al., 2010). Yet no major reform has
Corresponding Authors:
David Paunesku, Department of Psychology, Stanford University,
Jordan Hall, Bldg. 420, 450 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305
Email: paunesku@stanford.edu
Gregory M. Walton, Department of Psychology, Stanford University,
Jordan Hall, Bldg. 420, 450 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305
E-mail: gwalton@stanford.edu

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

A Scalable Intervention for Academic Underachievement
prioritized students’ psychological experience in school
or motivation to succeed, despite the fact that it is ultimately students themselves who must capitalize on learning opportunities. Can psychological science provide
scalable techniques to improve students’ approach to
learning and achievement in high school?
Although social-psychological or academic-mind-set
interventions (Farrington et al., 2012) have been influential, none of them have been tested in ways that are
potentially scalable. The problem is not so much that
past interventions included small samples but that they
have generally been tested in only one context at a time
and with far greater researcher involvement and control
than would be feasible in a large-scale implementation
(Farrington et  al., 2012; Yeager & Walton, 2011). This
includes tailoring materials for each school site, extensive
training of participating faculty, and exerting close control over the context and timing of intervention delivery.
These studies provide important tests of psychological
theory and its application. However, if interventions are
not tested in realistic ways with broad samples and minimal researcher input, they remain only exemplary test
cases whose practical impact on education outcomes is
unclear. As Bryk, Gomez, and Grunow (2011) wrote, “the
history of educational innovation is replete with stories
that show how innovations work in the hands of a few,
but lose effectiveness in the hands of the many” (p. 130).
Are academic-mind-set interventions a practical way
to raise achievement in the United States, especially for
underperforming students? If so, this would constitute a
major contribution of psychological science to social policy and justify increased investment in psychological
approaches to educational and social improvement.
To examine whether mind-set interventions could be
effective at scale, we transformed existing in-person
interventions into brief computer-based modules.
Computerized interventions allow materials to be delivered to recipients exactly as designed without extensive
researcher involvement or facilitator training; they eliminate geographic constraints, opening access to students
at multiple school sites and sites far from research centers; and they drastically reduce logistical burdens, the
marginal cost of additional participants, and the costs of
data collection and large-scale evaluation (Marks,
Cavanagh, & Gega, 2007).
We tested two mind-set interventions—one for growth
mind-set of intelligence1 and a second for sense of purpose—with more than 1,500 students in 13 high schools.
The primary outcomes were grades and satisfactory completion rates in core academic subjects. We focused on
effects among poorly performing students, because
mind-sets matter most when students encounter challenges in school (Burnette, O’Boyle, VanEpps, Pollack, &
Finkel, 2013; Dweck & Leggett, 1988).

785

Academic-Mind-Set Interventions
Academic-mind-set interventions target students’ core
beliefs about school and learning, such as “Can I learn
and grow my intelligence?” (growth-mind-set beliefs) and
“Why should I learn?” (sense-of-purpose beliefs). In so
doing, they can change how students interpret and
respond to challenges in school, increase students’ resilience, and set in motion positive recursive cycles that
increase success over time (Garcia & Cohen, 2012; Yeager
& Walton, 2011).
Growth-mind-set interventions convey that intelligence can grow when students work hard on challenging
tasks—and thus that struggle is an opportunity for
growth, not a sign that a student is incapable of learning.
Past studies featuring activities led by researchers or
researcher-trained tutors show that this message can raise
students’ achievement. In a seminal study, J. Aronson and
his colleagues (2002) taught a growth mind-set to college
students in three 1-hr laboratory sessions and then
encouraged students to internalize this message by teaching it to struggling middle school students. This experience raised the college students’ semester grade point
averages (GPAs). In another study, an eight-session
growth-mind-set workshop led by researchers raised the
math grades of low-achieving seventh-grade students
(Blackwell et  al., 2007; see also Good et  al., 2003).
Because growth-mind-set interventions help students
understand challenges in school in a way that promotes
learning and resilience, they may be most beneficial for
underperforming students (Burnette et al., 2013).
Sense-of-purpose interventions encourage students to
reflect on how working hard and learning in school can
help them accomplish meaningful goals beyond the self,
such as contributing to their community or being examples for other people (Yeager & Bundick, 2009; Yeager,
Henderson, D’Mello, et al., 2014). They draw on relevance interventions (Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009),
which help students relate course content to their lives.
However, they are framed more broadly, in terms of the
value of school in general. Like relevance interventions,
sense-of-purpose interventions can sustain students’
motivation when schoolwork is boring or frustrating but
foundational to learning. In so doing, they can raise
achievement, especially among underperforming students (Yeager, Henderson, D’Mello, et al., 2014).
Because mind-set interventions typically target a single keystone belief, they can be brief (e.g., an hour or
less) and can be delivered using standardized materials
(Cohen et  al., 2009; Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009;
Walton & Cohen, 2011; see Walton, 2014). We focused on
growth-mind-set and sense-of-purpose interventions
because they seemed most suitable to an initial effort to
scale such interventions to heterogeneous settings. They

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Paunesku et al.

786
do not require customization to course content (unlike,
e.g., Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009) or reference students’ school context (unlike, e.g., Walton & Cohen,
2011). They use common narratives (e.g., stories from
older students) and objective information (e.g., scientific
concepts) to change core beliefs about school ( J. Aronson
et al., 2002). In this way, such interventions can be distributed in a more flexible array of situations than more
experiential interventions, which may need to take place
within the classroom itself (e.g., Cohen et  al., 2009).
Furthermore, they benefit underperforming students
broadly, unlike interventions that focus on the psychological experience of students from negatively stereotyped groups (e.g., Cohen et al., 2009; Walton & Cohen,
2011).
We took a number of steps to test the interventions
under realistic circumstances like those that would be in
force when the interventions were scaled-up. We included
a heterogeneous sample of schools even though this
introduced more variance in outcomes, and we allowed
schools to control when and by whom intervention activities would be administered. To retain schools that could
not offer extended time for the study, we also dispensed
with extensive survey batteries and psychological process measures such as daily diaries (e.g., Walton & Cohen,
2011). By taking these steps and reducing the “superrealization bias” (Cronbach et al., 1980) that can lead to
large effect sizes in trials with small, highly controlled
samples (Ioannidis, Cappelleri, & Lau, 1998; Slavin &
Smith, 2009), we expected to find more modest but more
realistic and broadly reliable effects.
When psychological-science researchers examine
social problems, the remedies that emerge from their
research are often impractical or not tested in ways that
can be meaningfully scaled up. This is perhaps one reason why psychological science has played only a limited
role in many major policy debates. In the current study,
we tested whether academic-mind-set interventions can
have a meaningful impact on academic outcomes when
delivered to a large sample in a scalable way. If so, our
results could stand as a model for research that takes
theory into practice.

Method
Participating schools and students
Thirteen high schools, recruited through a series of presentations to educators or brief phone meetings, agreed to
participate and provide participating students’ academic
records. The schools were located in the eastern, western,
and southwestern United States. Eight were public schools,
four were charter schools, and one was a private school.
They varied widely in socioeconomic characteristics: In

five schools, almost no students received free or reduced
lunch because of low household income; in six, more
than half of students did (see Table 1).
To maximize external validity and power, we sought
to include as many students as possible in the study.
Consequently, we permitted all interested schools to take
part provided that they agreed to try to enroll 100 or
more students and to provide academic outcomes for
participating students (not all schools reached this benchmark). Our analyses focus on the 1,594 students for
whom both preintervention and postintervention semester grades were available.

Procedure
Participating schools were asked to select a study coordinator who would recruit teachers to participate and follow-up with teachers if classrooms lagged. The
coordinator asked teachers to create accounts on the
study Web site (http://www.perts.net) and to schedule
two 45-min sessions about 2 weeks apart (mean = 13
days). Both sessions were administered in the school
computer lab during the spring semester, between
January and May 2012. In an online registration process,
teachers agreed to describe the activities to students as a
part of an ongoing Stanford University study about why
and how students learn. After signing into the study Web
site, each student was individually randomly assigned to
a control condition or to one of three intervention conditions: growth-mind-set intervention, sense-of-purpose
intervention, or the two interventions combined. For all
groups, the growth-mind-set intervention (or related control materials) was delivered in Session 1; the sense-ofpurpose intervention (or related control materials) was
delivered in Session 2. Students from all four conditions
thus took part in both sessions.
The growth-mind-set intervention drew directly on
past research ( J. Aronson et  al., 2002; Blackwell et  al.,
2007; Good et al., 2003) for both content and procedures;
however, the material was revised to be effective within
a single 45-min online session. Students read an article
describing the brain’s ability to grow and reorganize itself
as a consequence of hard work and good strategies on
challenging tasks. The article focused on the implications
of neuroscience findings for students’ potential to become
more intelligent through study and practice. In keeping
with our focus on underperforming students, the article
stressed the fact that struggle and setbacks in school do
not indicate limited potential; rather, they provide opportunities to learn. This message was reinforced through
two writing exercises (see E. Aronson, 1999; J. Aronson
et al., 2002). In one, students summarized the scientific
findings in their own words. In the second, they read
about a hypothetical student who was becoming

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

A Scalable Intervention for Academic Underachievement

787

Table 1. Participating Schools and Their Demographics

School

School
type

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

Public
Public
Public
Public
Public
Public
Charter
Charter
Public
Charter
Private
Charter
Public

Students
Total
on free or
Mean SAT
Racial composition of school
Number of
school reduced-price score (out
participants enrollment lunch (%)
of 2400) Asian (%) Black (%) Hispanic (%) White (%) Other (%)
361
224
172
135
132
119
79
77
76
69
68
52
30

1,824
1,129
1,781
238
2,059
2,037
1,852
416
174
297
2,049
709
192

8
—
68
85
0
64
6
56
71
39
31
4
90

1795
—
1376
1193
1737
1430
1951
—
1268
1255
1785
1562
—

60
8
1
13
8
2
23
9
4
3
11
0
—

1
14
2
27
1
1
4
24
21
64
6
1
—

9
6
90
53
6
88
9
42
56
26
39
5
—

28
54
5
2
81
8
58
15
6
4
41
93
—

2
18
2
4
4
1
7
9
13
3
2
1
—

Note: Not all information was available for all schools. Total school enrollment is reported for the 2011–2012 school year.

discouraged and beginning to think of himself as not
smart enough to do well in school. Participating students
were asked to use what they had read to advise this student. In the control condition, students read and completed similar-seeming materials; however, these materials
focused on functional localization in the brain, not neural
plasticity. They thus lacked the key psychological message that intelligence is malleable.
The sense-of-purpose intervention was designed to
help students articulate how schoolwork could help them
accomplish meaningful, beyond-the-self life goals. The
materials also drew directly on past research (Yeager,
Henderson, D’Mello, et al., 2014). In the intervention, the
students were first asked to write briefly about how they
wished the world could be a better place. It went on to say
that many students work hard in school because they want
to grow up to “make a positive impact on the world,” to
“make their families proud,” or to be “a good example for
other people.” Students were then asked to think about
their own goals and to write about how learning and
working hard in school could help them achieve these
goals. In the control condition, students completed either
of two similarly formatted modules that did not differ from
each other in their impact, ts < 1, and were combined in
analyses. One asked students to describe how their lives
were different in high school than before high school. The
other was very similar to the sense-of-purpose treatment but
put forward economic self-interest rather than prosocial
contribution as a reason to work hard in school. We included
this second control condition to establish that focusing on
beyond-the-self goals, not just any personal future goal, is
an important component of the intervention, a hypothesis

supported by prior work (Yeager, Henderson, D’Mello,
et al., 2014; Yeager & Bundick, 2009).
All students who entered the study and for whom preand postintervention grades were available were included
in the analyses (e.g., students who completed Session 1
but not Session 2 are retained with their original random
condition assignment). Thus, we performed an intentionto-treat analysis. Sample demographics are presented in
Table 2. Degrees of freedom varied because not all students completed all survey questions.

Psychological measures
Brief psychological measures were administered at the
start of Session 1 and at the end of Session 2. First, to
confirm that the growth-mind-set intervention changed
students’ beliefs about the malleability of intelligence, we
assessed this belief using two items: “You can learn new
things, but you can’t really change your basic intelligence” and “You have a certain amount of intelligence
and you really can’t do much to change it” (α = .84; see
Blackwell et  al., 2007). Second, we examined students’
construal of mundane academic tasks using a meaningfulness-of-schoolwork task (Yeager, Henderson, D’Mello,
et al., 2014; see also Steger, Bundick, & Yeager, 2012),
which assesses whether students view schoolwork (e.g.,
“Doing your math homework”) at a low, mechanical level
(e.g., “Typing numbers into a calculator and writing formulas”) or at a high level relevant to learning and growth
(“Building your problem-solving skills”; see Michaels,
Parkin, & Vallacher, 2013). Eight items formed a reliable
composite, α = .72. Although this measure is more closely

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Paunesku et al.

788
Table 2. Demographic Characteristics of the Sample
Characteristic
Gender
Female
Male
Race
Hispanic
White
Asian
Black
Other, mixed
Grade level
9th
10th
11th
12th

n

%

800
794

50
50

525
371
277
174
247

33
23
17
11
15

1,307
68
156
63

82
4
10
4

Note: Data on individual students’ socioeconomic status (SES) were
not collected; however, the percentage of students receiving free or
reduced-price lunches, a measure of school-level SES, was known
for all public and charter schools (12 of 13 participating schools; see
Table 1).

matched to the purpose of schoolwork, it seemed reasonable that the results of the meaningfulness-of-schoolwork task could be influenced by both interventions
insofar as both interventions attempted to induce students to perceive the purpose of schoolwork to be learning and growth.

Measures of academic performance
Schools provided participating students’ transcripts. Ten
schools coded students’ performance on a five-letter
grading scale (A, B, C, D, F), whereas three assigned “no
credit” (NC) in place of Ds and Fs. To numerically transform letter grades for analysis, we always coded A, B, and
C as 4, 3, and 2, respectively. Because there was no single
a priori basis by which to code D, F, and NC, we used
three schemes: D = 1, F = 0, and NC = missing; D = 1, F =
1, and NC = 1 (because they are all unsatisfactory); or F =
0, D = 1, and NC = 1 (because D and NC are immediately
below C). The current results are presented using the
final coding scheme because it (a) retained all data
(unlike the first scheme) and (b) distinguished between F
and D (unlike the second scheme); however, all three
coding methods provided comparable results. We also
created a dichotomous measure of unsatisfactory progress, with grades of D, F, NC, and incomplete (I) marked
as unsatisfactory and grades of A, B, C, pass (P), and
credit (CR) marked as satisfactory.
We calculated each student’s end-of-semester GPA in
core academic courses (i.e., math, English, science, and
social studies) in the fall (preintervention) and in the spring
(postintervention). We focused on core academic courses

because these courses are generally most crucial to students’ success and because they are the most challenging
(mean core GPA = 2.45; mean noncore GPA = 3.15). Thus,
they are the most relevant to the interventions.2

Results
Baseline associations
After we controlled for school, race, and gender, prestudy
GPA was positively associated with baseline values for both
growth mind-set, β = 0.06, 95% confidence interval (CI) =
[0.03, 0.09], t(1561) = 3.47, p < .001, and sense of purpose,
β = 0.05, 95% CI = [0.01, 0.08], t(1551) = 2.67, p = .008.

Manipulation checks
A linear regression analysis in which we controlled for
prestudy beliefs about intelligence showed that the
growth-mind-set intervention led to a more malleable
view of intelligence, β = 0.17, 95% CI = [0.05, 0.28],
t(1007) = 2.82, p = .005, but the sense-of-purpose and
combined interventions did not, ps > .24.
A linear regression controlling for preintervention
meaningfulness of schoolwork showed that the sense-ofpurpose group perceived mundane academic tasks as
more relevant to learning and growth than did the control group, β = 0.17, 95% CI = [0.03, 0.32], t(1000) = 2.37,
p = .018; this was also true for the growth-mind-set group,
but only marginally, β = 0.11, 95% CI = [−0.01, 0.23],
t(1000) = 1.77, p = .078. The combined interventions
again showed no significant effect, t < 1.

Grade point average
To determine whether the intervention influenced poststudy GPA and did so to a greater extent for students with
a history of underperformance, we tested whether intervention effects would emerge among students who met
“high-yield” indicators of dropping out from high school.
This threshold was created by the Consortium for Chicago
School Research using decades of official records from
Chicago public schools (see Allensworth & Easton, 2007;
Heppen & Therriault, 2008). In our sample, 519 students
(33%) earned a baseline first-semester GPA of 2.0 or less
or failed at least one core academic course.
In the semester before the intervention, the intervention and control groups did not differ in GPA, ts < 1. We
conducted a linear regression analysis that included risk
(0 = not at risk, 1 = at risk), a dummy variable for each
intervention condition, and a dummy variable for each
Risk × Intervention (growth mind-set, sense of purpose,
combined) interaction. The outcome was core GPA for
the semester after intervention. We controlled for prestudy
GPA, race, gender, and school. The regression revealed

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

A Scalable Intervention for Academic Underachievement

789

Control Condition
Growth-Mind-Set Condition
Sense-of-Purpose Condition
Combined-Interventions Condition

Residual Standardized Poststudy Core GPA

0.10

0.05

0.00

−0.05

−0.10

Not At Risk for Dropping
Out of High School

At Risk for Dropping
Out of High School

Fig. 1. The effect of the interventions on grade point average (GPA). Residual standardized poststudy core GPA is graphed as a function of risk (n = 519 students at risk of dropping out of high school; n = 1,075 students not at risk of dropping out) and condition.
These residuals were calculated controlling for at-risk status, prior GPA, school, race, and
gender. Error bars indicate ±1 SE.

the predicted Risk × Intervention interaction for each
intervention condition: This interaction was significant
for the growth-mind-set intervention, b = 0.13, 95% CI =
[0.00, 0.26], t(1568) = 1.97, p = .048, and the sense-ofpurpose intervention, b = 0.17, 95% CI = [0.03, 0.32],
t(1568) = 2.31, p = .021, and it was marginally significant
for the combined interventions, b = 0.14, 95% CI = [−0.01,
0.28], t(1568) = 1.81, p = .071 (Fig. 1).
Because our primary research question concerned the
efficacy of academic-mind-set interventions in general
when delivered via online modules, we then collapsed
the intervention conditions into a single intervention
dummy code (0 = control, 1 = intervention). We again
controlled for prestudy GPA, race, gender, and school.
The regression analysis revealed a significant At Risk ×
Intervention interaction, b = 0.14, 95% CI = [0.03, 0.25],
t(1572) = 2.56, p = .011, such that the intervention effect
was significant among at-risk students, b = 0.13, 95% CI =
[0.02, 0.25], t(499) = 2.30, p = .022, but not among other
students, t < 1.3 The three intervention conditions produced similar benefits for at-risk students (mean change
in GPA—control condition: 0.04; growth-mind-set condition: 0.15, sense-of-purpose condition: 0.18, combinedinterventions condition: 0.13),4 and the effect of
intervention among at-risk students was not moderated
by race or gender, ps > .21.

It is intriguing that students who received both interventions did not show greater benefits. To our knowledge, only two past studies have tested the effects of
combining mind-set interventions; neither found that the
combination yielded greater benefits than the individual
interventions (Good et al., 2003; Yeager, Walton, Brady,
et al., 2014, Experiment 2). Why? In the case of the present study, one possibility is that the two psychological
messages were not integrated. Absent this, it may have
been difficult for students to fully incorporate two simultaneous and distinct changes to their basic beliefs about
schoolwork; that is, students may have received only a
partial “dose” of each intervention. This interpretation is
consistent with the lack of manipulation-check effects in
the combined condition (for a similar pattern, see Yeager,
Walton, Brady, et al., 2014, Experiment 2). Future research
on combined interventions should integrate the chosen
interventions so that they enhance and support each
other rather than presenting separate and possibly confusing messages about learning and school.5

Satisfactory performance
Satisfactory grades (e.g., A, B, C) denote minimal acceptable proficiency in a subject and are often required for
entry into higher-level courses. To assess whether the

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Paunesku et al.

790
Intervention Conditions
Control Condition

a

English

b

Math

All Core Courses

40%
30%
20%

Science

Social Studies

50%
40%

Satisfactory Course Completion

Satisfactory Course Completion

50%
50%

40%

30%

30%
20%

20%
Before

After

Before

After

Before

Semester Relative to Intervention

After

Semester Relative to Intervention

Fig. 2. The effect of the interventions on satisfactory course completion in core courses among students at risk of dropping out of high
school. The graphs in (a) show the percentage of students who received satisfactory grades (A, B, C, pass, or credit) in all core courses
in the semesters before and after the interventions were conducted. The graph in (b) shows the average percentage of satisfactory course
completion across all core courses in the same semesters. The error bars represent ±1 SE.

interventions helped at-risk students clear this academic
threshold, we used a logistic mixed-effect model to assess
the effect of the intervention on students’ likelihood of
satisfactory performance in each core academic class
(Bates, Maechler, & Bolker, 2012). This analysis was
restricted to at-risk students, because these students
accounted for the vast majority of postintervention course
failures. As the outcomes, we specified satisfactory course
completion (earning A, B, C, P, or CR vs. D, F, NC, or I)
in each core course before and after intervention; as
fixed effects, we specified intervention (dummy-coded),
time (0 = preintervention, 1 = postintervention), and their
interaction; as random intercepts, we specified each student, course, and school.
There was no effect of condition on preintervention
satisfactory course completion rates, t < 1. However, the
regression revealed a significant Time × Intervention
interaction, odds ratio (OR) = 1.48, 95% CI = [1.04, 2.10],
Z = 2.18, p = .029. Intervention-group students were significantly more likely to earn satisfactory grades in core
academic classes after the intervention (raw mean = 49%)
compared with control-group students (raw mean =
41%), OR = 1.58, Z = 2.68, p = .007. Moreover, whereas
there was no difference in satisfactory completion rates
before and after the intervention among control-condition students (−0.4%), t < 1, students in the intervention

group showed a significant increase (+6.0%), Z = 4.38,
p < .001 (see Fig. 2). The 367 at-risk students in the intervention group took a total of 1,358 core courses; the
intervention thus led them to earn satisfactory grades in
87 more courses than would be expected on the basis of
control-group rates (1,358 × 6.4%).

Discussion
Are academic-mind-set interventions effective on a small
scale only with carefully managed administration? Or do
they have the potential to scale up and thereby serve as a
partial solution for pervasive underachievement in U.S.
high schools? The goal of the present research was to
answer these questions. Two interventions, each lasting
about 45 min and delivered online, raised achievement in
a large and diverse group of underperforming students
over an academic semester. Among these students, who
accounted for the bottom third of students in the sample,
the interventions raised GPA in core academic classes and
led students to earn satisfactory grades in more core
classes. Crucially, these effects were obtained across a
sample of heterogeneous schools and in response to
interventions that could be scaled to virtually unlimited
numbers of students at low marginal cost. Among the 4.93
million students who constitute the lowest-performing

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

A Scalable Intervention for Academic Underachievement

791

third of high school students nationwide, could this translate into a proportional 1.18 million additional successfully completed courses? The results suggest this possibility.
Moreover, the methods tested here provide a feasible way
to disseminate these interventions and evaluate them on a
large scale.
A critical next step is to examine how mind-set interventions interact with diverse contexts (Hanselman,
Bruch, Gamoran, & Borman, 2014; Walton, Logel, Peach,
Spencer, & Zanna, in press). Our sample was heterogeneous, but it was nonetheless a convenience sample.
Mind-set interventions depend on resources and learning
opportunities in the academic environment: They encourage students to take advantage of such opportunities and
may be ineffective if these opportunities are absent.
Evaluating mind-set interventions with a larger and more
representative group of adolescents will help identify settings in which students’ beliefs serve as barriers to
achievement; in such settings, mind-set interventions
may be essential, but in other settings, the interventions
may have less impact. For instance, further research
might reveal settings in which mind-set interventions are
redundant with messages already present or in which
students lack access to challenging learning opportunities. In conducting this research, it will be critical to
ensure that intervention modules retain their psychological essence; mind-set interventions “are not magic . . .
they are tools to target important psychological processes
in schools” (Yeager & Walton, 2011, p. 293). If a mind-set
intervention does not speak to students’ psychological
experience, it will not be effective. More broadly, this
future research will deepen our understanding of the role
of psychological processes in the context of other factors
that shape student achievement.
It is also important to examine potential long-term
effects among high-achieving students, for whom the
benefits of mind-set interventions may not emerge until
schoolwork becomes challenging, such as when students
take advanced coursework or transition to college.

(e.g., Mueller & Dweck, 1998), and small-scale field
experiments (e.g., J. Aronson et al., 2002; Blackwell et al.,
2007). Our research simultaneously advances this lineage
and addresses an important social problem in a scalable
way.

Conclusion

1. This has also been called an incremental theory of intelligence in past research.
2. When we included all reported grades, the pattern of results
was similar to that derived from core GPA, albeit weaker. Even
so, the contrast between the three intervention conditions and
control condition remained significant (p < .05).
3. Nearly identical results for the collapsed intervention conditions were obtained using a mixed model with individual course
grade as the outcome, b = 0.14, 95% CI = [0.03, 0.25], p = .011.
Individual intervention effects using a mixed model were also
similar to those reported, .034 < ps < .054 (see Supplemental
Material available online).
4. Changes in psychological measures were not related to
changes in achievement, ts < 1.50, a pattern in keeping with the

In recent years, psychologists have called for a new
emphasis on testing the replicability of psychological
research (Pashler & Wagenmakers, 2012) and on examining real-world behavioral outcomes (Schneider, Gruman,
& Coutts, 2011). In demonstrating the potential for academic-mind-set interventions to be effective on a wide
scale, the present research provides a case study of the
health of our field and its relevance to public concerns.
The interventions we tested draw directly from an intellectual lineage in psychology, including basic theory (e.g.,
Dweck & Leggett, 1988), careful laboratory experiments

Author Contributions
D. Paunesku and G. M. Walton developed the study concept.
D. Paunesku, G. M. Walton, C. Romero, D. S. Yeager, and C. S.
Dweck contributed to the study design. Data collection was
performed by D. Paunesku and C. Romero. D. Paunesku and
E. N. Smith performed the data analysis. D. Paunesku and G. M.
Walton drafted the manuscript. All authors provided critical
revisions and approved the final version of the manuscript for
submission.

Acknowledgments
We thank the participating schools and the staff of the Stanford
University Project for Education Research That Scales (PERTS),
especially Benjamin Haley, Chris Macrander, Jacquie Beaubien,
Rachel Herter, Abby Howard, and Brian Spitzer.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The authors declared that they had no conflicts of interest with
respect to their authorship or the publication of this article.

Funding
The research reported in this article was supported by William
and Flora Hewlett Foundation Grants 2011-6513 and 2013-8860,
by Raikes Foundation Grants 13027 and 227, and by National
Science Foundation Research and Evaluation on Education in
Science and Engineering (REESE) Program Grant DRL-1247283.
The opinions expressed in the article are those of the authors
only and do not reflect the opinions of the funders.

Supplemental Material
Additional supporting information can be found at http://pss
.sagepub.com/content/by/supplemental-data

Notes

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Paunesku et al.

792
inconsistency with which self-report measures mediate behavioral changes (e.g., J. Aronson et  al., 2002; Wilson & Linville,
1982).
5. A second possibility is that the two interventions, even though
they differed in substantive ways, shared a common underlying
ingredient and were therefore partly redundant. Indeed, each
provided a reason to work hard in school for students who
lacked such a reason. The lack of manipulation-check effects
in the combined condition does not suggest this interpretation;
however, other measures of beliefs/motivation could suggest
such a common ingredient.

References
Allensworth, E. M., & Easton, J. Q. (2007). What matters for staying on track and graduating in Chicago public high schools.
Chicago, IL: Consortium on Chicago School Research.
Aronson, E. (1999). The power of self-persuasion. American
Psychologist, 54, 875–884.
Aronson, J., Fried, C. B., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the effects
of stereotype threat on African American college students
by shaping theories of intelligence. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 38, 113–125.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., & Bolker, B. (2012). lme4: Linear
mixed-effects models using S4 classes [Software]. R package version 1.1-7. Retrieved from http://CRAN.R-project
.org/package=lme4
Blackwell, L. S., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007).
Implicit theories of intelligence predict achievement across
an adolescent transition: A longitudinal study and an intervention. Child Development, 78, 246–263.
Bryk, A. S., Gomez, L. M., & Grunow, A. (2011). Getting ideas
into action: Building networked improvement communities
in education. In M. T. Hallinan (Ed.), Frontiers in sociology
of education (Vol. 1, pp. 127–162). New York, NY: Springer.
Burnette, J. L., O’Boyle, E. H., VanEpps, E. M., Pollack, J. M.,
& Finkel, E. J. (2013). Mind-sets matter: A meta-analytic
review of implicit theories and self-regulation. Psychological
Bulletin, 139, 655–701.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Apfel, N., &
Brzustoski, P. (2009). Recursive processes in self-affirmation: Intervening to close the minority achievement gap.
Science, 324, 400–403.
Cronbach, L. J., Ambron, S. R., Dornbusch, S. M., Hess, R. D.,
Hornik, R. C., Phillips, D. C., . . . Weiner, S. S. (1980).
Toward reform of program evaluation: Aims, methods, and
institutional arrangements. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Dianda, M. (2008). Preventing future high school dropouts: An
advocacy and action guide for NEA state and local affiliates. Washington, DC: National Education Association.
Dweck, C. S., & Leggett, E. L. (1988). A social-cognitive
approach to motivation and personality. Psychological
Review, 95, 256–273.
Farrington, C. A., Roderick, M., Allensworth, E., Nagaoka, J.,
Keyes, T. S., Johnson, D. W., & Beechum, N. O. (2012).
Teaching adolescents to become learners: The role of noncognitive factors in shaping school performance. Chicago,
IL: University of Chicago, Consortium on Chicago School
Research.

Fullan, M. (2001). The new meaning of educational change.
New York, NY: Teachers College Press.
Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (2012). A social psychological perspective on educational intervention. In E. Shafir (Ed.),
Behavioral foundations of policy (pp. 329–350). Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Glazerman, S., Isenberg, E., Dolfin, S., Bleeker, M., Johnson, A.,
Grider, M., & Jacobus, M. (2010). Impacts of comprehensive
teacher induction: Final results from a randomized controlled study (Publication No. NCEE 20104027). Retrieved
from U.S. Department of Education Web site: http://ies
.ed.gov/ncee/pubs/20104027/pdf/20104027.pdf
Good, C., Aronson, J., & Inzlicht, M. (2003). Improving adolescents’ standardized test performance: An intervention to
reduce the effects of stereotype threat. Journal of Applied
Developmental Psychology, 24, 645–662.
Hanselman, P., Bruch, S. K., Gamoran, A., & Borman, G. D.
(2014). Threat in context: School moderation of the impact
of social identity threat on racial/ethnic achievement gaps.
Sociology of Education, 87, 106–124.
Harackiewicz, J. M., Rozek, C. S., Hulleman, C. S., & Hyde,
J. S. (2012). Helping parents to motivate adolescents in
mathematics and science: An experimental test of a utilityvalue intervention. Psychological Science, 23, 899–906.
doi:10.1177/0956797611435530
Heppen, J. B., & Therriault, S. B. (2008). Developing early
warning systems to identify potential high school dropouts. Retrieved from National High School Center Web
site at http://www.betterhighschools.org/pubs/documents/
IssueBrief_EarlyWarningSystemsGuide.pdf
Hulleman, C. S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2009). Promoting
interest and performance in high school science classes.
Science, 326, 1410–1412.
Ioannidis, J. P., Cappelleri, J. C., & Lau, J. (1998). Issues in comparisons between meta-analyses and large trials. Journal of
the American Medical Association, 279, 1089–1093.
Jamieson, J. P., Mendes, W. B., Blackstock, E., & Schmader,
T. (2010). Turning the knots in your stomach into bows:
Reappraising arousal improves performance on the GRE.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 208–212.
Marks, I. M., Cavanagh, K., & Gega, L. (2007). Hands-on help:
Computer-aided psychotherapy. New York, NY: Psychology
Press.
Michaels, J. L., Parkin, S. S., & Vallacher, R. R. (2013). Destiny
is in the details: Action identification in the construction
and destruction of meaning. In J. Hicks & C. Routledge
(Eds.), The experience of meaning in life: Emerging themes
and controversies (pp. 103–115). New York, NY: Springer.
Mueller, C. M., & Dweck, C. S. (1998). Praise for intelligence
can undermine children’s motivation and performance.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 33–52.
Pashler, H., & Wagenmakers, E. J. (2012). Editors’ introduction
to the special section on replicability in psychological science: A crisis of confidence? Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 7, 528–530.
Schneider, F. W., Gruman, J. A., & Coutts, L. M. (Eds.).
(2011). Applied social psychology: Understanding and
addressing social and practical problems. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

A Scalable Intervention for Academic Underachievement

793

Sherman, D. K., Hartson, K. A., Binning, K. R., Purdie-Vaughns,
V., Garcia, J., Taborsky-Barba, S., . . . Cohen, G. L. (2013).
Deflecting the trajectory and changing the narrative: How
self-affirmation affects academic performance and motivation under identity threat. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 104, 591–618.
Slavin, R., & Smith, D. (2009). The relationship between sample sizes and effect sizes in systematic reviews in education. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 31,
500–506.
Steger, M., Bundick, M., & Yeager, D. S. (2012). The development of meaning during adolescence. In R. J. Levesque
(Ed.), Encyclopedia of adolescence (pp. 1666–1777). New
York, NY: Springer.
U.S. Department of Education. (2014). Obama administration 2015 budget prioritizes key education investments
to provide opportunities for all Americans [Press release].
Retrieved from http://www.ed.gov/news/press-releases/
obama-administration-2015-budget-prioritizes-key-educa
tion-investments-provide-opportunities-all-americans
Walton, G. M. (2014). The new science of wise psychological
interventions. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
23, 73–82.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A brief social-belonging
intervention improves academic and health outcomes of
minority students. Science, 331, 1447–1451.
Walton, G. M., Logel, C., Peach, J., Spencer, S., & Zanna, M. P.
(in press). Two brief interventions to mitigate a “chilly

climate” transform women’s experience, relationships,
and achievement in engineering. Journal of Educational
Psychology. doi:10.1037/a0037461
Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. (1982). Improving the academic performance of college freshmen: Attribution therapy revisited. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
42, 367–376.
Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. (1985). Improving the performance of college freshmen with attributional techniques.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 287–
293.
Yeager, D. S., & Bundick, M. J. (2009). The role of purposeful
work goals in promoting meaning in life and in schoolwork during adolescence. Journal of Adolescent Research,
24, 423–452.
Yeager, D. S., Henderson, M., D’Mello, S., Paunesku, D., Walton,
G. M., Spitzer, B. J., & Duckworth, A. L. (2014). Boring but
important: A self-transcendent purpose for learning fosters
academic self-regulation. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 107, 559–580.
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological
interventions in education: They’re not magic. Review of
Educational Research, 81, 267–301.
Yeager, D. S., Walton, G. M., Brady, S. T., Akcinar, E. N.,
Paunesku, D., Keane, L., . . . Dweck, C. S. (2014). Brief
psychological interventions can reduce post-secondary
achievement gaps at scale. Manuscript submitted for
publication.

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

512856

research-article2014

CDPXXX10.1177/0963721413512856WaltonWise Psychological Interventions

The New Science of Wise Psychological
Interventions

Current Directions in Psychological
Science
2014, Vol. 23(1) 73­–82
© The Author(s) 2014
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0963721413512856
cdps.sagepub.com

Gregory M. Walton
Stanford University

Abstract
Citizens complete a survey the day before a major election; a change in the survey items’ grammatical structure increases
turnout by 11 percentage points. People answer a single question; their romantic relationships improve over several
weeks. At-risk students complete a 1-hour reading-and-writing exercise; their grades rise and their health improves
for the next 3 years. Each statement may sound outlandish—more science fiction than science. Yet each represents
the results of a recent study in psychological science (respectively, Bryan, Walton, Rogers, & Dweck, 2011; Marigold,
Holmes, & Ross, 2007, 2010; Walton & Cohen, 2011). These studies have shown, more than one might have thought,
that specific psychological processes contribute to major social problems. These processes act as levers in complex
systems that give rise to social problems. Precise interventions that alter them—what I call “wise interventions”—can
produce significant benefits and do so over time. What are wise interventions? How do they work? And how can they
help solve social problems?
Keywords
intervention, health, education, close relationships, prejudice
When you imagine a “psychological intervention,” you
might think of something dramatic (like a family challenging an alcoholic to stop drinking) or multifaceted
and expensive (like an after-school program for at-risk
youth). One of the most exciting developments in psychological science in recent years, however, is the emergence of a new class of interventions, which are more
ordinary, briefer, and more precise. These interventions
are much like everyday experiences. They aim, simply, to
alter a specific way in which people think or feel in the
normal course of their lives to help them flourish. We do
this every day. Whenever a person tries to hold his or her
temper in a fight or to encourage a child to work harder
in school, they are trying to change how a person thinks
or feels to produce a positive end. Intervention studies
formalize strategies, rooted in laboratory research and
social-psychological theory, and subject them to rigorous,
field-experimental tests (see Tables 1–5 for samples of
intervention studies on civic behavior, close relationships, education, health, and intergroup relationships).
I call these wise interventions; they are wise to specific
underlying psychological processes that contribute to
social problems or prevent people from flourishing. In a
wise intervention, the most important question is What is

CORRECTED VERSION

the psychological process at hand? Many other interventions, even if they involve psychology, do not take as
their primary target a change in a specific psychological
process. The term wise comes from gay culture in the
1950s, in which it described straight people who understood the full humanity of gay people despite the overwhelming homophobia of the time (Goffman, 1963).
Steele (1997) adopted the term to advocate for “wise
schooling”—schooling that is sensitive to the experiences
of diverse students and that defuses processes such as
stereotype threat. Drawing on this tradition, a wise intervention depends on a precise understanding of people’s
psychological reality—what it is like to be them and how
they construe themselves and their social world. In creating a wise intervention, researchers identify an aspect of
people’s psychology that harms their outcomes and aim
to change this process.
Wise interventions draw on a long tradition of research
(e.g., Dimidjian et al., 2006; Lewin, 1952; McCord, 1978).
Corresponding Author:
Gregory M. Walton, Department of Psychology, Stanford University,
Jordan Hall, Building 420, 450 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305
E-mail: gwalton@stanford.edu

Walton

74	
Table 1.  A Sample of Wise Interventions: Civic Behavior
Intervention

Intervention condition

Control condition

Noun/Verb (Bryan, The day before elections, Survey items were
Walton, Rogers, &
eligible voters
framed using verbs
Dweck, 2011)
responded to survey
(e.g., “How important
items framed using
is it to you to vote
nouns (e.g., “How
. . . ?”).
important is it to
you to be a voter in
tomorrow’s election?”).
Social norms (Braga Randomly assigned crime Other crime hot spots
& Bond, 2008; see
hot spots were cleaned
had routine policing
also Goldstein,
up (e.g., vacant lots
(areas unidentified to
Cialdini, &
secured, street lighting
police captains).
Griskevicius, 2008)
improved) and social
disorder was reduced
(e.g., more public
drinkers arrested).

But they are novel in that they are psychologically precise,
often brief, and often aim to alter self-reinforcing processes
that unfold over time and, thus, to improve people’s outcomes in diverse circumstances and long into the future.
By changing the self over time, many wise interventions
go beyond simple “nudges”—changes to a specific situation or decision framework to encourage better behavior
in that context (Thaler & Sunstein, 2008). Wise interventions are special remedies for social problems and afford
important implications for theory. How do wise interventions work? The research presented here reviews their
foundations and the lessons and opportunities they provide for research and application.

Wise Interventions Are Psychologically
Precise
A wise intervention begins with a specific, well-founded
psychological theory. This theoretical precision allows
researchers to create a precise tool, often instantiated in
a brief exercise, to change a specific psychological process in a real-world setting. This psychological precision
reflects the same values psychologists cultivate in laboratory research—keen insight into basic processes and
methodological precision to isolate these processes. Wise
interventions export this precision in theory and methodology to field settings. Consistent with the Lewinian mantra, “There is nothing so practical as a good theory,” a
precise psychological theory allows researchers to construct strikingly “small” interventions that simultaneously
test this theory and seek to bring about positive change.
The interventions reviewed in Tables 1 through 5 are
diverse. But each articulates and targets a specific psychological process.

CORRECTED VERSION

Psychological process
Noun wording
represents voting as
an opportunity to
become a valued kind
of person—a “voter.”
—not an errand to be
accomplished.

Major outcome
An increase in voter
turnout of 11
percentage points as
assessed by official
records.

Signs of disorder
Treated hot spots had
communicate that rule
20% fewer citizen 911
breaking is acceptable,
calls during the next
which increases
6 months (e.g., 34%
criminality.
fewer assaults and 11%
fewer larcenies/thefts)
and fewer observations
of disorder, with no
increase in crime in
adjacent areas.

Consider Bryan, Walton, Rogers, and Dweck’s (2011)
intervention to increase voter turnout. Relying on research
that showed that people treat noun wording (e.g., I am a
chocolate eater vs. I eat chocolate a lot) as conveying
abstract meaning about a person, Bryan et al. hypothesized that nouns represent a potential future behavior as
an opportunity to become a certain kind of person.
Would a grammatical structure that portrays voting as an
opportunity to become “a voter” motivate higher turnout?
To test this hypothesis, Bryan et al. (p. 12655) manipulated 10 survey items completed by potential voters the
day before two major elections. In one condition, items
used nouns to refer to voting (e.g., “How important is it
to you to be a voter in tomorrow’s election?”). In the
other condition, items used verbs to refer to voting (e.g.,
“How important is it to you to vote in tomorrow’s election?”). Results showed that the intervention led to one of
the largest increases in turnout ever observed in a randomized experiment—an increase of 11 percentage
points for participants in the noun condition compared
with participants in the verb condition, as assessed by
state records.
Can precise interventions improve outcomes in arguably more complex contexts, such as relationships?
Marigold, Holmes, and Ross (2007, 2010) theorized that
people with low self-esteem, who tend to question their
worth, often dismiss compliments from romantic partners
as not having important meaning. To induce people with
low self-esteem to truly accept a compliment, Marigold
et al. (2007) asked participants to think of a compliment
from their romantic partner and to “explain why your
partner admired you. Describe what it meant to you and
its significance for your relationship” (p. 235). This stimulus prompt, compared with a stimulus prompt that asked

Wise Psychological Interventions	

75

Table 2.  A Sample of Wise Interventions: Close Relationships
Intervention
Abstract reframing
of a compliment
(Marigold,
Holmes, & Ross,
2007, 2010)

Intervention condition

Control condition

Psychological process

Major outcome

People with low selfPeople described the
People with low selfesteem wrote about
context in which
esteem tend to
a compliment their
their partner had
question their worth
romantic partner had
complimented them or
and, thus, dismiss
recently given them
“whether your partner
compliments; the
and “why your partner
admired you. . . .”
intervention leads
admired you . . . [and]
people to see a
what it meant to you
compliment as having
and its significance for
an important meaning.
your relationship.”

Cognitive retraining In up to 20 visits during
of problems
the child’s 1st year,
in parenting
interviewers asked
(Bugental et al.,
at-risk mothers about
2002)
problems with their
child and possible
causes of problems
until the mother gave
a non-self-blaming
and non-child-blaming
reason. They then
asked mothers for
possible solutions.
Third-person
Every 4 months for 1
perspective on
year, couples wrote
marital conflicts
about how “a neutral
(Finkel, Slotter,
third party who wants
Luchies, Walton,
the best for all” would
& Gross, 2013)
view a conflict in their
marriage and how
they could take this
perspective.

No visits or similar
visits but without the
cognitive-retraining
component.

Couples reported on
conflicts but did
not complete the
third-person writing
exercise.

participants to describe the circumstances of the compliment, led participants with low self-esteem to feel more
secure in their relationship immediately and several
weeks thereafter. This feeling of security is essential in
close relationships; it mitigates the fears of rejection that
can cause people to withdraw from relationships and
behave negatively toward their partner (Murray, Holmes,
& Collins, 2006). Consistent with this theorizing, during
this several-week period, reports from participants indicated that they valued their relationship more, behaved
more positively toward their partners (as reported by
partners), and saw their partners as behaving more positively toward them. The intervention changed the interplay of feelings and behavior between couples to improve
their relationships.
The significance of a precise psychological understanding means that an inaccurate psychological understanding
can lead would-be interveners astray. An important insight
in the Marigold et al. (2007) intervention is that people

CORRECTED VERSION

People with low selfesteem valued their
relationships more and
felt more secure in
them immediately and
several weeks later.
They also behaved
more positively toward
their partners (partner
reported) and saw their
partners as behaving
more positively toward
them.
Questions prompt
The treatment reduced
mothers to explain
the percentage of
and resolve problems
infants abused during
without blaming the
the 1st year from
self or child, and,
approximately 25% to
thus, to feel more
4%; effects were largest
empowered as parents.
among high-risk (e.g.,
premature) infants.
The treatment also
improved child health
and reduced mother
depression.

A third-person
perspective may
prevent reciprocal
patterns of negative
affect between
couples, making
conflicts less
distressing.

Control-condition couples
continued to decline
in marital quality
(e.g., satisfaction,
love, intimacy, trust,
passion). Treatmentcondition couples
maintained their
marital quality during
the year.

with low self-esteem tend to default to negative views of
the self. As a consequence, in this intervention, the
researchers invited participants to articulate why a compliment has an important meaning; they did not ask participants whether the compliment has this meaning. When
Marigold et al. tested this prompt instead—“Explain
whether you think what your partner said indicated that
he/she admired you. Consider whether it was meaningful
to you and significant for your relationship,” (p. 242)—
people with low self-esteem essentially wrote that the
compliment did not have a larger meaning and the experience produced no benefits. Or consider a growth mind-set
of intelligence intervention. This intervention conveys
that intelligence is not fixed but can expand with effort
and help from others; it can help struggling students perform better in school for months after the intervention
(Blackwell, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2007). But if misunderstood, a growth-mind-set message could be confused
with the lay belief that students should be praised for their

Walton

76	
Table 3.  A Sample of Wise Interventions: Education
Intervention

Intervention condition

Expectancy value
Ninth graders wrote
(Hulleman &
brief essays every
Harackiewicz, 2009;
3 to 4 weeks that
see also Harackiewicz,
described the
Rozek, Hulleman, &
relevance of their
Hyde, 2012)
science coursework
to their lives.

Control condition
Students summarized
the week’s science
topic.

Growth mind-set of
Eighth-grade students
Students learned about
intelligence (Blackwell,
learned in eight
the relationship
Trzesniewski, &
classroom workshops
between brain
Dweck, 2007; see
that intelligence is
regions and brain
also J. Aronson,
malleable and can
functions.
Fried, & Good, 2002;
grow like a muscle
Good, Aronson, &
with hard work and
Inzlicht, 2003; Yeager,
help from others.
Trzesniewski, &
Dweck, 2013)
Social belonging (Walton First-year college
Students learned about
& Cohen, 2011; see
students learned that
unrelated aspects
also Walton, Logel,
all students worry
of the transition to
Peach, Spencer, &
at first about their
college.
Zanna, 2013; Wilson,
belonging in college
Damiani, & Shelton,
but that, over time,
2002; Yeager et al., in
everyone comes to
press)
feel at home.
Value affirmation (Cohen, Seventh graders
Garcia, Purdiecompleted several
Vaughns, Apfel, &
in-class exercises in
Brzustoski, 2009; see
which they wrote
also Miyake et al.,
about why their most
2010; Sherman et al.,
important values
2013)
(e.g., relationships
with friends and
family) were
important to them.

Students wrote
about why values
unimportant to them
might matter to
someone else.

existing intelligence (“You’re so smart!”). It is ironic that
this can induce a fixed mind-set about intelligence, which
undermines motivation when students struggle (Mueller &
Dweck, 1998). Wise interventions depend on wise theories
of psychological processes. With a precise, well-founded
theory, even brief exercises can produce significant
benefits.

Wise Interventions Target Recursive
Processes to Cause Lasting Change
Wise interventions can improve outcomes for years.
Finkel, Slotter, Luchies, Walton, and Gross (2013) showed
that three 7-minute perspective-taking exercises improved
couples’ marriages over the course of a year. Several

CORRECTED VERSION

Psychological process

Major outcome

Making science
The intervention raised
personally relevant
science grades
increases students’
among students who
engagement with
expected to perform
course material,
poorly.
especially among
students who expect
to perform poorly
and who otherwise
may not have a
reason to work hard.
Students with a growth The control group
mind-set interpret
continued to show
academic challenges
a decline in math
as opportunities to
grades, whereas
learn, not as evidence
the treatment group
of fixed inability, and
showed a rebound.
respond by trying
harder, not by giving
up.
The treatment leads
African American
students to attribute
students earned
daily struggles to the
higher grades during
normal difficulties
the next 3 years,
of the transition
halving the racialto college, not to
achievement gap, and
evidence they do not
reported better health
belong in school in
3 years later.
general.
Writing about important Initially low-performing
values bolsters
African American
students’ sense of
students earned
self-integrity in the
higher core academic
face of threat and
grades during the
prevents threat and
next 2 years.
poor performance
from recurring in a
negative recursive
cycle.

studies have shown that brief exercises, lasting an hour
or less, can raise ethnic-minority students’ school achievement for as long as 3 years later (Cohen, Garcia, PurdieVaughns, Apfel, & Brzustoski, 2009; Sherman et al., 2013;
Walton & Cohen, 2011).
These interventions can seem magical (Yeager &
Walton, 2011). To understand them, it is essential that
one consider how interventions change not a moment in
time (“a snapshot”) but a process that unfolds over time
(“a movie”; Kenthirarajah & Walton, 2013). In a relationship, every interaction builds on the previous interaction.
By targeting psychological processes that contribute to
recursive dynamics that compound with time, wise interventions can improve downstream consequences (Garcia
& Cohen, 2013). Consider two examples.

Wise Psychological Interventions	

77

Table 4.  A Sample of Wise Interventions: Health
Intervention

Intervention condition

Control condition

Psychological process

Major outcome

Sense of control (Langer Nursing home residents
& Rodin, 1976; Rodin & were reminded
Langer, 1977; see also
of their many
Schulz, 1976; Schulz &
responsibilities and
Hanusa, 1978)
choices, chose a
plant to take care of,
were encouraged to
choose when to go
to movies, and so
forth.

Residents were
reminded of the
staff’s responsibility
for them, received
a plant and were
told a nurse would
take care of it, were
assigned a night to
go to movies, and so
forth.

In institutionalized
settings, people lose
a sense of control
over their daily lives;
reintroducing a sense
of control promotes
health and wellbeing.

Social connection
People admitted to
(Carter, Clover, Whyte,
hospitals for selfDawson, & D’Este,
poisoning received
2013; see also Motto &
eight postcards
Bostrom, 2001)
during the following
year expressing the
hospital’s concern
and care.
Value affirmation (Logel Undergraduate women,
& Cohen, 2012; see
half of whom were
also Sherman, Bunyah,
overweight, wrote
Creswell, & Jaremka,
about why their most
2009)
important values
were important to
them.

Treatment as usual (i.e., Postcards communicate
no postcards).
the hospital’s
ongoing concern and
care for the patient.

Three weeks later,
residents reported
being happier and
more active, were
judged more alert
by interviewers and
more improved by
nurses, and spent
more time visiting
patients and talking
with staff; 18 months
later they were
rated more active by
nurses and healthier
by doctors and
suffered a lower
mortality rate (15%
vs. 30%).
During the 5 years after
discharge, patients
had nearly 50% fewer
readmissions for selfpoisoning.

Women wrote
about why values
unimportant to them
might matter to
someone else.

Writing about trauma
Undergraduates
Students wrote about
(Pennebaker, Kiecoldwrote about “the
neutral topics (e.g.,
Glaser, & Glaser, 1988)
most traumatic and
daily plans).
upsetting experiences
of your entire life”
for 20 minutes per
day for 4 days.

Finkel et al. (2013) surveyed couples every 4 months
for 2 years about their marriages. During the 2nd year,
couples randomized to the perspective-taking intervention were asked, in addition, how “a neutral third party
who wants the best for all” would view a conflict in their
marriage and how they could adopt this perspective in
future conflicts (Finkel et al., 2013, p. 1597). This exercise
was designed to forestall the reverberation of negative
affect that can occur between couples in conflicts, in

CORRECTED VERSION

Writing about important Two-and-a-half
values bolsters
months later,
people’s sense of
treatment-condition
self-integrity, reduces
women weighed
stress (a major cause
approximately
of weight gain), and
6 pounds less,
helps people sustain
had smaller waist
self-control in the
circumferences,
face of temptations.
and ate fewer
cookies after having
previously exerted
self-control.
Writing encourages
The treatment
people to
improved immune
confront traumatic
system function and
experiences, which
reduced doctor visits
reduces inhibition
during the next 6
and helps people
weeks.
find meaning in the
trauma.

which each person gets angry in turn. During the intervention year, the marital quality of couples in the control
condition continued to decline—these couples’ levels of
love, satisfaction, intimacy, trust, and passion fell. But
these indices stabilized among couples in the perspectivetaking condition.
What would this experience be like for a couple?
Suppose you and your spouse complete the perspectivetaking exercise. This may help you step back in a

Walton

78	
Table 5.  A Sample of Wise Interventions: Intergroup Relationships
Intervention

Intervention condition

Control condition

Enacting cultural
Asian and White
Students were either not
interests (Brannon
students were led to
led to feel socially
& Walton, 2013)
feel socially connected
connected to the
to a Mexican
Mexican American
American peer with
peer, thought the
whom they freely
activity was unrelated
took part in a Mexican
to Mexican culture,
cultural activity.
or thought they had
to do the Mexican
cultural activity.

Fast friends (PageGould, MendozaDenton, & Tropp,
2008)

During three sessions,
Same-race dyads
Latino/White
completed the same
dyads exchanged
exercises.
increasingly selfdisclosing questions
(e.g., “Who is the
most important person
in your life?”) and
completed cooperative
activities.

Jigsaw classroom
(E. Aronson &
Osherow, 1980)

Individual grade-school
Students studied alone
children were each
and participated in
given a portion of a
class on their own.
topic to study, taught
this part to peers in
a jigsaw group, and
were later tested on
the whole topic.
Social network
High school students
Wait list control.
(Paluck, 2011; see
took a weekly
also Bond et al.,
antiprejudice class that
2012)
encouraged students
to intervene with
peers when needed.

Value confrontation
(Rokeach, 1971)

Students ranked 18
values, typically
ranking “freedom”
higher than “equality.”
They were told this
meant they “care a
great deal about their
own freedom but are
indifferent to other
people’s freedom.”

CORRECTED VERSION

Students only completed
the attitude and value
scales.

Psychological process
A social connection
can spark interest
in another person’s
culture. Freely
enacting this
cultural interest feels
inconsistent with
prejudice, thereby
motivating prejudice
reduction.

Major outcome

Participants showed
reduced implicit
prejudice against
Latinos immediately.
Six months later,
they reported
greater interest in
interacting with
Mexican Americans,
including about
racially sensitive topics
(e.g., undocumented
Mexican immigrants).
A close cross-group
Participants, especially
friendship can
those high in
disconfirm negative
prejudice or sensitivity
expectations
to race-based
about intergroup
rejection, showed
interactions.
reduced stress
(cortisol) during
the three sessions
and initiated more
daily intergroup
interactions.
Jigsaw groups reduce
Students liked each
competition and
other more within and
facilitate cooperative,
across group lines
equal-status intergroup
and had higher selfcontact.
esteem, and ethnicminority students
learned more over
several weeks.
Antiprejudice attitudes
Five months later,
can spread through
participants were
social networks to
more likely to be
affect friends and
nominated as standing
peers.
up for others;
their friends and
acquaintances were
more likely to sign a
gay rights petition.
Making people aware
Students were more
of inconsistency in
likely to respond to a
their values creates
solicitation from the
self-dissatisfaction,
National Association
which drives personal
for the Advancement
change.
of Colored People and
to enroll in an ethnic
studies program 3 to
5 months later and
expressed greater
support for “equal
rights for Negroes”
through 15 to 17
months later.

Wise Psychological Interventions	
subsequent conflict—you see the conflict from a broader
perspective, so you get less angry. Now each of you is
dealing with a better-disposed spouse. If the interaction
goes better and you problem solve more effectively, you
may be better prepared for the next conflict. You still
have a conflict, but it is less distressing. When an intervention changes a recursive process, it effectively puts
people in a new situation. Indeed, the intervention did
not reduce conflicts. But it did reduce the distress couples reported in conflicts, and this result mediated the
stabilization in marital quality.
Wise interventions can also change recursive dynamics that begin with the psychology of individuals. Walton
and Cohen’s (2011) social-belonging intervention aimed
to forestall minority students’ worries that experiences
such as being left out or criticized mean, in general, that
they do not belong in school. The intervention gives students an alternative narrative for understanding negative
experiences—namely that worries about belonging are
normal in the transition to a new school but dissipate
with time. Learning and reflecting on this information in
a 1-hour exercise improved African American college students’ grades over a 3-year period, halving the racialachievement gap, and led them to report being happier
and healthier at the end of college.
How could this work? Imagine you are a freshman
worried about whether you belong in college. Learning
that such worries are common and improve with time
may take the edge off negative experiences. Indeed, in
the Walton and Cohen (2011) study, daily-diary measures
showed that minority students in the intervention condition no longer saw daily slights as if they portended a
global lack of belonging; this change in social construal
mediated the 3-year improvement in grades. If everyday
encounters feel less threatening, perhaps students can
interact with others in more positive ways and build better relationships. Indeed, one social-belonging intervention helped women in male-dominated engineering
majors form more friendships with male engineers
(Walton, Logel, Peach, Spencer, & Zanna, 2013). These
women are now in a different situation—they are embedded in a social network in engineering. As these psychological and social processes build over time, they position
students to thrive.
Wise interventions can change how people interact
with one another in ways that improve their circumstances and propel effects forward in time. In these interventions, real-world factors, such as friendships in school,
do not function only as “noise” that causes effects to
decay. They also serve as proximal outcomes that facilitate longer-term effects. An important implication is that
wise interventions are most likely to cause long-term
gains in inherently recursive contexts—such as relationships and school, contexts in which positive experiences
facilitate later positive outcomes. Another implication is

CORRECTED VERSION

79
that wise interventions can amplify their effects over time
if a recursive process “snowballs.” Indeed, the perspective-taking and social-belonging interventions both generated the largest benefits at the most distal time point
assessed.
These interventions used reading-and-writing exercises to change people’s psychology directly. They
encouraged people to respond to ongoing experiences
in more adaptive ways to remake their worlds. Many
other interventions, however, introduce a new experience to people’s lives (e.g., a tutoring program). Such
experiences change people’s psychology only indirectly;
they can thus be less effective (even when they provide
substantive resources; McCord, 1978). Moreover, relying
on a new experience to change psychology can make an
intervention vulnerable if that experience changes. Schulz
(1976) tested whether being able to control or predict
visits from a friendly college student would bolster a
sense of control among elderly nursing home residents
and, thus, improve their health and well-being. During a
2-month period, residents received visits they could control or predict, yoked random visits, or no visits. At the
end of this period, residents in the conditions in which
they could control or predict visits used fewer medications, were rated as healthier and as having more “zest
for life,” and reported being happier. However, tragically,
during the course of the next 42 months, these residents
showed a precipitous decline in their health and wellbeing and even had marginally higher mortality rates
than did “random-visit” and “no-visit” residents (Schulz &
Hanusa, 1978). The ability to control or predict visits
from college students presumably bolstered a sense of
control while the visits lasted. However, this change in
psychology was identified entirely with the visits. When
the visits ended, this may have confirmed the very lack of
control residents had in their lives, thereby undermining
their outcomes. A more robust strategy is to encourage
people to construe their lives broadly as full of control,
not just with a specific experience. One such intervention
improved nursing home residents’ health and well-being
during an 18-month period, which reduced mortality
rates by 50% (Rodin & Langer, 1977).

Wise Interventions Are Context
Dependent—Not Silver Bullets
Because wise interventions target specific psychological
processes and recursive dynamics, they will not always
produce the same effects. They must be wise to the population and context in at least three ways. First, a wise
intervention will be effective only if the process it targets
matters in the setting at hand. If people with high selfesteem readily accept compliments (as they do), interventions that address self-esteem will not improve their
relationships.

Walton

80	
Second, wise interventions will be effective only if
they change the targeted psychological process. To be
maximally effective in different contexts, interventions
may need to be adapted, for instance, to illustrate the
message in the local setting. In addition, rather than a
passive exposure, many interventions use active exercises to drive home key ideas. For example, recipients
may describe themselves or aspects of their lives in a
specific way (Bryan et al., 2011; Cohen et al., 2009; Finkel
et al., 2013; Marigold et al., 2007, 2010). Or they may
complete “saying-is-believing” exercises in which they
use their own experience to advocate for the idea conveyed in the intervention to other people (Walton &
Cohen, 2011). This technique is powerful and persuasive:
It encourages recipients to author the intervention message and to view their experience through its lens without feeling controlling or stigmatizing.
Third, wise interventions will affect long-term outcomes only if they alter critical recursive processes. For
instance, brief value-affirmation interventions delivered
early in the school year can prevent downward cycles of
psychological threat and poor performance among ethnic-minority adolescents for years; if delivered after such
cycles are established, the same intervention is less effective (Cook, Purdie-Vaughns, Garcia, & Cohen, 2012).
Relatedly, interventions will affect long-term outcomes
only if the context provides appropriate affordances. If a
social-belonging intervention generates lasting gains by
helping students to form better relationships, its effectiveness will depend on the possibility of forming these ties.
In addition, psychological interventions can be necessary
but insufficient. Removing psychological barriers to
learning will benefit only those students with access to
adequate learning opportunities.

Conclusion
Wise interventions provide psychologists an enormous
opportunity. They allow us to test how specific psychological processes contribute to specific social problems,
how to change these processes in field settings, and how
a change in psychology unfolds over time in interaction
with the context. Addressing these questions will help us
create distinctly psychological theories of and solutions
to social problems. The far-reaching effects of wise interventions suggest that psychological processes often act
as key levers in complex systems that give rise to social
problems. The development of precise theories of how
psychological processes contribute to these systems provides psychologists opportunities to collaborate with
practitioners in local settings, with other social scientists,
and with policymakers. It will also push us to “scale up”

CORRECTED VERSION

psychological interventions to large samples (e.g., using
the Internet, see http://www.perts.net) and, in doing so,
to contribute to large-scale social change.
Social problems are complex and multicaused. But
nearly every problem involves psychology. As psychologists, it is our job to identify those elements of a social
problem—whether global warming, conflict, crime, poverty, racism, or low achievement—that are psychological
and develop ways to address them.
Recommended Reading
Dweck, C. S. (2006). Mindset: The new psychology of success.
New York, NY: Random House. A comprehensive overview
of people’s implicit theories about the malleability of human
qualities, such as intelligence, with applications to interventions in diverse areas.
Paluck, E. L., & Cialdini, R. B. (in press). Field research methods. In H. Reis & C. Judd (Eds.), Handbook of research
methods in social and personality psychology (2nd ed.).
New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. A compelling
discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of field
research, including intervention field experiments, for the
development of psychological theory.
Rokeach, M. (1971). (See References). A little-known historical
classic; one of the first papers to develop a brief psychological intervention and to test its effects over an extended
period of time.
Wilson, T. D. (2011). Redirect: The surprising new science of
psychological change. New York, NY: Little Brown. A comprehensive review of psychological interventions in diverse
areas, from behavior problems to racial prejudice to school
achievement, with a focus on interventions that change
people’s implicit stories about who they are and where
they are going.
Yeager, D. S. & Walton, G. M. (2011). (See References). An
accessible review of brief social-psychological interventions in education, especially growth-mind-set, attributional-retraining, value-affirmation, and social-belonging
interventions, including the psychological process each targets, how they cause change over time, and how they may
be scaled to more students.

Author Contributions
G. M. Walton is the sole author of this article and is responsible
for its content.

Acknowledgments
I thank Lauren Aguilar, Chris Bryan, Angela Duckworth, Carol
Dweck, Sam Erman, Eli Finkel, James Gross, Bridgette Hard,
and David Yeager for helpful comments.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author declared that he had no conflicts of interest with
respect to his authorship or the publication of this article.

Wise Psychological Interventions	
References
Aronson, E., & Osherow, N. (1980). Cooperation, prosocial
behaviour, and academic performance: Experiments in the
desegregated classroom. In L. Bickerman (Ed.), Applied
social psychology annual (pp. 163–196). Beverley Hills,
CA: Sage.
Aronson, J., Fried, C. B., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the effect
of stereotype threat on African American college students
by shaping theories of intelligence. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 38, 113–125.
Blackwell, L. A., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007).
Theories of intelligence and achievement across the junior
high school transition: A longitudinal study and an intervention. Child Development, 78, 246–263.
Bond, R. M., Fariss, C. J., Jones, J. J., Kramer, A. D. I., Marlow,
C., Settle, J. E., & Fowler, J. H. (2012). A 61-million-person
experiment in social influence and political mobilization.
Nature, 489, 295–298.
Braga, A. A., & Bond, B. J. (2008). Policing crime and disorder
hot spots: A randomized controlled trial. Criminology, 46,
577–607.
Brannon, T. N., & Walton, G. M. (2013). Enacting cultural interests: How intergroup contact reduces prejudice by sparking
interest in an out-group’s culture. Psychological Science,
24, 1947–1957.
Bryan, C. J., Walton, G. M., Rogers, T., & Dweck, C. S. (2011).
Motivating voter turnout by invoking the self. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 108, 12653–
12656.
Bugental, D. B., Ellerson, P. C., Lin, E. K., Rainey, B., Kokotovic,
A., & O’Hara, N. (2002). A cognitive approach to child abuse
prevention. Journal of Family Psychology, 16, 243–258.
Carter, G. L., Clover, K., Whyte, I. M., Dawson, A. H., & D’Este,
C. (2013). Postcards from the EDge: 5-year outcomes of
a randomised controlled trial for hospital-treated selfpoisoning. British Journal of Psychiatry, 202, 372–380.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Apfel, N., &
Brzustoski, P. (2009). Recursive processes in self-affirmation: Intervening to close the minority achievement gap.
Science, 324, 400–403.
Cook, J. E., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L.
(2012). Chronic threat and contingent belonging: Protective
benefits of values affirmation on identity development.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102, 479–496.
Dimidjian, S., Hollon, S. D., Dobson, K. S., Schmaling, K. B.,
Kohlenberg, R. J., Addis, M. E., . . . Jacobson, N. S. (2006).
Randomized trial of behavioral activation, cognitive therapy, and antidepressant medication in the acute treatment
of adults with major depression. Journal of Counseling and
Clinical Psychology, 74, 658–670.
Finkel, E. J., Slotter, E. B., Luchies, L. B., Walton, G. M., & Gross,
J. J. (2013). A brief intervention to promote conflict reappraisal preserves marital quality over time. Psychological
Science, 24, 1595–1601.
Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (2013). A social psychological perspective on educational intervention. In E. Shafir (Ed.),
Behavioral foundations of policy (pp. 329–350). New York,
NY: Russell Sage.

CORRECTED VERSION

81
Goffman, E. (1963). Stigma: Notes on the management of spoiled
identity. New York, NY: Touchstone.
Goldstein, N. J., Cialdini, R. B., & Griskevicius, V. (2008). A
room with a viewpoint: Using social norms to motivate
environmental conservation in hotels. Journal of Consumer
Research, 35, 472–482.
Good, C., Aronson, J., & Inzlicht, M. (2003). Improving adolescents’ standardized test performance: An intervention to
reduce the effects of stereotype threat. Journal of Applied
Developmental Psychology, 24, 645–662.
Harackiewicz, J. M., Rozek, C. R., Hulleman, C. S., & Hyde, J.
S. (2012). Helping parents to motivate adolescents in mathematics and science: An experimental test of a utility-value
intervention. Psychological Science, 23, 899–906.
Hulleman, C. S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2009). Promoting
interest and performance in high school science classes.
Science, 326, 1410–1412.
Kenthirarajah, T., & Walton, G. M. (2013). Movie interventions:
A field-theory model of how brief social-psychological interventions cause enduring effects. Manuscript submitted for
publication.
Langer, E. J., & Rodin, J. (1976). The effects of choice and
enhanced personal responsibility for the aged: A field
experiment in an institutional setting. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 34, 191–198.
Lewin, K. (1952). Group decision and social change. In
G. Swanson, T. Newcombe, & E. Hartley (Eds.), Readings
in social psychology (pp. 459–473). New York, NY: Henry
Holt.
Logel, C., & Cohen, G. L. (2012). The role of the self in physical
health: Testing the effect of a values-affirmation intervention on weight loss. Psychological Science, 23, 53–55.
Marigold, D. C., Holmes, J. G., & Ross, M. (2007). More than
words: Reframing compliments from romantic partners
fosters security in low self-esteem individuals. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 232–248.
Marigold, D. C., Holmes, J. G., & Ross, M. (2010). Fostering
relationship resilience: An intervention for low self-esteem
individuals. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46,
624–630.
McCord, J. (1978). A thirty-year follow-up of treatment effects.
American Psychologist, 33, 284–289.
Miyake, A., Smith-Kost, L. E., Finkelstein, N. D., Pollock, S.
J., Cohen, G. L., & Ito, T. A. (2010). Reducing the gender
achievement gap in college science: A classroom study of
values affirmation. Science, 330, 1234–1237.
Motto, J. A., & Bostrom, A. G. (2001). A randomized controlled
trial of postcrisis suicide prevention. Psychiatric Services,
52, 828–833.
Mueller, C. M., & Dweck, C. S. (1998). Intelligence praise
can undermine motivation and performance. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 33–52.
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., & Collins, N. L. (2006). Optimizing
assurance: The risk regulation system in relationships.
Psychological Bulletin, 132, 664–666.
Page-Gould, E., Mendoza-Denton, R., & Tropp, L. R. (2008). With
a little help from my cross-group friend: Reducing anxiety in
intergroup contexts through cross-group friendship. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 95, 1080–1094.

82	
Paluck, E. L. (2011). Peer pressure against prejudice: A high
school field experiment examining social network change.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 47, 350–358.
Pennebaker, J. W., Kiecold-Glaser, J. K., & Glaser, R. (1988).
Disclosure of traumas and immune function: Health implications for psychotherapy. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 56, 239–245.
Rodin, J., & Langer, E. J. (1977). Long-term effects of a controlrelevant intervention with the institutionalized aged.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35, 897–902.
Rokeach, M. (1971). Long-range experimental modification of
values, attitudes, and behavior. American Psychologist, 26,
453–459.
Schulz, R. (1976). Effects of control and predictability on the
physical and psychological well-being of the institutionalized aged. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 33,
563–573.
Schulz, R., & Hanusa, B. H. (1978). Long-term effects of control
and predictability-enhancing interventions: Findings and
ethical issues. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
36, 1194–1201.
Sherman, D. K., Bunyah, D. P., Creswell, J. D., & Jaremka, L. M.
(2009). Psychological vulnerability and stress: The effects of
self-affirmation on sympathetic nervous system responses
to naturalistic stressors. Health Psychology, 28, 554–562.
Sherman, D. K., Hartson, K. A., Binning, K. R., Purdie-Vaughns,
V., Garcia, J., Taborsky-Barba, S., . . . Cohen, G. L. (2013).
Deflecting the trajectory and changing the narrative:
How self-affirmation affects academic performance and
motivation under identity threat. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 104, 591–618.

CORRECTED VERSION

Walton
Steele, C. M. (1997). A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape
intellectual identity and performance. American Psychologist,
52, 613–629.
Thaler, R. H., & Sunstein, C. R. (2008). Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth, and happiness. New York, NY:
Penguin Books.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A brief social-belonging
intervention improves academic and health outcomes
among minority students. Science, 331, 1447–1451.
Walton, G. M., Logel, C., Peach, J., Spencer, S., & Zanna, M. P.
(2013). Two brief social-psychological interventions transform women’s experience, relationships, and achievement
in engineering. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Wilson, T. D., Damiani, M., & Shelton, N. (2002). Improving
the academic performance of college students with brief
attributional interventions. In J. Aronson (Ed.), Improving
academic achievement: Impact of psychological factors
on education (pp. 88–108). San Diego, CA: Academic
Press.
Yeager, D. S., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., Apfel, N.,
Brzustoski, P., Master, A., . . . Cohen, G. L. (in press).
Breaking the cycle of mistrust: Wise interventions to provide critical feedback across the racial divide. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General.
Yeager, D. S., Trzesniewski, K., & Dweck, C. S. (2013). An
implicit theories of personality intervention reduces adolescent aggression in response to victimization and exclusion.
Child Development, 84, 970–988.
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological
interventions in education: They’re not magic. Review of
Educational Research, 81, 267–301.

REPORTS
changes in the interlaminar signal flows in rats
are consistent with our results obtained in monkeys performing a memory task. Together, these
findings highlight the flexibility of cortical laminar circuits. Further experiments will be needed
to determine whether such flexible interlaminar
connectivity is also implemented and used in
other cortical areas for other cognitive demands.

Gregory M. Walton1* and Geoffrey L. Cohen1,2
A brief intervention aimed at buttressing college freshmen’s sense of social belonging in school was
tested in a randomized controlled trial (N = 92), and its academic and health-related consequences over
3 years are reported. The intervention aimed to lessen psychological perceptions of threat on campus
by framing social adversity as common and transient. It used subtle attitude-change strategies to lead
participants to self-generate the intervention message. The intervention was expected to be particularly
beneficial to African-American students (N = 49), a stereotyped and socially marginalized group in
academics, and less so to European-American students (N = 43). Consistent with these expectations,
over the 3-year observation period the intervention raised African Americans’ grade-point average (GPA)
relative to multiple control groups and halved the minority achievement gap. This performance boost
was mediated by the effect of the intervention on subjective construal: It prevented students from
seeing adversity on campus as an indictment of their belonging. Additionally, the intervention
improved African Americans’ self-reported health and well-being and reduced their reported number
of doctor visits 3 years postintervention. Senior-year surveys indicated no awareness among participants
of the intervention's impact. The results suggest that social belonging is a psychological lever where
targeted intervention can have broad consequences that lessen inequalities in achievement and health.

A

Americans, and other non-Asian ethnic minorities relative to European Americans. These differences occur at all levels of socioeconomic
status (1–3).
Although many structural factors contribute
to these inequalities, the present research exam-

www.sciencemag.org

SCIENCE

23.
24.
25.
26.

References and Notes
1. L. R. Squire, J. T. Wixted, R. E. Clark, Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
8, 872 (2007).
2. W. A. Suzuki, Neuron 61, 657 (2009).
3. E. A. Murray, T. J. Bussey, L. M. Saksida, Annu. Rev.
Neurosci. 30, 99 (2007).
4. Y. Miyashita, Science 306, 435 (2004).
5. Y. Naya, M. Yoshida, Y. Miyashita, J. Neurosci. 23, 2861
(2003).
6. N. K. Logothetis, D. L. Sheinberg, Annu. Rev. Neurosci.
19, 577 (1996).
7. G. Buzsáki, Neuron 68, 362 (2010).
8. S. H. Wang, R. G. Morris, Annu. Rev. Psychol. 61, 49, C1
(2010).
9. M. P. Witter, E. I. Moser, Trends Neurosci. 29, 671 (2006).
10. A. Bollimunta, Y. Chen, C. E. Schroeder, M. Ding, J. Neurosci.
28, 9976 (2008).
11. A. K. Engel, P. Fries, Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 20, 156 (2010).
12. I. E. Ohiorhenuan et al., Nature 466, 617 (2010).
13. R. J. Douglas, K. A. Martin, Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 27, 419
(2004).
14. J. J. Nassi, E. M. Callaway, Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 360
(2009).
15. R. C. Reid, J. M. Alonso, Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 6, 475 (1996).
16. J. Csicsvari, B. Jamieson, K. D. Wise, G. Buzsáki, Neuron
37, 311 (2003).
17. C. E. Schroeder, P. Lakatos, Trends Neurosci. 32, 9 (2009).

A Brief Social-Belonging Intervention
Improves Academic and Health
Outcomes of Minority Students

n important question facing society concerns the origins of inequalities between
socially marginalized and nonmarginalized groups. Among the most consequential of
inequalities is the poorer school and health outcomes experienced by African Americans, Latino

18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

VOL 331

27.
28.
29.
30.

A. K. Engel, W. Singer, Trends Cogn. Sci. 5, 16 (2001).
T. Hirabayashi, Y. Miyashita, J. Neurosci. 25, 10299 (2005).
M. Tomita, J. J. Eggermont, J. Neurophysiol. 93, 378 (2005).
C. A. Atencio, C. E. Schreiner, PLoS ONE 5, e9521 (2010).
T. Hirabayashi, D. Takeuchi, K. Tamura, Y. Miyashita,
J. Neurosci. 30, 10407 (2010).
J. M. Alonso, L. M. Martinez, Nat. Neurosci. 1, 395 (1998).
Materials and methods are available as supporting
material on Science Online.
S. Lefort, C. Tomm, J. C. Floyd Sarria, C. C. H. Petersen,
Neuron 61, 301 (2009).
N. Weiler, L. Wood, J. I. Yu, S. A. Solla, G. M. G.
Shepherd, Nat. Neurosci. 11, 360 (2008).
S. Sakata, K. D. Harris, Neuron 64, 404 (2009).
W. A. Suzuki, D. G. Amaral, J. Comp. Neurol. 463, 67 (2003).
K. S. Saleem, K. Tanaka, J. Neurosci. 16, 4757 (1996).
This work was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Specially
Promoted Research from the Ministry of Education,
Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) to Y.M.
(19002010) and Grant-in-Aid for Young Scientists from
MEXT to T.H. (18700378); a grant from Takeda Science
Foundation to Y.M.; and Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science (JSPS) Research Fellowships for Young Scientists
to D.T. (1811234) and K.T. (211438). This work was also
supported in part by Global Center of Excellence Program
from MEXT. We thank M. Takeda for discussions and
comments and H. Kasahara, R. Fujimichi, T. Matsui, and
K. W. Koyano for advice and help with experiments.

Supporting Online Material
www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/331/6023/1443/DC1
Materials and Methods
SOM Text
Figs. S1 to S9
Tables S1 and S2
References
3 November 2010; accepted 8 February 2011
10.1126/science.1199967

ines a psychological factor: concern about social
belonging. Social belonging—a sense of having
positive relationships with others—is a fundamental human need (4, 5). Social isolation, loneliness,
and low social status harm not only subjective
well-being (6) but also intellectual achievement
(7) and immune function and health (8–11). Even
a single instance of exclusion can undermine wellbeing (12, 13), intelligence quotient (IQ) test performance, and self-control (14).
Members of socially stigmatized groups, such
as African Americans, may be relatively more
uncertain about their social belonging in mainstream institutions like school and work (7). Because their ethnic group is often negatively
stereotyped and marginalized, they may be unsure of whether they will be fully included in
positive social relationships in these settings (2).
As the sociologist Erving Goffman wrote, “The
central feature of the stigmatized individual’s situation in life…is a question of…‘acceptance’”
(15). Uncertainty about belonging, especially when
chronic, can undermine minorities’ performance
(7, 16) and health (3, 17, 18). Social belonging
may thus constitute a psychological lever where
targeted intervention could yield broad benefits.

Downloaded from http://science.sciencemag.org/ on September 20, 2017

units (fig. S9) [paired t test, P < 0.02, n = 19 pairs;
median distances from the granular layer were 0.45
mm (source units) and 1.05 mm (target units)].
The present study demonstrated that canonical feed-forward signal flow across cortical layers
during sensory coding reverse to the feed-back
direction during memory retrieval phase, which suggests flexible recruitment of interlaminar connectivity
depending on the cognitive demands in the monkey
association cortices (Fig. 4C). We used CSD analysis to estimate cortical layers (Fig. 1, C to E, and
fig. S1), and the observed stimulus-evoked CSD
profiles were quite similar to those in the primary
sensory cortices (17, 27). For some penetrations,
we observed that the current sink positioned superficially next to the earliest-sink contact exhibited
larger peak amplitudes and much longer durations
than that of the earliest current sink. This observation
might reflect the cytoarchitectural nature of A36 as
a dysgranular cortex (28) as well as the direct inputs
to the deepest part of the superficial layer, which is
consistent with anatomical observations (29).
A recent study in the rat primary auditory cortex demonstrated that the direction of interlaminar signal flow depends on the cortical “state”:
Sensory-evoked responses were initiated in the
thalamorecipient layers and then propagated to the
superficial and deep layers, whereas in spontaneously active “up-states,” neuronal activity was
initiated in the deep layers and then propagated to
the superficial layers (27). These state-dependent

1
Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA
94305, USA. 2School of Education and Graduate School of
Business, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

*To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail:
gwalton@stanford.edu

18 MARCH 2011

1447

REPORTS

1448

college-adjustment process. Upon arrival in a
research lab, participants read a report of the
ostensible results of a survey of more senior
students at their school. Most students, the report
indicated, had worried about whether they belonged in college during the difficult first year but
grew confident in their belonging with time. The
survey results were said to be consistent across
ethnic and gender groups. For instance, one survey respondent was quoted as saying, “Freshman
year even though I met large numbers of people, I
didn’t have a small group of close friends…I was
pretty homesick, and I had to remind myself that
making close friends takes time. Since then…I
have met people some of whom are now just as
close as my friends in high school were” (23).
Concerns about belonging were thus represented
as common at first, as temporary, and as due to
the challenging nature of the college transition.
To encourage participants to internalize the
message, several steps exploited the “sayingis-believing effect”—the tendency to endorse
messages that one has freely advocated (25). Participants were asked to write an essay describing
how their own experiences in college echoed the
experiences summarized in the survey. They
then turned their essay into a speech, which they
delivered to a video camera. These materials,
participants were told, would be shown to future
students to help ease their transition to college.
Beyond facilitating internalization, this procedure
averted the potential stigma of receiving an
intervention, because it encouraged participants
to see themselves as benefactors and not as
beneficiaries (24, 26). In the control condition,
the procedure was the same but the survey addressed topics unrelated to belonging (e.g., change
in social-political attitudes) (23). The intervention
lasted about 1 hour.
Few analyses were moderated by cohort (i.e.,
no more than would be expected by chance alone
and none involving the primary outcomes of
GPA, health, or well-being). Thus, data from the
two cohorts were combined to increase statistical
Fig. 1. Raw GPA by
student race, experimental condition, and academic term. Means are
noncumulative and were
combined across cohorts.
Ranges in sample sizes
and standard errors for
European Americans are
N = 25 to 33 and SE =
0.08 to 0.14; for African
Americans, N = 30 to 37
and SE = 0.09 to 0.12.

18 MARCH 2011

power. First, analyses examined the trajectory of
students’ official GPA over time. In contrast to all
other groups, African Americans in the control
group showed no improvement in GPA from the
fall of their freshman year, the semester before
the intervention, through their sophomore, junior,
and senior years [linear trend F < 1]. By contrast,
the GPAs of intervention-treated African Americans rose over time [for linear trend, F(1,34) =
13.79, P = 0.0007; for time × condition, F(1,34) =
4.16, P = 0.049]. The GPAs of European-American
students also rose over time [F(1,29) = 6.88, P =
0.014] with no difference by condition [F < 1].
As Fig. 1 shows, the intervention set African
Americans on an upward trajectory such that the
gap between them and their European Americans
classmates closed over time. By students’ senior
year, the gap was cut by 79% (23).
Multiple regression, with student gender
controlled, tested the effect of student race and
condition (randomized control versus socialbelonging treatment) on change in GPA—mean
postintervention GPA (sophomore through senior
years) minus mean preintervention GPA (fall
term, first year) (23). There was no condition
effect on preintervention GPA for either racial
group [t values < 1] (table S1) (23). However, a
significant condition effect on change in GPA
emerged for African Americans [B = 0.30, t(65) =
2.54, P = 0.014] with no effect for European
Americans [t < 1] [race × condition B = –0.43, t(65) =
–2.41, P = 0.019]. Virtually identical results were
obtained when preintervention GPA was used as
a covariate in an analysis of postintervention
GPA [treatment effect for African Americans, B =
0.24, t(64) = 2.65, P = 0.010; treatment effect for
European Americans, t < 1; race × condition: B =
–0.31, t(64) = –2.27, P = 0.027]. The intervention
closed the minority gap in 3-year GPA (SD =
0.36) from 0.29 points in the control condition to
0.14 points in the treatment condition, a 52%
reduction.
Adding the campus-wide sample further supports treatment efficacy. An agreement with uni-

4.00
Social-Belonging
Treatment

3.90

European Americans, Randomized Control Group
European Americans, Social-Belonging Treatment
African Americans, Randomized Control Group
African Americans, Social-Belonging Treatment

3.80
3.70
3.60
3.50
3.40
3.30
3.20
3.10
3.00
Fall Term

First Year

VOL 331

SCIENCE

Fall Term Spring Term Fall Term Spring Term Fall Term Spring Term

Sophomore Year

www.sciencemag.org

Junior Year

Senior Year

Downloaded from http://science.sciencemag.org/ on September 20, 2017

Such an intervention is reported here. Critical
to its rationale is the insight that it is people’s
subjective interpretations of the quality of their
relationships, more so than the objective number
or attributes of those relationships, that strongly
affects well-being (5, 19). The present intervention, delivered to students during the challenging
transition to college, was designed to encourage
nonthreatening interpretations of adversity. During
the transition to a new school, students can face
frequent social setbacks and feelings of isolation.
Their well-being and performance may depend, to
a great extent, on whether they construe such
experiences as evidence that they do not belong.
Because African-American students experience relatively greater uncertainty about their
belonging in school, they were expected to benefit from the intervention more than nonminority
students (7). Further if, as we intended, the intervention triggered an enduring perceptual change
in the encoding of social experience, its effects
might persist over time. Short-term effects might
compound into long-term effects through a recursive virtuous cycle, in which early performance gains assure students of their belonging in
school, which in turn improves their performance,
in a repeating feedback loop (20). Students who
feel more assured of their belonging may also
initiate more social interactions and form better
relationships on campus, facilitating their social
integration and further benefiting their wellbeing, performance, and health (21).
The intervention was delivered to two cohorts
of African-American (N = 49) and EuropeanAmerican (N = 43) students in the second semester of their first year at a selective college (22, 23).
To assess psychological responses to adversity,
we asked participants to complete daily surveys
in the first week after the intervention. To assess
their long-term sense of belonging, health, and
well-being, we asked them to complete an endof-college survey 3 years later (completion rate
78.26%) (23). At the end of this survey, participants were asked to authorize the release of their
complete college academic transcript (authorization rate 97.22%) (23).
Participating students were randomly assigned to either the belonging-treatment condition or a control condition. In cohort 1, participants
were recruited through convenience sampling; in
cohort 2, through random sampling (23). An
additional campus-wide control group was obtained by collecting the anonymized official
grade-point averages (GPAs) of all European
Americans (N = 1362) and African Americans
(N = 194) in the same class years as participants
but who did not participate in the study (23).
This group was included in secondary analyses
of GPA.
The intervention provided students with a
narrative that framed social adversity in school as
shared and short-lived (24). This message encouraged students to attribute adversity not to
fixed deficits unique to themselves or their ethnic
group but to common and transient aspects of the

REPORTS
2.99, P = 0.004]. In summary, the intervention
robbed adversity of its symbolic meaning for
African Americans, untethering their sense of
belonging from daily hardship (27). Like treated
African Americans, European Americans showed
little relationship between adversity and belonging
[for both conditions, mean within-subjects R =
–0.09; condition difference, t < 1] [race × condition: t(59) = –2.04, P = 0.046].
These results provide a window into the shift
in African-American students’ psychology caused
by the intervention. This shift benefited their
long-term performance. African Americans whose
belonging was more robust to daily adversity—
whose sense of belonging was relatively independent of their day-to-day adversity—showed
greater improvement in their 3-year postintervention GPA [R = 0.51, P = 0.001] (23). The
effect of the intervention in protecting AfricanAmericans students’ sense of belonging from daily
adversity mediated its effect on their GPA (23).
The intervention thus planted a change in social
perception that, it appears, accompanied students
long after the intervention ended to affect their
performance in college.
Three years after the intervention, at the end
of their college tenure, participants completed a
survey to assess long-term effects on psychology,
well-being, and health. Also, to assess whether
the intervention operated beneath conscious awareness, we asked participants whether they remembered the intervention from 3 years previously,
whether they thought it had affected them, and
whether they agreed with its message. On no
outcome did European Americans differ by condition [t values < 1.35, P values > 0.18]. African
Americans, however, showed consistent treatment effects. The race × condition interaction

was not always significant, indicating that the
treatment effect was not always larger for African
Americans than for European Americans. Degrees
of freedom vary because some measures were
completed only by participants in cohort 2 (23).
If the intervention lessened how much African Americans’ belonging fluctuated with adversity, and if it did so by lessening how much they
viewed campus life through the lens of race, then
intervention-treated African Americans should
(i) report greater stability and less uncertainty
about their belonging in school {less agreement
with items like, “When something bad happens, I
feel that maybe I don’t belong at [school name]”}
(7) and (ii) exhibit less cognitive accessibility of
negative racial stereotypes and self-doubt (23).
They did [self-reported belonging uncertainty,
t(36) = –2.01, P = 0.052; accessibility of negative
racial stereotypes, t(66) = –2.01, P = 0.049;
accessibility of self-doubt, t(64) = –2.64, P =
0.010] (Fig. 3) (23).
Given the importance of social belonging for
reducing stress and improving immune function
and physical health (5, 8–11, 19) and the relatively poorer health experienced by African
Americans, even those high in socioeconomic
status (3), we examined effects on health. We
assessed self-reported health, an important predictor of morbidity and mortality (28), using the
five-item general health component of the Medical Outcomes Study Short-Form Health Survey
(23). We also asked participants how many times
they had visited the doctor in the previous 3
months (cohort 1) or 1 month (cohort 2). African
Americans reported being healthier and visiting the doctor less frequently in the treatment
condition than in the control condition [t(32) =
2.48, P = 0.019 and t(63) = –2.23, P = 0.030,

Fig. 2. Cumulative academic
Campus-Wide Control Group
performance from sophomore
Randomized Control Group
Percentage of Students in Top and Bottom 25%
through senior year. Data were
Social-Belonging Treatment
of College Class
combined across cohorts. (A) ResidA
B In Residual Postintervention GPA C
Mean Residual
ual sophomore-through-seniorIn Raw Postintervention GPA
70%
70%
0.25 Postintervention GPA
year GPAs adjusted for student
gender and preintervention (fall
0.20
60%
60%
term, first year) GPA. Error bars
0.15
50%
50%
represent T1 SE. Means repre0.10
sent the degree to which stu40%
40%
dents performed better (positive
0.05
30%
30%
values) or worse (negative val0.00
ues) than expected after the in20%
20%
tervention in GPA units based on -0.05
-0.10
10%
10%
their gender and preintervention
performance. (B) Percentage of -0.15
0%
0%
students in the top and bottom
-0.20
In
Top
of
In
Top
of
In
Bottom
In
Bottom
In Top of In Bottom In Top of In Bottom
25% of their college class in
Class of Class Class of Class
Class of Class Class of Class
residual postintervention GPA -0.25
(i.e., postintervention GPA adEuropean African
justed for student gender and
American American
European American African American
European American African American
Students Students
preintervention GPA). (C) PercentStudents
Students
Students
Students
age of students in the top and
bottom 25% of their college class
in raw postintervention GPA. For analytic details, see (23). Sample sizes for European Americans are Ncampus-wide control group = 1362 and Nexperimental groups = 33; for African
Americans, Ncampus-wide control group = 194 and Nexperimental groups = 37.
www.sciencemag.org

SCIENCE

VOL 331

18 MARCH 2011

Downloaded from http://science.sciencemag.org/ on September 20, 2017

versity officials precludes the reporting of raw or
adjusted means in this sample. To honor this
agreement but present the results graphically, we
performed analyses on residual postintervention
GPA with preintervention GPA and gender controlled. Multiple regression on change in GPA
and on raw postintervention GPA with preintervention GPA included as a covariate yield virtually identical results (23). As shown in Fig. 2A,
treated African Americans had higher residual
GPA scores than did African Americans campuswide [B = 0.28, t(1620) = 3.97, P = 0.00008] and
African Americans in the randomized control group
[B = 0.24, t(1620) = 2.62, P = 0.009]. The latter
two groups did not differ [t < 1]. (Fig. 2A) (23).
Illustrating its broad impact, the intervention tripled the percentage of African Americans
earning postintervention GPAs in the top 25%
of their class, as measured by both residual and
raw postintervention GPA, and tended to reduce
the percentage of African Americans performing
in the bottom 25% of their class on both indices
(Fig. 2, B and C) (23).
What accounts for these treatment effects?
Daily surveys, collected the week after the intervention, suggest that the intervention buffered
African Americans against adversity (23). Among
untreated African Americans, feelings of belonging in school rose and fell with the degree
of adversity students reported having experienced
earlier that day and the day before. As adversity
rose, belonging fell (mean within-subjects R =
–0.45, derived from the average of individual
participants’ within-subjects correlations, after
each was subjected to a Fisher r-to-z transformation) (23). For treated African Americans,
this relationship was reduced to nil [mean withinsubjects R = 0.01], a significant reduction [t(59) =

1449

REPORTS

1450

proved the academic performance, self-reported
health, and well-being of ethnic minority students
over 3 years. The results suggest that inequality
between marginalized and nonmarginalized groups
arises not only from structural factors but also
from concern about social belonging.
This concern can be mitigated by using a
psychological remedy. The intervention provided
students a nonthreatening frame for interpreting
the daily challenges of school. By encouraging
students to adopt this message as their own, the
intervention made this message stick psychologically. Along with other recent research, this study

highlights how the impact of adversity depends
on its perceived meaning—how it is subjectively construed (24–26, 31–33). Changing subjective construal is a fruitful avenue for intervention
because many events are ambiguous and amenable to multiple interpretations. Moreover, a
change in construal can become self-reinforcing.
Students who feel confident in their belonging
may experience the social world in a way that reinforces this feeling. They may initiate more relationships and thus obtain more opportunities for
belonging and growth. Brief interventions that
shore up belonging can thus promote performance

Social-Belonging Treatment
Rasdgasg

Randomized Control Group

A

Self-Reported
Belonging Uncertainty

7
6
5

B
4.0

Accessibility of
Negative Racial
Stereotypes

3.0

3.0

2.5

4

2.0

3

1.5

1.5
1.0
0.5

0.5

0.0

0.0

European African
American American
Students Students

European African
American American
Students Students

Accessibility of
Self-Doubt

2.0

1.0

1

3.5

3.5

2.5

2

C

European African
American American
Students Students

Fig. 3. Self-reported belonging uncertainty and the cognitive accessibility of negative racial stereotypes
and of self-doubt 3 years postintervention. Error bars represent T1 SE. Data were combined across cohorts
where measures were completed by both cohorts. (A) Self-reported belonging uncertainty (cohort 2). (B)
Accessibility of negative racial stereotypes (cohorts 1 and 2). (C) Accessibility of self-doubt (cohorts 1 and
2). The y axis in (A) represents the full range of the scale. The y axes in (B) and (C) represent about 3.00
standard deviations. Sample sizes in cohort 2 only are NEuropean Americans = 20 and NAfrican Americans = 23.
Sample sizes in cohorts 1 and 2 are NEuropean Americans = 31 and NAfrican Americans = 38.

Social-Belonging Treatment
Randomized ControlRasdgasg
Group

A
100
90

Self-Assessed
General Health

B

1.50
1.25

80
70

Number of Reported
Doctor Visits in the
Previous Month

C

7

Subjective
Happiness

6

1.00

5

0.75

4

0.50

3

0.25

2

0.00

1

60
50
40
30
20
10
0

European African
American American
Students Students

European African
American American
Students Students

European
American
Students

African
American
Students

Fig. 4. Self-reported health and happiness 3 years postintervention. Error bars represent T1 SE. Data
were combined across cohorts where measures were completed by both cohorts. (A) Self-assessed general
health (cohort 2). (B) Reported doctor visits in the previous month (cohorts 1 and 2). (C) Subjective
happiness (cohort 2). The y axes in (A) and (C) represent the full range of each scale. The y axis in (B)
represents about 2.00 standard deviations. Sample sizes in cohort 2 only are NEuropean Americans = 20 and
NAfrican Americans = 23. Sample sizes in cohorts 1 and 2 are NEuropean Americans = 31 and NAfrican Americans = 38.

18 MARCH 2011

VOL 331

SCIENCE

www.sciencemag.org

Downloaded from http://science.sciencemag.org/ on September 20, 2017

respectively] (Fig. 4, A and B). Whereas 60% of
untreated African Americans had seen a doctor
recently, only 28% of treated African Americans
had [c2(1, N = 38) = 3.98, P = 0.046]. The race
gap in self-reported health was eliminated in the
treatment condition; interestingly, there was no
gap for doctor visits (23). Future research should
examine whether these patterns generalize to
physiological and physical indicators of health
(9) to assess the robustness of the effect beyond
self-report outcomes and to identify biological
pathways (11).
As further evidence of improved well-being,
African Americans also scored higher on the
Subjective Happiness Scale (23) [t(35) = 2.61, P =
0.013] (Fig. 4C). The happiness gap with European Americans higher than African Americans
disappeared in the treatment condition (23). The
finding of a lasting positive impact on subjective
happiness is noteworthy in light of research
showing that individual happiness is relatively
stable (6).
Participants were unaware of the intervention’s effect, suggesting that its efficacy did not
depend on conscious awareness. Most students
reported that they remembered participating in
the study 3 years earlier (79% did). But when
asked to describe “the most memorable and
important” information they had learned in the
study, few recalled the key content of the survey
they had read (8% did), and few reported that the
study had had “any” effect on their college experience (14% did) (table S3). There was no
condition difference on any of these outcomes for
African Americans [c2(1, N = 37 to 38) values <
1.40, P values > 0.20]; treated African Americans
ascribed no more effect to the study than untreated African Americans. However, indirect measures of recall and beliefs did show treatment
effects. When asked to “guess” the process of
change described in the survey they had read,
more treated than untreated African Americans
wrote that it concerned how students’ social experiences in college improve over time (50%
versus 20%) [c2(1, N = 38) = 3.79, P = 0.052].
Additionally, treated students endorsed this message. When asked to describe their own experiences, more treated than untreated African Americans
volunteered that their own social experiences in
college had improved over time (50% versus 20%)
[c2(1, N = 38) = 3.79, P = 0.052]. The subtle nature
of this intervention, with its influence occurring
outside conscious awareness (29), may contribute
to its efficacy. In some cases, conscious awareness may undo the effects of an intervention (30).
More overt interventions risk sending the stigmatizing message that the beneficiaries are seen
as in need of help. They may also cause resistance and reactance and undermine the sense of
accomplishment people take in their success (26).
This study provides an experimental, longitudinal demonstration that a brief intervention to
buttress feelings of social belonging can have
significant effects on a wide range of important
outcomes. The social-belonging intervention im-

REPORTS
and well-being even long after their delivery
(7, 20, 25, 31, 34).
Importantly, the effectiveness of socialpsychological interventions depends on factors
in the context. Such interventions are unlikely to
be effective in contexts without opportunities for
learning. Also, because the present intervention
works by changing people’s subjective interpretation of ambiguous events, it may be ineffective
in openly hostile environments. Lastly, whether
this intervention would work among younger or
less-select students, or students from other marginalized groups, is an important question for
future research (20, 31, 34). These qualifications noted, the results underscore the importance of social belonging and subjective construal
in contributing to social inequality and show
how this insight can inform our collective efforts
to promote equality in performance, health, and
well-being.

Direct Interaction of RNA
Polymerase II and Mediator
Required for Transcription in Vivo
Julie Soutourina,1* Sandra Wydau,1† Yves Ambroise,2 Claire Boschiero,1 Michel Werner1*
Gene transcription is highly regulated. Altered transcription can lead to cancer or developmental
diseases. Mediator, a multisubunit complex conserved among eukaryotes, is generally required
for RNA polymerase II (Pol II) transcription. An interaction between the two complexes is known, but its
molecular nature and physiological role are unclear. We identify a direct physical interaction between
the Rpb3 Pol II subunit of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and the essential Mediator subunit, Med17.
Furthermore, we demonstrate a functional element in the Mediator–Pol II interface that is important
for genome-wide Pol II recruitment in vivo. Our findings suggest that a direct interaction between
Mediator and Pol II is generally required for transcription of class II genes in eukaryotes.

M

ediator is a large multisubunit complex
conserved in all eukaryotes (1). It acts
as a link between specific protein regu-

1

Commissariat à l’Energie Atomique et aux Energies Alternatives (CEA), iBiTec-S, Service de Biologie Intégrative et
Génétique Moléculaire, F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France.
2
CEA, iBiTec-S, Service de Chimie Bio-organique et Marquage,
F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail:
julie.soutourina@cea.fr (J.S.); michel.werner@cea.fr (M.W.)
†Present address: Université Paris Descartes, EA 4065, Faculté
des Sciences Pharmaceutiques et Biologiques, 75006 Paris, France.

lators and the RNA polymerase II (Pol II) transcription machinery (2). Mediator is required at
most Pol II–transcribed gene promoters for regulated gene expression (3–5). In Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, Mediator is composed of 25 subunits
and is organized in four structural modules: the
tail, middle, head, and Cdk8 modules (6). A direct Mediator–Pol II interaction is indicated
by previous copurification, coimmunoprecipitation (CoIP) experiments (7–9) and by in vivo formaldehyde cross-linking (10). A model of the
Mediator–Pol II complex determined by electron

www.sciencemag.org

SCIENCE

VOL 331

27. J. Crocker, C. T. Wolfe, Psychol. Rev. 108, 593
(2001).
28. E. L. Idler, Y. Benyamini, J. Health Soc. Behav. 38,
21 (1997).
29. T. D. Wilson, Strangers to Ourselves: Discovering the
Adaptive Unconscious (Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge,
MA, 2002).
30. D. K. Sherman et al., J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 97, 745
(2009).
31. L. S. Blackwell, K. H. Trzesniewski, C. S. Dweck, Child Dev.
78, 246 (2007).
32. J. J. Gross, R. A. Thompson, in Handbook of Emotion
Regulation, J. J. Gross, Ed. (Guilford, New York, 2007),
pp. 3–24.
33. J. P. Jamieson, W. B. Mendes, E. Blackstock, T. Schmader,
J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 46, 208 (2010).
34. G. L. Cohen, J. Garcia, N. Apfel, A. Master, Science 313,
1307 (2006).
35. We thank participating students and helpful
administrators at an anonymous university for their
involvement. We also thank P. Carr, E. Chen, C. Dweck,
C. Logel, G. Miller, D. Paunesku, D. Sherman,
S. Spencer, C. Steele, and D. Yeager for input and
L. Cai, K. Crockett, J. Darwall, L. Egan, A. Master,
M. Silverio, and R. Titcombe for assistance. This
research was supported by grants from the American
Psychological Association, the Society for the
Psychological Study of Social Issues, and the Spencer
Foundation awarded to G.M.W. and by a grant from
the Russell Sage Foundation awarded to G.L.C.

Supporting Online Material
www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/331/6023/1447/DC1
Materials and Methods
Tables S1 to S3
References
28 September 2010; accepted 14 February 2011
10.1126/science.1198364

microscopy (EM) at 35 Å resolution suggests
that several Pol II subunits (Rpb1, 2, 3, 6, and 11)
might contact the middle or the head of Mediator
(11). It was recently suggested that Rpb4 and
Rpb7 could also be implicated in interactions
with Mediator (12–14). However, the requirement
of a direct interaction between Mediator and Pol II
for transcription activation has not been demonstrated. Moreover, the identity of the Mediator
subunits contacting Pol II is unknown because of
the low resolution of the Mediator structure. As a
consequence, the mechanism by which Mediator
recruits Pol II is poorly understood.
To identify the subunit(s) of Mediator that
directly contact Pol II and determine the role of
these interactions in transcription regulation, we
used an in vivo photo–cross-linking approach based
on the incorporation by the cell-translation system of photo-activable analogs of methionine and
leucine in proteins [see supporting online material
(SOM) text and figs. S1 and S2] (15, 16).
Because EM results (11) suggested potential
interactions of 16 Mediator subunits belonging to
the head (Med6, 8, 11, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22) and
middle (Med1, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 21, 31) modules with
Rpb1, 2, 3, 6, or 11 Pol II subunits, we immunoprecipitated hemagglutinin (HA)–tagged proteins after in vivo cross-linking. Among the 80
pairwise contacts that we tested, only Myc-tagged
Rpb3 and HA-tagged Med17 cross-linked (Fig. 1).
These results demonstrate that the Rpb3 Pol II

18 MARCH 2011

Downloaded from http://science.sciencemag.org/ on September 20, 2017

References and Notes
1. K. Magnuson, J. Waldfogel, Steady Gains and Stalled
Progress: Inequality and the Black-White Test Score Gap
(Russell Sage Foundation, New York, 2008).
2. C. M. Steele, S. J. Spencer, J. Aronson, in Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology, M. P. Zanna, Ed.
(Academic Press, San Diego, CA, 2002), pp. 379–440.
3. D. R. Williams, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 896, 173 (1999).
4. R. F. Baumeister, M. R. Leary, Psychol. Bull. 117, 497 (1995).
5. J. T. Cacioppo, B. Patrick, Loneliness: Human Nature and
the Need for Social Connection (Norton, New York, 2008)
6. S. Lyubomirsky, K. M. Sheldon, D. Schkade, Rev. Gen.
Psychol. 9, 111 (2005).

7. G. M. Walton, G. L. Cohen, J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 92,
82 (2007).
8. L. F. Berkman, S. L. Syme, Am. J. Epidemiol. 109, 186 (1979).
9. S. Cohen, D. Janicki-Deverts, Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 4,
375 (2009).
10. G. E. Miller, N. Rohleder, S. W. Cole, Psychosom. Med.
71, 57 (2009).
11. B. N. Uchino, J. Behav. Med. 29, 377 (2006).
12. N. I. Eisenberger, M. D. Lieberman, K. D. Williams,
Science 302, 290 (2003).
13. K. D. Williams, in Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology, M. P. Zanna, Ed. (Academic Press, San Diego,
CA, 2009), pp. 279–314.
14. R. F. Baumeister, J. M. Twenge, C. K. Nuss, J. Pers. Soc.
Psychol. 83, 817 (2002).
15. E. Goffman, Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled
Identity (Simon and Schuster, New York, 1963), p. 8.
16. R. Mendoza-Denton, G. Downey, V. J. Purdie, A. Davis,
J. Pietrzak, J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 83, 896 (2002).
17. J. Blascovich, S. J. Spencer, D. Quinn, C. Steele,
Psychol. Sci. 12, 225 (2001).
18. S. W. Cole, M. E. Kemeny, S. E. Taylor, J. Pers. Soc.
Psychol. 72, 320 (1997).
19. S. Cohen et al., Health Psychol. 27, 268 (2008).
20. G. L. Cohen, J. Garcia, V. Purdie-Vaughns, N. Apfel,
P. Brzustoski, Science 324, 400 (2009).
21. T. D. Wilson, Science 313, 1251 (2006).
22. A previous paper reports relatively short-term results of
this intervention from the first cohort of students (7).
23. Information on materials and methods is available as
supporting material on Science Online.
24. T. D. Wilson, M. Damiani, N. Shelton, in Improving
Academic Achievement: Impact of Psychological Factors
on Education, J. Aronson, Ed. (Academic Press, Oxford,
2002), pp. 91–110.
25. J. Aronson, C. B. Fried, C. Good, J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 38,
113 (2002).
26. L. Ross, R. Nisbett, The Person and the Situation
(McGraw-Hill, New York, 1991).

1451

A Brief Social-Belonging Intervention Improves Academic and Health Outcomes of Minority
Students
Gregory M. Walton and Geoffrey L. Cohen

Science 331 (6023), 1447-1451.
DOI: 10.1126/science.1198364

http://science.sciencemag.org/content/331/6023/1447

SUPPLEMENTARY
MATERIALS

http://science.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2011/03/15/331.6023.1447.DC1

REFERENCES

This article cites 23 articles, 5 of which you can access for free
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/331/6023/1447#BIBL

PERMISSIONS

http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions

Use of this article is subject to the Terms of Service
Science (print ISSN 0036-8075; online ISSN 1095-9203) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title
Science is a registered trademark of AAAS.

Downloaded from http://science.sciencemag.org/ on September 20, 2017

ARTICLE TOOLS

Journal of Educational Psychology
2015, Vol. 107, No. 2, 468 – 485

© 2014 American Psychological Association
0022-0663/15/$12.00 http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0037461

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Two Brief Interventions to Mitigate a “Chilly Climate” Transform
Women’s Experience, Relationships, and Achievement in Engineering
Gregory M. Walton

Christine Logel

Stanford University

University of Waterloo

Jennifer M. Peach

Steven J. Spencer and Mark P. Zanna

Department of National Defence, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada

University of Waterloo

In a randomized-controlled trial, we tested 2 brief interventions designed to mitigate the effects of a “chilly
climate” women may experience in engineering, especially in male-dominated fields. Participants were
students entering a selective university engineering program. The social-belonging intervention aimed to
protect students’ sense of belonging in engineering by providing a nonthreatening narrative with which to
interpret instances of adversity. The affirmation-training intervention aimed to help students manage stress
that can arise from social marginalization by incorporating diverse aspects of their self-identity in their daily
academic lives. As expected, gender differences and intervention effects were concentrated in male-dominated
majors (⬍20% women). In these majors, compared with control conditions, both interventions raised
women’s school-reported engineering grade-point-average (GPA) over the full academic year, eliminating
gender differences. Both also led women to view daily adversities as more manageable and improved
women’s academic attitudes. However, the 2 interventions had divergent effects on women’s social experiences. The social-belonging intervention helped women integrate into engineering, for instance, increasing
friendships with male engineers. Affirmation-training helped women develop external resources, deepening
their identification with their gender group. The results highlight how social marginalization contributes to
gender inequality in quantitative fields and 2 potential remedies.
Keywords: gender, engineering, STEM, achievement, stereotype threat
Supplemental materials: http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0037461.supp

Even as women have entered historically male-dominated fields
such as law and medicine in increasing numbers, they remain
underrepresented in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), sometimes extremely so. For instance, women
make up just 18.4% of undergraduate engineering students and
12.9% of professional engineers (National Science Foundation,
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, 2013).
Women also perform worse than men in quantitative fields (The
College Board, 2013), especially in settings characterized by gender biases (Hyde & Mertz, 2009; Logel et al., 2009; Steele,
Spencer, & Aronson, 2002). Low levels of participation and
achievement in STEM restrict women’s career opportunities and

slow national economic growth (National Academy of Sciences,
National Academy of Engineering, and Institute of Medicine of the
National Academies, 2007).
Although many factors contribute to gender inequality in STEM
(Shapiro & Sax, 2011), the present research focused on social marginalization. When women enter male-dominated STEM fields, they
may experience a “chilly climate” in which they feel unwelcome
(Flam, 1991). This chilliness arises from explicit and implicit messages that convey to women that their gender could be a liability in
STEM settings. Indeed, women may encounter ambient cues that
represent STEM fields as masculine (Cheryan, Plaut, & Davies, &
Steele, 2009), stereotypes that allege that women lack ability (Appel

This article was published Online First August 4, 2014.
Gregory M. Walton, Department of Psychology, Stanford University;
Christine Logel, Department of Social Development Studies, Renison
University College, University of Waterloo; Jennifer M. Peach, Military
Personnel Research and Analysis, Department of National Defence, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada; Steven J. Spencer and Mark P. Zanna, Department
of Psychology, University of Waterloo.
This research was supported by grants from the Society for the
Psychological Study of Social Issues and the Spencer Foundation to the
first author, from the University of Waterloo Centre for the Advancement of Co-operative Education to the second author, and from the

Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada to the
fourth and fifth authors. We thank participating students, the Faculty of
Engineering at the University of Waterloo, and M. Walker for their
involvement; G. Cohen, C. Dweck, C. Kaiser, D. Paunesku, and D.
Yeager for input; and J. Clark, J. Gebhardt, V. Gronowski, W. Hall, A.
Hoff, J. Hughes, A. Litt, S. Reeves, J. Hillerby, C. Zhan, and S. Zhang
for assistance.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Gregory
M. Walton, Department of Psychology, Jordan Hall, Building 420, Stanford University, 450 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305. E-mail: gwalton@
stanford.edu
468

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

INTERVENTIONS FOR WOMEN’S EXPERIENCE IN ENGINEERING

& Kronberger, 2012; Steele et al., 2002; Thoman, Smith, Brown,
Chase & Lee, 2013) and men in STEM settings who treat women in
subtly sexist ways (Logel et al., 2009). One focus-group participant in
the present research relayed that a female professor, “told [classmates]
not to present themselves as women first if they wanted to be taken
seriously as engineers.” In this climate, even highly skilled and
motivated women may wonder if they will be fully included, valued,
and respected in STEM (Cheryan et al., 2009; Flam, 1991; Good,
Rattan, & Dweck, 2012; Murphy, Steele, & Gross, 2007; Shapiro &
Sax, 2011; Steele et al., 2002; Yoshida, Peach, Zanna, & Spencer,
2012).
Although gender bias can undermine women’s outcomes in
STEM directly, for instance, through social exclusion, disrespectful behavior, or biased decision making (e.g., Logel et al., 2009;
Moss-Racusin, Dovidio, Brescoll, Graham, & Handelsman, 2012),
people’s psychological reactions to threatening settings also matter
and can change the trajectory of their experience over time. Uncertainty about social belonging can lead students to monitor
school for evidence of nonbelonging; this perspective can color
interpretations of ambiguous events, leading students to view even
commonplace adversities like difficulty making friends or receiving critical feedback as evidence they do not belong in general,
further eroding feelings of belonging (Walton & Cohen, 2007). In
addition, feeling marginalized can cause high levels of stress and
threat with which students may struggle to cope. If left unaddressed, social marginalization may thus feed on itself and worsen
students’ outcomes over time (Cohen et al., 2009).
If these psychological dynamics partially mediate the effects of
a chilly climate on gender inequality, addressing them may improve women’s outcomes in STEM over time (Aguilar, Walton, &
Wieman, 2014). Building on recent research with ethnic-minority
and first-generation students (e.g., Cohen, Garcia, PurdieVaughns, Apfel, & Brzustoski, 2009; Harackiewicz et al., 2014;
Sherman et al., 2013; Walton & Cohen, 2011), we developed two
brief interventions designed to help women cope with the chilly
climate of STEM and tested their effectiveness in reducing inequality in STEM achievement. We also explored effects on women’s daily experiences in STEM, academic attitudes, developing
friendship groups, and self-identity.
Our theoretical analysis suggests two potential intervention
strategies (see Garcia & Cohen, 2012). An intervention could
forestall inferences of nonbelonging, which undermine students’
outcomes over time. Or it could help students cope with stress and
threat that arise from social marginalization. We developed and
tested both interventions with a group of selective first-year engineering students. The first, a social-belonging intervention, gave
students a nonthreatening narrative for interpreting negative social
events like feelings of exclusion or not being taken seriously in
engineering. It conveyed that adversities and worries about belonging are normal at first in engineering and dissipate with time.
This message encourages students to ascribe difficulties to the
academic transition, not to a permanent lack of belonging on their
part or the part of their group. One past variant of this intervention,
delivered in an hour-long session toward the end of students’ first
year of college, halved the gap in GPA between African American
and European American students over 3 years (Walton & Cohen,
2011). In the present research, using extensive interviews and
focus groups with female engineering students, we identified aspects of belonging of special relevance to women in STEM and

469

adapted the intervention accordingly. We tested its effects on
women’s achievement. In addition, we examined students’ underlying social experiences. By forestalling perceptions of threat in
daily social encounters (Walton & Cohen, 2011), we hypothesized
that the social-belonging intervention could facilitate better interactions with other people in engineering, especially with men with
whom interactions may otherwise be most fraught, and thus facilitate women’s social integration in the field.
The second intervention aimed to help students cope with stress
and threat by encouraging them to incorporate important selfidentities and personal values in their daily lives. One effect of
threat is to narrow people psychologically; in the face of threat, it
can seem that all that is relevant is the threat, which must be
counteracted (Sherman & Hartson, 2011; Walton, Paunesku, &
Dweck, 2012). One way to reduce stress and help people function
more effectively in threatening settings is to administer specific
“value-affirmation” writing exercises that remind people of selfdefining values unrelated to the source of threat (e.g., close relationships). Reflecting on alternative sources of self-identity broadens the self, makes specific threats and stressors loom less large,
and helps people cope (Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Sherman &
Cohen, 2006; Sherman & Hartson, 2011; Walton et al., 2012). In
school settings, when given several times over an academic year,
value-affirmation exercises can raise achievement among ethnicminority adolescents (Bowen, Wegmann, & Webber, 2013; Cohen
et al., 2009; Sherman et al., 2013; see also Harackiewicz et al.,
2014; Miyake et al., 2010). Inspired by this past research, we
developed a new intervention called affirmation training. Students
did not complete an affirmation. Instead, we encouraged students
to incorporate personally important self-identities and values in
their daily lives as an explicit strategy to manage stress and threat,
for instance, to help students avoid “tunnel vision” and find “balance.” We anticipated that this might yield more robust benefits
than a simple value affirmation because it encourages students to
express broader aspects of their self-identity within their daily
lives in ways and at times that are optimal for them. It empowers
students to maintain their own well-being. Notably, this intervention provides the first test of whether students can be taught to
incorporate a sophisticated social–psychological strategy to remedy psychological threat in their own lives. Moreover, whereas
past value-affirmation interventions are typically delivered multiple times over an academic term or school year (Cohen et al.,
2009; Harackiewcz et al., 2014; Miyake et al., 2010; Sherman et
al., 2013), affirmation training allowed us to intervene with students just once.
The aim of both interventions was to mitigate a chilly climate in
engineering. To do so, both conveyed at a general level that
difficulties are common at first in engineering and that students
learn to cope with these difficulties. This encourages students to
reappraise difficulties as manageable, a powerful psychological
ingredient (Jamieson, Mendes, Blackstock, & Schmader, 2010;
Johns, Inzlicht, & Schmader, 2008; Wilson, Damiani, & Shelton,
2002). However, the content of the two interventions differed. The
social-belonging intervention focused on the meaning of adversities in the transition to engineering. It invited students to view
adversities as due to the challenges all students face. By contrast,
affirmation training focused students on themselves— on ways to
broaden their self-identity to manage stress and function well.

470

WALTON, LOGEL, PEACH, SPENCER, AND ZANNA

This distinction draws on Garcia and Cohen’s (2012) identity
engagement model, which distinguishes vigilance and appraisal
processes people experience in psychologically threatening settings. First, as Garcia and Cohen wrote,

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

[People] tend to become vigilant in environments where their identity
is engaged . . . They monitor such situations for cues related to
whether their identity is relevant to their outcomes, for instance,
whether it affects how they are treated by important figures in their
social environment . . . As in any hypothesis-testing process, people
may be more sensitive to bias-confirming evidence than to biasdisconfirming evidence. (p. 334).

The worry that “people like me” might not belong in a school
setting sensitizes students to indicators of nonbelonging (e.g.,
Cheryan et al., 2009; Murphy et al., 2007; Walton & Cohen, 2007).
It leads students to interpret events through the lens of questions
like “Maybe I don’t belong?” and “Maybe my group doesn’t
belong?” The social-belonging intervention offers students a more
hopeful lens with which to interpret adversity—it invites students
to see adversity as normal for all students as they enter a new
school and as lessening with time.
Second, Garcia and Cohen argued that, if people perceive
threats, a “threat appraisal” process ensues in which people “assess
whether they have the ability to deal with the threat . . . Students
might see the degree of bias in a classroom as surpassing their
ability or desire to overcome it” (p. 334). Value-affirmation interventions, they wrote, “[increase] people’s psychological resources” (p. 336) to cope with such threats in part by broadening
the self-concept. Rather than focusing on the nature of the social
environment, the intervention focuses students on themselves and
thereby helps them cope (Cohen & Sherman, 2014).
This theorizing implies that the two interventions may cause
both convergent and divergent effects. Given the marginalization
of women in STEM fields (Cheryan et al., 2009; Logel et al., 2009;
Steele et al., 2002), both interventions were predicted to benefit
women more than men; moreover, by improving the trajectory of
women’s experience in engineering over time, both were predicted
to cause lasting gains. The primary outcome— on which we expected benefits from both interventions—was students’ end-ofyear GPA in engineering.
We also predicted that both interventions would lead students to
view daily adversities as manageable, not overwhelming. This
could occur if adversities are seen either as normal and temporary
(social belonging) or as within their capacity to manage (affirmation training; Sherman et al., 2013; Walton & Cohen, 2011). We
assessed construals of adversity directly in two daily-diary measures in the 1–2 weeks after the intervention. The first assessed
how “important” students saw daily negative and positive events.
If students view daily adversities as manageable, we reasoned
negative events would loom less large in importance. The second
assessed how “confident” students were that they could handle
daily stressors in engineering.
Finally, we examined STEM attitudes. These often decline in
college and predict exit from STEM fields (Good et al., 2012;
Shapiro & Sax, 2011; Stout, Dasgupta, Hunsinger, & McManus,
2011). If women construe daily adversities as manageable, they
may report better experiences in engineering and, perhaps with
time, greater confidence that they can succeed in the field.

Beyond these convergent benefits, we predicted divergent effects on students’ underlying social experiences. If the socialbelonging intervention leads women to perceive less threat in daily
social encounters in engineering, these interactions may go better
and women may form more friendships, especially with male
engineers, reinforcing their social integration in the field. We thus
examined women’s friendships with male engineers, a potentially
valuable source of belonging and identity in STEM (Shook &
Clay, 2012; Walton & Carr, 2012). We also examined implicit
normative evaluations about female engineers—the extent to
which students associated the constructs “most people like” and
“female engineers” on an automatic level (Yoshida et al., 2012).
Implicit norms are thought to “arise from repeated exposure to
how objects are treated and depicted by groups. For example, if
people repeatedly hear negative jokes about female engineers and
repeatedly see female engineers treated in a sexist manner, then
they will be likely to associate that most people dislike female
engineers” (Yoshida et al., 2012, p. 695). Implicit norms thus
provide an indicator of women’s social experiences in engineering
and whether the social-belonging intervention improved these experiences over time. Notably, implicit norms about female engineers tend to become more negative over time in engineering
among both men and women and predict women’s intentions to
leave the field (Yoshida et al., 2012); we tested whether the
social-belonging intervention remedied this risk factor.
By contrast, affirmation training encouraged students to incorporate valued aspects of their self-identity in their daily lives to
cope with stress and threat; it does not target the meaning of
adversities per se but resources students can develop within themselves to cope with and function well despite adversity. Although
the intervention does not reference gender, it is women’s gender
identity that can seem incompatible with pursuing STEM fields
(Cheryan et al., 2009; Nosek, Banaji, & Greenwald, 2002; Stout et
al., 2011); indeed, women invested in STEM may selectively
suppress aspects of their gender identity that seem incompatible
with pursuing these fields (Pronin, Steele, & Ross, 2004). We thus
predicted that encouraging students to incorporate broader aspects
of their self-identity in their daily lives would help women “restore” their gender identity to their self-concept. We examined the
subjective importance of women’s gender identity to women—
their ingroup identification, which can buffer students in threatening settings (Cohen & Garcia, 2005; Oyserman, Brickman, Bybee,
& Celious, 2006). We also examined the development of women’s
friendships with women outside engineering.
This study extends current understanding of brief social–
psychological interventions in education in four primary ways.
First, it provides the first test of whether such interventions can
reduce gender inequality in STEM broadly, a significant problem.
Past interventions have examined racial/ethnic disparities (e.g.,
Bowen et al., 2013; Cohen et al., 2009; Sherman et al., 2013;
Walton & Cohen, 2011) or women’s or girls’ performance on a
single test (Good, Aronson, & Inzlict, 2003; Smeding, Dumas,
Loose, & Régner, 2013) or in a single class (Miyake et al., 2010;
see also Harackiewicz, Rozek, Hulleman, & Hyde, 2012; Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009). We examined women’s achievement
in multiple classes over a full academic year. Second, by assessing
diverse indices of students’ psychology and social experience, this
study provides deeper understanding of how brief social–
psychological interventions transform at-risk students’ school ex-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

INTERVENTIONS FOR WOMEN’S EXPERIENCE IN ENGINEERING

perience broadly beyond achievement. Third, we developed the
novel affirmation-training intervention and tested its effects. Moreover, by directly comparing it with the social-belonging intervention, we tested the hypothesis that the latter helps women integrate
into engineering, whereas the former helps women cultivate resources in their lives and identity.
Finally, this study directly tested the hypothesis that socialbelonging and value-affirmation interventions allay concerns that
arise from a specific social context—from being a member of an
at-risk and underrepresented group in a setting—not from some
inherent property of ethnic minorities or of women. To do so, we
compared students enrolled in gender-diverse and in maledominated engineering majors. Following past laboratory (Inzlicht
& Ben-Zeev, 2000; Murphy et al., 2007; Steele et al., 2002) and
field (Hanselman, Bruch, Gamoran, & Borman, 2014; Stout et al.,
2011; Yoshida et al., 2012) research, we expected that the underrepresentation of women would create a “chilly climate” that
intensifies women’s social marginalization. If this is the experience remedied by the interventions, then gender disparities and
intervention effects should both be concentrated in maledominated majors.

Method
Overview
Students in the first year of a demanding university engineering
program took part. Early in the academic year, students completed a
brief preintervention survey. Intervention or control materials were
delivered in sessions in engineering classrooms soon after. To assess
construals of daily adversities, students completed surveys every other
evening over the next 12 days. To assess change in academic attitudes
and social experiences, we asked them to complete one or two
second-semester surveys (⬇4 months postintervention). Official academic records were obtained for students’ first year.

Participants and Recruitment
Participants were first-year engineering students in three successive
cohorts at the University of Waterloo (UW), one of the highest ranked
engineering schools in Canada (Times Higher Education, 2013). A
total of 228 first-year students participated and were randomly assigned to condition (92 women and 136 men). Research staff solicited
students with appeals and handouts in engineering classes. The study
was called the “Skills for Transitions to Engineering Project” (STEP)
and represented as an opportunity for students to learn about other
students’ experiences entering engineering and to share their experiences with future students to help improve their transition. The study
was thus described as of potential benefit to students; it was not,
however, referred to as an “intervention” or represented as remedial.
As compensation, students received small gift certificates to a local
business.
Interested students were invited to complete an online preintervention survey. All women who completed this survey were recruited to take part in the rest of the study; men who matched
women based on their major and ethnicity were randomly selected
to be recruited for the rest of the study. Male and female participants did not differ in demographic characteristics: engineering
major, ␹2(10, N ⫽ 228) ⫽ 13.86, p ⫽ .18; ethnicity, ␹2(3, N ⫽

471

220) ⫽ 1.10, p ⫽ .78. Reflecting the university’s student body,
most students self-identified as White (38.16%), East Asian
(33.77%), or South Asian/Middle Eastern (20.18%; other or unknown: 7.90%). However, insofar as students chose to participate,
the sample was not necessarily representative of the student body.
Cohort 1 included 64 students (34 women). Cohort 2 included 68
students (30 women). Cohort 3 included 96 students (28 women).

Classification of Engineering Majors
Students enter the Faculty of Engineering enrolled in one of 12
undergraduate programs (i.e., “majors”). These majors organize
students’ experience, including what classes they take and with
whom and represent important sources of self-identity (e.g., students might identify as “electrical engineers,” not as engineers).
We classified majors as “gender-diverse” if more than 20% of
students enrolled in the major in the first year of the study were
women (across cohorts, 32.57% of students enrolled in these
majors were women; N ⫽ 121) and as “male-dominated” otherwise (10.01% women, N ⫽ 107). See Table 1. This classification
assigned half of the majors to each category, is consistent with past
research, which defines a “critical mass” of women in STEM fields
at approximately 20% (Carrigan, Quinn, & Riskin, 2011; Lott,
Gardner, & Powers, 2009 –2010), and tracked social stereotypes—
interviews and focus groups with upper year engineering majors
confirmed that “male-dominated” majors were seen as more masculine than “gender-diverse” majors (e.g., one focus-group participant reported that chemical engineering [with 38.62% women in
the first year of the study] was known as “fem eng.”) See the
online supplemental material for more information.

Preintervention Survey (First Semester)
The preintervention survey, completed online in the first few
months of school, assessed five key constructs. First, three measures assessed students’ evaluation of their current experience in
engineering: (a) their sense of belonging in engineering (10 items,
e.g., “I belong in engineering at UW”; ⬀ ⫽ 0.87), (b) enjoyment
of engineering (three items, e.g., “How much do you enjoy academic work in engineering?” ⬀ ⫽ 0.87), and (c) self-efficacy in
engineering (two items, e.g., “I feel confident that I have the ability
to do well in engineering”; r ⫽ .53, p ⬍ .001; Walton & Cohen,
2011). All items were completed on 7-point scales. These measures formed a reliable scale (⬀ ⫽ 0.64) and showed a similar

Table 1
Classification of Engineering Majors as Gender-Diverse (⬎20%
Female Students) or Male-Dominated (⬍20% Female Students)
Gender-diverse majors
(⬎20% women)

Male-dominated majors
(⬍20% women)

Chemical engineering
Civil engineering
Environmental engineering
Geological engineering
Management engineering
Systems design engineering

Computer engineering
Electrical engineering
Mechanical engineering
Mechatronics engineering
Nanotechnology engineering
Software engineering

Note. Overall, women represented 32.57% of students enrolled in genderdiverse majors and 10.01% of students-enrolled in male-dominated majors.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

472

WALTON, LOGEL, PEACH, SPENCER, AND ZANNA

pattern of results (see Table S1 in the online supplemental material). Therefore, we combined them to form a composite measure.
Second, two measures assessed students’ evaluation of their prospects of succeeding in engineering: (a) possible selves in engineering
(four items, e.g., “I could see myself being a professional engineer”;
7-point scale; ⬀ ⫽ 0.66; Markus & Nurius, 1987) and (b) perceived
potential “to succeed in engineering” relative to classmates (a oneitem 100-point percentile scale; Walton & Cohen, 2007). The two
measures correlated (r ⫽ .26, p ⬍ .001) and showed a similar pattern
of results (Table S1), so we combined them. To place them on the
same scale, the former measure was transformed into a 100-point
scale and then averaged with the latter.
Third, we assessed students’ identification with their gender
group (four items, e.g., “My gender is an important reflection of
who I am”; 7-point scale; Cohen & Garcia, 2005). One item that
did not load was dropped (⬀ ⫽ 0.60).
Fourth, we examined students’ friendship groups. Students provided the initials of up to five friends they had made in university
at that point and, subsequently, indicated the gender and major of
each friend. We calculated the percentage of friends students listed
who were male engineers, female engineers, male nonengineers,
and female nonengineers.
Finally, we assessed implicit normative evaluations of female
engineers (Yoshida et al., 2012), an automatic measure of the
degree to which participants saw women as valued in engineering.
The measure was a modified version of the Implicit Association
Test (IAT), a well-validated computerized measure for assessing
implicit attitudes (Peach, Yoshida, Spencer, Zanna, & Steele,
2011; Yoshida et al., 2012). The task assessed the ease with which
participants associated the construct “most people like” (vs. “most
people don’t like,” with the term most people defined as “most
undergraduates at your university”) with the construct female
engineers (vs. objects) on a reaction-time basis. Higher values
represent more positive implicit norms (i.e., “most people like” ⫽
“female engineers”). For details, see the online supplemental material.
This measure allowed us to go beyond self-reports,and thus to
assess whether intervention effects would extend to a psychological measure less sensitive to demand processes. It also complements past research, which has primarily emphasized implicit
gender stereotypes and attitudes in STEM (e.g., Nosek & Smyth,
2011; Smeding, 2012; Stout et al., 2011). Finally, the implicitnorm measure circumvents two debates about traditional IATs:
whether they measure personal attitudes or awareness of cultural
stereotypes (Arkes & Tetlock, 2004; Yoshida et al., 2012) and
whether they predict behavior (Greenwald, Poehlman, Uhlmann,
& Banaji, 2009). By using the category labels “most people like”
and “most people don’t like” (rather than “pleasant”/“unpleasant”),
the implicit-norm measure is designed specifically to assess perceived cultural associations, not personal attitudes (Yoshida et al.,
2012). Further, although implicit norms have been less researched
than traditional IATs, they have been found to predict women’s
intentions to leave engineering (Yoshida et al., 2012).

Intervention Session (First Semester)
After completing the preintervention survey, students were invited to take part in sessions in an engineering classroom in which

intervention or control materials were delivered. Each session was
randomly assigned to condition.1
Students were told that the study had two purposes: (a) “to better
understand your personal experiences and attitudes here in engineering at Waterloo” and (b) “to help us provide incoming UW
engineering students next year and in the years to come with more
accurate expectations about what university is like.” Students in
each condition were told that the researchers had previously conducted a survey of upper year students’ experiences entering the
engineering program and that they would be asked for their help in
interpreting the results of this survey. The results, students were
told, “were consistent across students’ program [i.e., major], gender, and ethnicity.” In each condition, students were then given a
one-page “summary of results” to review. Students then listened to
nine audio recordings of senior engineering students said to have
taken part in the survey (four women and five men in seven
engineering majors), which were described as “illustrative” of
students’ experiences in the ‘transition to engineering at UW.’” As
they listened to these recordings, students viewed a presentation
that displayed each student’s quotation, name (which, participants
were told, had been changed to protect students’ confidentiality),
year, and major along with photographs of campus engineering
buildings.
Social-belonging intervention. In the social-belonging intervention, the materials emphasized that both men and women
worried about their social belonging at first in engineering but that
these concerns dissipated with time and eventually most students
came to feel at home. These materials were drawn from past
research (Walton & Cohen, 2011) but revised to incorporate two
key themes that emerged in pilot interviews and focus groups with
female engineering students: worries about (a) being taken seriously or treated with respect and (b) fitting into a male peer
culture. The materials emphasized that both men and women
worry about being treated with respect at first in engineering, but
this improves with time; and that even when women do not share
some interests with men, they share common interests in engineering.
For instance, the “summary of results” indicated that “almost
all” upper year students had worried during their first year about
“whether other students would accept them” and had felt “intimidated by professors” but that, over time, most students came to
feel “comfortable in the academic environment,” made “good
friends within the Faculty of Engineering,” and felt “confident that
other engineering students and professors viewed their abilities
positively.”
The nine quotations, drawn from pilot research, reinforced this
theme. One upper year student said, “When I first got to Waterloo,
I worried that I was different from the other students . . . Now it
seems ironic— everybody feels different first year, when really
1
Most sessions included just one participant, but when convenient,
several students took part in a session. For instance, of the 41 sessions in
Cohort 1, 22 had one participant, 16 had two participants, two had three
participants, and one had four participants. Multilevel modeling was not
required. Students did not interact with one another in sessions, either
listening to the experimenter or completing individual activities, and session accounted for no variance in the primary outcome, first-year GPA (at
least in Cohort 1).

INTERVENTIONS FOR WOMEN’S EXPERIENCE IN ENGINEERING

we’re all going through the same things.” Another, a male student,
said,
Honestly, when I got here, I thought professors were scary . . . I
worried about whether other students would respect me . . . After
some time, I began to feel more comfortable . . . I saw that even when
professors are critical . . . it didn’t mean they looked down on me. It
was just their way of pushing us . . . I’m glad I have been challenged.
It’s made me a better engineer.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

A woman said
[M]y first term . . . some other civil engineers . . . spent 90% of the
time talking about hockey, about which I know next to nothing . . . It
was discouraging. But over time I got to know my classmates better
. . . Once I remember talking about the TV show Monster Machines,
which I have to admit I love. We had a great time sharing stories about
the different episodes. Even though I don’t share their love of hockey,
I realized that we do have a lot in common.

For more information, see Appendix S1 in the online supplemental
materials.
Affirmation-training intervention. In the affirmationtraining condition, the materials were similar, but instead of concerns about belonging, they emphasized that upper year students,
both men and women, learned to incorporate broader aspects of
their self-identity in their daily lives to manage stress and find
“balance” in engineering. The materials highlighted six values
identified in pilot testing as most relevant in this population:
relationships with friends and family, leading a healthy lifestyle,
learning for the sake of learning, religious or spiritual values,
achieving financial security, and making a difference in the world.
For instance, the “summary of results” indicated that during their
first year, “almost all” upper year students had “felt overwhelmed
by the workload” but that, over time, most students “found ways to
manage stress and find balance” by “spending time with friends,”
“putting their workload in perspective,” “going to the gym,” and
“taking mental ‘time-outs.’”
The nine quotations, again drawn from pilot research, reinforced
this theme. One upper year student said, “[F]irst year, I sometimes
felt like I had tunnel vision . . . I was just so completely caught up
with life at Waterloo . . . It was hard at first, and it was stressful.
But then I realized that, well there are things outside of engineering
that I do care about . . . I decided to get involved with an
environmental group here on campus. And even though, objectively, I had less time . . . I found I felt really refreshed, and I could
concentrate a lot better . . . the longer I spend in Waterloo, the
more I find things to do that are just broadening my life . . . I guess
the one thing I had to learn was that it isn’t the best thing for me
to just study nonstop.”
For more information, see Appendix S1 in the online supplemental
materials.
“Saying-is-believing” exercises. In the intervention conditions and in the study-skills control condition (described later),
after reading the survey, students completed two writing activities
designed to facilitate internalization of the intervention message
(Walton & Cohen, 2011). These “saying-is-believing” exercises
encouraged students to describe the process they had read about in
their own words, to view their own personal experiences in light of
it, and to advocate for this process to a receptive audience. This is
a powerful and noncontrolling persuasive technique. Further, it

473

encourages students to see themselves as helping others, not as
beneficiaries or as recipients of a persuasive appeal, which could
undermine effects.
First, students were asked, “to write about why you think
people’s experience in university develops in the way the senior
students described”—for instance, why students worry at first
about whether they belong in engineering but come to feel at home
with time (social-belonging) or how students learn to incorporate
broader aspects of their self-identity in their daily lives to manage
stress in engineering (affirmation-training). Students were encouraged to illustrate their essay “with examples from your own
experience” and invited to look back on the survey results as they
worked. In addition, students were told
[W]e hope to share selections of what students write in this study with
first-year students next year. We hope it will help them in the
transition to university . . . I am sure that the students who read about
your experiences next year will appreciate the effort you put in.

Students were given 15–20 min to write.
Next, students were asked to rewrite their essay into a personal
letter to a future student. Students were told
[W]e have learned . . . that students really appreciate hearing directly
from older students who already have some experience making the
transition to engineering at UW. To give next year’s . . . students a
chance to hear directly from an older student, we would like . . . you
to write a letter to an incoming engineering student next year . . . about
your transition . . . [and] what you’ve learned [including how students]
may feel unsure at first of their belonging in engineering but ultimately come to feel they belong [in the social-belonging condition]/
learn ways to manage stress by thinking about things they value
outside school [in the affirmation-training condition].

Students were then told
We will give these letters to a student of the same program and gender
as yourself, so you can imagine it is a student like you. We know that
it can be difficult . . . to write a personal letter to a stranger, but . . .
[we] believe it will be particularly meaningful for incoming students
if they feel as though an older student is speaking directly to them
about their experiences.

All students agreed to write the letter. The next year we delivered
some of these letters to new first-year students not participating in
the study.
Two raters, blind to participants’ condition, gender, and major,
coded the essays and letters students in the first cohort wrote.
Results confirmed that students were sensitive to the divergent
content of the two interventions and the study-skills control condition (described later). Their writings did not differ by gender or
major. For details, see the online supplemental material.
Control conditions. Two randomized control conditions were
used. In Cohort 1, the procedure was the same but the materials
addressed an unrelated topic, study skills. Students read information indicating that many students lack adequate study skills at first
in engineering but learn better study skills with time. For instance,
the “summary of results” indicated that during their first year,
“almost all” upper year students had felt “overwhelmed by the
workload” and “had difficulty keeping track of due dates and
deadlines” but that, over time, most students learned “proper study
techniques,” including “attending class regularly” and “recording

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

474

WALTON, LOGEL, PEACH, SPENCER, AND ZANNA

exams and assignment due dates in a day planner.” The nine
quotations reinforced this theme. Although this controls for the
representation that difficulties are common at first in engineering
and improve with time, the content is tangential to the key psychological issues targeted by the interventions (and, past research
suggests, is generally ineffective; Conway & Ross, 1984).
For Cohorts 2 and 3, we used a different control condition.
Students again took part in sessions in engineering classrooms,
equating for their effort and attention received, but they simply
completed outcome measures. The use of multiple control conditions follows procedures used in past research (e.g., Cohen et al.,
2009; Walton & Cohen, 2011). It ensures that observed condition
differences reflect the influence of the intervention conditions, not
an unanticipated ironic effect of any given control condition.
Key chain. After completing the writing exercises, students
completed initial measures assessing attitudes toward engineering
(described later). Finally, students received a key chain designed to
remind them of the intervention message. Past research has shown
that physical cues can facilitate intervention effects (Dal Cin,
MacDonald, Fong, Zanna, & Elton-Marshall, 2006). In the socialbelonging condition, the key chain depicted the Waterloo Engineering insignia. In the affirmation-training condition, it was an
opaque piece of plastic containing a slip of paper. Students were
given a list of the six aforementioned values (e.g., “relationships
with friends and family”) and asked to select the value that “is
most important to you” and to “write a word or phrase that will
remind you of this value” on the slip and return it to the key chain.
Control-condition students were offered both types of key chains
and given their choice (students who chose the opaque key chain
were not asked to write on the slip). In each condition, students
were then asked “Shall we put it on your keys now?” and then
helped in attaching the keychain to their keys.
The various aspects of the procedure were all designed to
convey the specific psychological message in each condition (see
Table S2 in the online supplemental materials). In total, the intervention session lasted 45– 60 min.

Dependent Measures
First-year engineering GPA. The primary outcome was students’ GPA in engineering classes over the first year calculated
from official school records. GPA is on a scale from 0 to 100.
Sixty is needed to remain in engineering; scores above 80 qualify
for the Dean’s honor list. We did not examine retention in engineering as an outcome because drop-out rates were low (8.38%) in
all conditions during the time period examined in this study (the
first year of engineering).
Intervention session: Attitudes toward engineering.
Immediately after completing intervention or control materials,
students reported their attitudes toward engineering. We assessed
the same two constructs assessed in the preintervention survey:
students’ (a) evaluation of their current experience in engineering
(sense of belonging in, self-efficacy in, and enjoyment of engineering) and (b) perception of their prospects of succeeding in
engineering (possible selves and self-perceived potential in engineering).
Daily diaries: Construal of daily adversities and daily
functioning. Beginning a few days after the intervention session,
students completed a brief (5-min) online survey every other

evening for 12 days (up to six assessments). Each survey assessed
students’ construals of daily adversities and stressors as well as
daily functioning (i.e., daily self-esteem).
First, we assessed the degree to which daily negative events
loomed large in importance to students. Students reported each
evening on events they had experienced that day that made them
“feel positively or negatively about engineering at UW or your
experience here” (Walton & Cohen, 2011). Students briefly described each event, categorized it as positive or negative, rated
“how positive” or “how negative” (1 ⫽ neutral, 5 ⫽ very positive/
negative), and then rated “how important” it was (1 ⫽ not at all,
5 ⫽ very). Our chief interest was the perceived importance of
negative events: the average daily sum total of the perceived
importance of negative events.
Second, we assessed students’ confidence they could handle
stress in school. Each evening, students considered 10 potential
sources of stress (Stinson et al., 2008): “family members,” “close
friends,” “other students,” “romantic partners,” “professors, TAs,
or work supervisors,” “person you are interested in dating but are
not dating,” “living independently,” “workload for classes,”
“workload for job,” and “any other sources of stress or negative
feelings.” We assessed how much stress students reported experiencing from each source each day (0 ⫽ not a source of stress, 1 ⫽
mild, 2 ⫽ moderate, 3 ⫽ severe) and how well students believed
they could handle stress from that source (“I can handle this source
of stress”; 1 ⫽ strongly disagree, 7 ⫽ strongly agree). We were
most interested in students’ confidence in their ability to handle
school-related stress: “other students,” “professors, TAs, or work
supervisors,” “workload for classes,” and “workload for jobs”
(many students held engineering-related jobs as students through a
co-op program). The primary outcome was the average daily
confidence students expressed in their ability to handle school
stressors.
Third, we examined the level and stability of students’ selfesteem across days, as both index daily functioning (Kernis, 2005;
Stinson et al., 2008). Each evening, we asked students to choose
between 20 pairs of adjectives to describe “your true feelings about
yourself right now” (e.g., “bad/good,” “ashamed/proud,” “adequate/inadequate”) on a 7-point scale (from ⫺3 to 3) (HoshinoBrowne et al., 2005; McFarland & Ross, 1982). We scored each
item such that higher values represented more positive self-views
and, each day, averaged across the 20 items. To provide an overall
measure, we calculated the mean and standard deviation of daily
self-esteem scores across days, reverse-scored the latter, and standardized and averaged the two measures. Secondary analyses
examine the two separately (see the online supplemental material).
Second-semester survey(s): Attitudes toward engineering,
friendship groups, implicit norms, and gender identification. In
their second semester on campus, students completed one or two
surveys. These assessed the same measures assessed in the preintervention survey: (a) attitudes toward engineering, (b) gender
identification, (c) friendship groups, and (d) implicit norms about
female engineers.
The timing and delivery of the second-semester surveys differed
slightly by cohort. For Cohort 1, there was one second-semester
survey completed about 4 months postintervention (primarily in
April). For Cohorts 2 and 3, there were two second-semester
surveys. Their content was identical, and among students who
completed both, responses were averaged across assessments.

INTERVENTIONS FOR WOMEN’S EXPERIENCE IN ENGINEERING

These surveys were completed about 3½ and 6 months postintervention (primarily in January and February and in May and June,
respectively).

Results

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Preliminary Data Analytic Issues
Retention rates. Retention rates were adequate, similar to
those in past research, and did not vary by gender, major, or
condition (see the online supplemental material). Degrees of freedom vary because of missing data on some postintervention measures.
Combination of cohorts. Few analyses were moderated by
student cohort (fewer than would be expected by chance alone), so
the three cohorts were combined.
Outliers. The results were not driven by outliers. We examined the critical three experimental conditions among women in
male-dominated majors. On all primary outcomes, all scores fell
within 2.30 standard deviations of the within-condition mean.
Race/ethnicity. No analysis was moderated by student race/
ethnicity (White vs. other), Fs ⬍ 2.75, ps ⬎ .10.

Preintervention Measures
Check on random assignment. Confirming the success of
random assignment, there was no difference by condition on any
preintervention measure, Fs ⬍ 1 (see Table S3 in the online
supplemental materials).
Baseline differences. First, we examined whether, at baseline,
women held more negative explicit attitudes toward engineering
than men. They did, both in terms of their evaluation of their
current experience in engineering and their perceived prospects of
succeeding in the field, main effects of gender, Fs ⬎ 5.00, ps ⬍
.028. Interestingly, there was no moderation by type of major,
Fs ⬍ 2.60, ps ⬎ .10 (see online supplemental material, Tables S4
and S5). Second, we examined gender differences in implicit
norms. Past research has shown that women tend to exhibit more
positive implicit norms (Yoshida et al., 2012) and gender stereotypes (Nosek & Smyth, 2011; Smeding, 2012) than men in STEM.
We replicated this pattern (Mwomen ⫽ 0.61; Mmen ⫽ 0.48), F(1,
206) ⫽ 8.75, p ⫽ .003, with no moderation by major type, F ⬍ 1.

Analytic Approach
Overview. Data were analyzed using multiple regression including appropriate dummy codes for student gender, major type
(gender-diverse vs. male-dominated), condition, and all two- and
three-way interaction terms. Separate analyses tested the combined
and separate effects of the two interventions (for specific dummy
variables, see the online supplemental material).
Covariates were included as follows: First, where available, the
preintervention assessment of each outcome was included in analyses, that is, in analyses of engineering attitudes, friendship
groups, implicit norms, and gender identification. This increases
statistical power by reducing error variance and ensures that condition differences are not the product of baseline variability. Second, the analysis of engineering GPA controlled for the mean GPA
earned in students’ major, as this varied widely, F(10, 181) ⫽

475

503.25, p ⬍ .001. This reduces error variance and ensures that
condition differences were not due to any tendency for students to
have enrolled in easier majors in one condition than in other
conditions. Third, analysis of the perceived importance of daily
negative events controlled for the perceived importance of daily
positive events, which ensures that effects reflect change in the
perception of negative events relative to positive events not change
in the perception of all events. In general, covariates were highly
significant (see Table S6 in the online supplemental materials).
This study was not designed primarily to explore questions of
statistical mediation; issues of sample size and statistical power limit
the value of these tests in this study (Mackinnon, Lockwood, Hoffman, West, & Sheets, 2002). However, several exploratory analyses
are reported in the online supplemental material.
Robustness of results in alternative analyses. In general,
the results were robust to alternative ways of analyzing the data.
First, in some cases, participants with intact postintervention
scores had missing data on the baseline assessment of that
measure, which as noted, was included as a covariate in analysis. To retain as many participants as possible, in primary
analyses we replaced missing preintervention values with the
Gender ⫻ Major mean (Cohen et al., 2009). In general, dropping participants with missing preintervention scores produces
similar results. In only one case did this procedure meaningfully
affect the results. The effect of affirmation training on the
representation of female nonengineers in students’ friendship
groups was somewhat stronger without replacing missing preintervention values (see the following section).
Second, dropping the two nonbaseline covariates—namely, the
mean GPA earned in students’ major in analyses of first-year GPA
and the perceived importance of daily positive events in analysis of
the perceived importance of daily negative events—produced similar
results (see the online supplemental material).
Third, analyses of implicit norms were robust to different ways of
handling a few participants with high error rates on either the pre- or
the postintervention assessment (see the online supplemental material).

Statistical Summary
Figure 1 shows the means and standard errors for first-year GPA by
gender, major, and condition. Figures 2– 4 show the means and
standard errors for the other primary outcomes among students in
male-dominated majors; in the online supplemental material, Figures
S1–S3 show parallel results among students in gender-diverse majors.
Tables 2–5 summarize the primary statistical results: Intervention
effects among women in male-dominated majors (Tables 2, 4, and 5)
and gender differences by condition among students in maledominated majors (Table 3). In the online supplemental material,
Tables S7–S11 summarize parallel comparisons among men in maledominated majors and among men and women in gender-diverse
majors. Effect sizes (Cohen’s ds, calculated using the raw pooled
standard deviation) are included for all contrasts at p ⱕ .15.

First-Year Engineering GPA
The primary outcome was students’ cumulative GPA in engineering over the full academic year as reported by the university.
We used multiple regressions to test the effects of student gender,

476

WALTON, LOGEL, PEACH, SPENCER, AND ZANNA

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Construal of Daily Adversities and Daily Functioning

Figure 1. First-year engineering grade point average (GPA), which is
calculated on a scale from 0 to 100. Sixty is the average needed to remain
in engineering; scores above 80 qualify students for the dean’s honor list.
Means are adjusted for average within-major GPA. Error bars represent ⫹1
standard error. The y axis represents approximately 2.30 standard deviations. Sample sizes: Nmen ⫽ 118; Nwomen ⫽ 73.

major, and condition, with the mean GPA earned in different
majors controlled.
We first combined the two interventions and compared this
group with the control condition. The analysis yielded a three-way
interaction, B ⫽ 15.13, t(182) ⫽ 2.30, p ⫽ .022. Examining
male-dominated majors, in the control condition, there was a
gender gap; women received lower GPAs than men, B ⫽ ⫺8.39,
t(182) ⫽ ⫺1.96, p ⫽ .051, d ⫽ ⫺0.77. But the interventions
significantly raised women’s GPAs, B ⫽ 11.40, t(182) ⫽ 2.69, p ⫽
.008, d ⫽ 1.04, eliminating the gender gap, t ⬍ 1. There was no
effect for men, t ⬍ 1.20. In contrast, in gender-diverse majors,
there was no gender difference in either condition, ts ⬍ 1.40, ps ⬎
.15, and no intervention effect for either men or women, ts ⬍ 1.65,
ps ⬎ .10.
Next, we tested the separate effect of each intervention by
creating a dummy variable for each. Both interventions raised
GPAs among women in male-dominated majors relative to the
control condition—social-belonging intervention: B ⫽ 11.66,
t(178) ⫽ 2.41, p ⫽ .017, d ⫽ 1.07; affirmation-training intervention: B ⫽ 11.13, t(178) ⫽ 2.30, p ⫽ .023, d ⫽ 1.02. The two
interventions did not differ, t ⬍ 1. See Figure 1 and Tables 2, 3,
and S7–S9.
There was only one other condition effect. In gender-diverse
majors, women earned lower GPAs in the affirmation-training
condition than in the control condition, B ⫽ ⫺7.56,
t(178) ⫽ ⫺2.03, p ⫽ .043, d ⫽ ⫺0.69. Although notable, this
pattern was not predicted and was not evident on any other
outcome, ts ⬍ 1.10, ps ⬎ .25, and Table S8. Thus, we interpret it
cautiously. Future research should investigate its reliability and, if
reliable, its nature.

The three daily-diary measures—(a) how “important” students
saw daily negative relative to positive events, (b) how confident
students were they could handle daily school stress, and (c) the
level and day-to-day stability of students’ self-esteem—yielded
parallel results, so we report them together.
Combining the interventions, multiple-regression analysis of
each daily-diary measure yielded a Gender ⫻ Major ⫻ Condition
interaction, ts ⬎ 2.30, ps ⬍ .025. In male-dominated majors, in the
control condition, women exhibited worse outcomes than men on
each measure, ts ⬎ 2.30, ps ⬍ .025, ⫺1.30 ⱕ dsⱕ⫺0.86. But on
all three measures, the interventions improved women’s outcomes relative to the control condition. The interventions led
women to view daily adversities as less “important,” B ⫽
⫺3.55, t(182) ⫽ ⫺2.77, p ⫽ .006, d ⫽ ⫺0.99; to express greater
confidence they could handle school stress, B ⫽ 0.93, t(197) ⫽
2.21, p ⫽ .028, d ⫽ 0.94; and to report higher and more stable
self-esteem, B ⫽ 0.71, t(196) ⫽ 2.16, p ⫽ .032, d ⫽ 0.90. The
intervention effects eliminated all three gender differences, ts ⬍
1.45, ps ⬎ .15. There were no effects for men, ts ⬍ 1. In contrast,
in gender-diverse majors, there was no consistent gender difference in either condition and no consistent intervention effect for
either men or women. When tested separately, both interventions
generated all three benefits for women in male-dominated majors,
ts ⬎ 1.80, ps ⬍ .070. The two interventions did not differ on these
outcomes, ts ⬍ 1. See Figures 2 and S1 and Tables 2, 3, and
S7–S9.
Secondary analyses examined the levels of adversity—the degree of negative relative to positive events and how much school
stress—students reported encountering each day. These analyses
did not yield consistent effects (see the online supplemental material). The interventions did not consistently reduce the daily
challenges women encountered. Instead, they helped women construe challenges as manageable.

Attitudes Toward Engineering
Did the interventions improve women’s experience in engineering and, with time, their confidence in their prospects of succeeding in the field? They did. Each analysis controlled for the same
measure assessed at baseline.
With the interventions combined, students’ felt experience in
engineering both immediately after the intervention and in the
second semester yielded the predicted Gender ⫻ Major ⫻ Condition interaction, t(218) ⫽ 2.54, p ⫽ .012, and t(144) ⫽ 1.65, p ⫽
.10, respectively. Students’ confidence in their prospects of succeeding in engineering showed no interaction effect in the intervention session, t ⬍ 1, but did by the second semester, t(144) ⫽
2.43, p ⫽ .016. In each case, in the control condition in maledominated majors, women expressed more negative attitudes than
men, ts ⬎ 1.65, ps ⬍ .10, ⫺1.02 ⱕ ds ⱕ ⫺0.62. However, the
interventions improved women’s felt experience in engineering
relative to the control condition in the intervention session, B ⫽
0.58 t(218) ⫽ 2.76, p ⫽ .006, d ⫽ 0.67, and in the second
semester, B ⫽ 0.61, t(144) ⫽ 1.90, p ⫽ .060, d ⫽ 0.67, and
improved women’s confidence in their prospects of succeeding in
engineering in the second semester, B ⫽ 13.35, t(144) ⫽ 2.61, p ⫽
.010, d ⫽ 0.87. These effects eliminated all three gender differences, ts ⬍ 1. There was no effect for men, ts ⬍ 1. By contrast, in

INTERVENTIONS FOR WOMEN’S EXPERIENCE IN ENGINEERING
A
10

Perceived Importance
of Daily Negative
Events

B
7

Confidence in Ability
to Handle Daily
School Stressors

C
0.8

477

Average Daily Level
and Stability of SelfEsteem

9
6

8
7

0.4

5
0

6
4

5

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

4

-0.4
3

3
2

-0.8

2

1
0

1
Men

Women

Male Dominated Majors (<20%
Women)

Control Condition

-1.2
Men

Men

Women

Male Dominated Majors (<20%
Women)

Social-BelongingRasdgasg
Intervention

Women

Male Dominated Majors (<20%
Women)

Affirmation-Training Intervention

Figure 2. Daily functioning over 12 days after the intervention among students in male-dominated majors
(⬍20% women). Error bars represent ⫹1 standard error. (A) Perceived importance of negative events each day
(adjusted for the perceived importance of positive events). (B) Confidence in ability to handle daily school
stressors. (C) Level and stability (reverse-scored standard deviation) of self-esteem. The two measures were
standardized and then averaged. The y axes in Panels A and C represent approximately 3.50 and 2.50 standard
deviations, respectively. The y axis in Panel B represents the full range of the scale. Sample sizes (including
students in gender-diverse majors, Figure S1): Nmen ⫽ 110 –121; Nwomen ⫽ 81-– 84.

gender-diverse majors, there was no gender difference in either
condition, ts ⱕ 1.40, ps ⬎ .15, and no intervention effect for men
or women, ts ⬍ 1.55, ps ⬎ .10. When tested separately, both
interventions generated all three benefits for women in maledominated majors, ts ⬎ 1.45, ps ⱕ 0.14, 0.59 ⱕ ds ⱕ 1.05. On no
measure did the two interventions differ, ts ⬍ 1. See Figures 3 and
S2 and Tables 2, 3, and S7–S9.

Social Experiences in Engineering
Next, we examined students’ social experience in engineering
through the second semester. In contrast to the prior measures,
here we found divergent effects of the two interventions. In each
analysis, we controlled for the same measure assessed at baseline.
Unique effects of social-belonging intervention: Friendships
with male engineers and implicit normative evaluations of
female engineers. The social-belonging intervention aimed to
facilitate women’s social integration in engineering. To explore
this integration, we first examined the representation of male
engineers among the five closest friends students reported having
on campus in the second semester with the baseline assessment
controlled. The social-belonging intervention increased these
friendships among women in male-dominated majors relative to
the affirmation-training and control conditions combined, B ⫽
0.34, t(137) ⫽ 3.17, p ⫽ .002, d ⫽ 1.10, and relative to each
separately, ts ⬎ 2.60, ps ⱕ .010, 1.09 ⱕ ds ⱕ 1.12. See Figures 4
and S3 and Tables 4 and S10. Notably, the representation of male

engineers in women’s friendship groups in the social-belonging
condition (75%) more closely resembles the percentage of men
among women’s classmates (90%).
Second, we examined implicit normative evaluations of female
engineers. As noted, negative implicit norms predict women’s
intentions to leave the field (Yoshida et al., 2012). In maledominated majors, the social-belonging intervention buffered
women against this risk factor. With the baseline assessment
controlled, social-belonging-condition women exhibited more positive implicit norms about female engineers in the second semester
than affirmation-training and control-condition women combined,
B ⫽ 0.34, t(143) ⫽ 2.39, p ⫽ .018, d ⫽ 1.03, and relative to each
group tested separately, ts ⱖ 1.99, ps ⬍ .050, 1.02 ⱕ ds ⱕ 1.04.
On both measures, no other group showed consistent effects of the
social-belonging intervention. See Figures 4 and S3 and Tables 4
and S10.
Yoshida and colleagues (2012) found that, absent intervention,
implicit norms about female engineers become more negative over
time. To examine whether our results replicated this pattern and
how it varied by condition, we conducted a repeated-measures
analysis of variance involving time (preintervention vs. second
semester) as a within-subject factor and gender, major type, and
condition (social-belonging intervention vs. affirmation-training
intervention and control condition) as between-subjects factors.
The analysis yielded a marginal four-way interaction, F(1, 144) ⫽
3.10, p ⫽ .080. Replicating Yoshida and colleagues, in the control

WALTON, LOGEL, PEACH, SPENCER, AND ZANNA

478
A
7

Evaluation of Current
Experience in Engineering

B

Perceived Prospects of
Future Success in
Engineering

100
90

6

80
70

5
60
50

4

40

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

3

30
20

2

10

1

0
Intervention
Session

Second
Semester

Men

Intervention
Session

Second
Semester

Intervention
Session

Women

Men

Male Dominated Majors (<20% Women)

Control Condition

Second
Semester

Intervention
Session

Second
Semester

Women

Male Dominated Majors (<20% Women)

Social-BelongingRasdgasg
Intervention

Affirmation-Training Intervention

Figure 3. Attitudes toward engineering in the intervention session and in the second semester among students
in male-dominated majors (⬍20% women). Means are adjusted for preintervention reports. The y axes represent
the full range of each scale. Error bars represent ⫹1 standard error. (A) Students’ evaluation of their current
experience in engineering. (B) Students’ perceived prospects of succeeding in engineering. Sample sizes
(including students in gender-diverse majors, see Figure S2): Men: Nimmediate postintervention ⫽ 135,
Nsecond semester ⫽ 88; Women: Nimmediate postintervention ⫽ 92, Nsecond semester ⫽ 65).

and affirmation-training conditions, both men and women exhibited more negative implicit norms about female engineers over
time (i.e., irrespective of major; Mpreintervention ⫽ 0.57;
Msecond semester ⫽ 0.42), F(1, 144) ⫽ 12.88, p ⬍ .001. However, the
social-belonging intervention reversed this normative decline among
women in male-dominated majors (Mpreintervention ⫽ 0.68;
Msecond-semester ⫽ 0.78), t ⬍ 1 (see online supplemental material).2
Unique effects of affirmation-training intervention: Gender
identification and friendships with female nonengineers. In
contrast, the affirmation-training intervention led women to value
their gender identity more, aspects of which they might otherwise
suppress in STEM fields (Pronin et al., 2004). In male-dominated
majors, affirmation-trained women expressed greater gender identification in the second semester than social-belonging- and
control-condition women, B ⫽ 0.98, t(141) ⫽ 2.48, p ⫽ .014, d ⫽
1.06; the effect was also significant relative to each comparison
group tested separately, ts ⬎ 2.00, ps ⬍ .050, 1.04 ⱕ ds ⱕ 1.08.
In male-dominated majors, affirmation-trained women also reported having marginally more female nonengineering friends in
the second semester than social-belonging- and control-condition
women, B ⫽ 0.12, t(136) ⫽ 1.73, p ⫽ .086, d ⫽ 0.71.3 No other
group showed either effect, ts ⬍ 1.45, ps ⬎ .15. See Figures 4 and
S3 and Tables 5 and S11.4

Discussion
The women who gained admission to the selective engineering
programs studied in the present research were among the best
prepared in the world. Those who entered programs with a mod-

erate representation of women (on average women accounting for
about one third of the students) exhibited relatively positive experiences and performed relatively well. Yet the women who entered
male-dominated fields—like computer, electrical, and mechanical
2
Our theory implies that the social-belonging intervention should facilitate women’s friendships with male engineers and improve implicit norms
by reducing their experience of identity-based threat in daily social encounters. We did not assess this directly (e.g., daily perceived sexism),
however, because we did not want to prime sexism repeatedly for ethical
reasons and because we feared that doing so would interfere with intervention effects. However, preintervention and in the second semester, we
asked students how often they had heard sexist jokes about female engineers on campus (two items rated on a scale ranging from 1 ⫽ never to 7 ⫽
frequently; cf. Yoshida et al., 2012). Analysis of change scores showed
that, in male-dominated majors, control- and affirmation-training condition
women reported hearing more sexist jokes over time—Mdiffadj⫽ 0.95);
effect of time: t(142) ⫽ 2.88, p ⫽ .005—while belonging-condition women
showed no increase—Mdiffadj ⫽ ⫺0.04; effect of time: t ⬍ 1), a marginal
condition difference, t(142) ⫽ 1.77, p ⫽ .079, d ⫽ 0.71. See Figure S4 in
the online supplemental materials. This pattern could reflect a change in
women’s social experience (more respectful relationships with men), a
change in social perception (perhaps jokes did not seem threatening enough
to encode as sexist), or both. This is an important distinction; however, in
either case, the results suggest that the belonging intervention uniquely
reduced women’s experience of identity threat.
3
This analysis retains 12 participants with missing preintervention
scores by replacing these scores with the Gender ⫻ Major mean. Not
retaining those participants somewhat strengthens the results. See Table 5.
4
Notably, neither intervention increased the representation of female
engineers in women’s friendship groups; instead, they led to a marginal
reduction in this representation, B ⫽ ⫺0.16, t(136) ⫽ ⫺1.80, p ⫽ .074. For
discussion, see the online supplemental material.

INTERVENTIONS FOR WOMEN’S EXPERIENCE IN ENGINEERING

A

479

Composition of Student Friend Groups

100%
90%

8%
5%

80%
70%

9%

12%

12%

9%
3%

16%

9%

10%

13%

Female
Non22% Engs.
Male

8% Non-

29%

60%

Engs.

22%

21%

34%

Female

27% Engs.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

50%
40%
30%

75%
58%

57%

54%

Male

44%

20%

43% Engs.

10%
0%
Control

Social Affirmation Control
Belonging Training

Male Particiapnts

Social Affirmation
Belonging Training

Female Participants

Male Dominated Majors (<20% Women)

B
1.2
1

Implicit Norms About
Female Engineers
Control Condition
Social-Belonging Intervention
Affirmation-Training Intervention

0.8

C
7
6

Gender
Identification
Control Condition
Social-Belonging Intervention
Affirmation-Training Intervention

5

0.6
4
0.4
3
0.2
2

0

1

-0.2
Men

Women

Male Dominated Majors (<20%
Women)

Men

Women

Male Dominated Majors (<20%
Women)

Figure 4. Friendship groups, implicit norms, and gender identification in the second semester among students in
male-dominated majors (⬍20% women). Means are adjusted for preintervention reports. Error bars represent ⫹1
standard error. (A) Representation in students’ friendship groups of male and female engineers (Engs.) and nonengineers. (B) Implicit normative evaluations of female engineers. Higher values represent more positive implicit norms
about female engineers (i.e., “most people like” ⫽ “female engineers”). The y axis represents approximately 3.50
standard deviations. (C) Self-reported gender identification. The y axis represents the full range of the scale. Sample
sizes (including students in gender-diverse majors; see Figure S3): Nmen ⫽ 81– 87; Nwomen ⫽ 64 – 65.

engineering, which had on average 10% women in their programs—struggled. Compared with men, they reported feeling
more overwhelmed by daily adversities, anticipated less success,
and performed worse in class.

However, these struggles were not fixed. Instead, each of two
45- to 60-min interventions designed to help women navigate
“chilly” STEM settings catalyzed broad improvement in women’s
lives and achievement. Both interventions raised women’s grades

B ⫽ 0.54, t(140) ⫽ 1.47,
p ⫽ .14, d ⫽ 0.60
B ⫽ 10.64, t(140) ⫽ 1.81,
p ⫽ .072, d ⫽ 0.69

B ⫽ 0.61, t(144) ⫽ 1.90,
p ⫽ .060, d ⫽ 0.67

B ⫽ 13.35, t(144) ⫽ 2.61,
p ⫽ .010, d ⫽ 0.87

t⬍1

B ⫽ 0.65, t(214) ⫽ 2.76,
p ⫽ .006, d ⫽ 0.75

B ⫽ 0.58, t(218) ⫽ 2.76,
p ⫽ .006, d ⫽ 0.67
t⬍1

B ⫽ ⫺3.32, t(178) ⫽ ⫺2.25,
p ⫽ .026, d ⫽ ⫺0.93
B ⫽ 0.93, t(193) ⫽ 1.91,
p ⫽ .057, d ⫽ 0.93
B ⫽ 0.68, t(192) ⫽ 1.83,
p ⫽ .069, d ⫽ 0.87

B ⫽ 11.66, t(178) ⫽ 2.41,
p ⫽ .017, d ⫽ 1.07

B ⫽ ⫺3.55, t(182) ⫽ ⫺2.77,
p ⫽ .006, d ⫽ ⫺0.99
B ⫽ 0.93, t(197) ⫽ 2.21,
p ⫽ .028, d ⫽ 0.94
B ⫽ 0.71, t(196) ⫽ 2.16,
p ⫽ .032, d ⫽ 0.90

B ⫽ 11.40, t(182) ⫽ 2.69,
p ⫽ .008, d ⫽ 1.04

Social belonging
(1) vs. control (0)

B ⫽ 16.13, t(140) ⫽ 2.73,
p ⫽ .007, d ⫽ 1.05

B ⫽ 0.69, t(140) ⫽ 1.90,
p ⫽ .060, d ⫽ 0.77

t⬍1

B ⫽ 0.51, t(214) ⫽ 2.18,
p ⫽ .031, d ⫽ 0.59

B ⫽ ⫺3.73, t(178) ⫽ ⫺2.67,
p ⫽ .008, d ⫽ ⫺0.94
B ⫽ 0.94, t(193) ⫽ 2.01,
p ⫽ .046, d ⫽ 0.94
B ⫽ 0.73, t(192) ⫽ 2.02,
p ⫽ .045, d ⫽ 0.92

B ⫽ 11.13, t(178) ⫽ 2.30,
p ⫽ .023, d ⫽ 1.02

Affirmation training
(1) vs. control (0)

B ⫽ ⫺13.36,
t(144) ⫽ ⫺2.13, p ⫽ .035

B ⫽ ⫺0.49, t(144) ⫽ ⫺1.24,
p ⫽ .22

t⬍1
t⬍1

B ⫽ ⫺3.92, t(218) ⫽ ⫺1.14,
p ⫽ .26

B ⫽ ⫺0.60, t(218) ⫽ ⫺2.48,
p ⫽ .014

B ⫽ 3.34, t(182) ⫽ 2.21,
p ⫽ .028
B ⫽ ⫺0.89, t(197) ⫽ ⫺1.80,
p ⫽ .073
B ⫽ ⫺0.74, t(196) ⫽ ⫺1.94,
p ⫽ .054

B ⫽ ⫺8.09, t(182) ⫽ ⫺1.59,
p ⫽ .11

Gender ⫻ Condition in
male-dominated majors

t⬍1

t⬍1

t⬍1

t⬍1

t⬍1

t⬍1

Social belonging
(1) vs. affirmation
training (0)

B ⫽ 19.62, t(144) ⫽ 2.43,
p ⫽ .016

B ⫽ 0.83, t(144) ⫽ 1.65,
p ⫽ .10

t⬍1

B ⫽ 0.79, t(218) ⫽ 2.54,
p ⫽ .012

B ⫽ ⫺4.33, t(182) ⫽ ⫺2.32,
p ⫽ .022
B ⫽ 1.63, t(197) ⫽ 2.63,
p ⫽ .009
B ⫽ 1.55, t(196) ⫽ 3.21,
p ⫽ .002

B ⫽ 15.13, t(182) ⫽ 2.30,
p ⫽ .022

Gender ⫻ Major ⫻
Condition

Interactions (interventions combined)

Note. Contrasts were derived from multiple regression analyses. For intervention effects among men in male-dominated majors, see Table S7. For intervention effects among students in gender-diverse
majors, see Table S8. GPA ⫽ grade point average.

Daily diaries
Perceived importance of
daily negative events
Confidence handling
daily school stress
Day-to-day level and
stability of selfesteem
Intervention session:
Evaluation of current
experience in
engineering
Perceived prospects of
succeeding in
engineering
Second semester
Evaluation of current
experience in
engineering
Perceived prospects of
succeeding in
engineering

First-year engineering GPA

Variable

Combined intervention
(1) vs. control (0)

Contrasts among women in male-dominated majors

Table 2
Intervention Effects on Primary Outcomes Among Women in Male-Dominated Majors

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

480
WALTON, LOGEL, PEACH, SPENCER, AND ZANNA

INTERVENTIONS FOR WOMEN’S EXPERIENCE IN ENGINEERING

481

Table 3
Gender Differences on Primary Outcomes by Condition Within Male-Dominated Majors
Male-dominated majors

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Variable
First-year engineering grade point average
Daily diaries:
Perceived importance of daily negative events
Confidence handling daily school stress
Day-to-day level and stability of self-esteem
Intervention session:
Evaluation of current experience in engineering
Perceived prospects of succeeding in engineering
Second session:
Evaluation of current experience in engineering
Perceived prospects of succeeding in engineering

Control conditions

Intervention conditions

B ⫽ ⫺8.39, t(182) ⫽ ⫺1.96, p ⫽ .051, d ⫽ ⫺0.77

t⬍1

B ⫽ 3.06, t(182) ⫽ 2.34, p ⫽ .020, d ⫽ 0.86
B ⫽ ⫺1.22, t(197) ⫽ ⫺2.89, p ⫽ .004, d ⫽ ⫺1.22
B ⫽ ⫺1.03, t(196) ⫽ ⫺3.12, p ⫽ .002, d ⫽ ⫺1.30

t⬍1
B ⫽ ⫺0.33, t(197) ⫽ ⫺1.29, p ⫽ .20
B ⫽ ⫺0.28, t(196) ⫽ ⫺1.42, p ⫽ .16

B ⫽ ⫺0.55, t(218) ⫽ ⫺2.66, p ⫽ .008, d ⫽ ⫺0.64
t⬍1

t⬍1
B ⫽ 1.94, t(218) ⫽ 1.07, p ⫽ .29

B ⫽ ⫺0.56, t(143) ⫽ ⫺1.69, p ⫽ .093, d ⫽ ⫺0.62
B ⫽ ⫺15.67, t(144) ⫽ ⫺2.96, p ⫽ .004, d ⫽ ⫺1.02

t⬍1
t⬍1

Note. Men coded as 0; women coded as 1. For analyses, intervention conditions were combined. Contrasts derived from multiple regression analyses. For
gender differences within gender-diverse majors, see Table S9.

in male-dominated majors over the full academic year, eliminating
gender differences. Moreover, both helped women view daily
adversities and stressors as challenges they could manage,
strengthening their resilience. They also led women to report more
positive experiences in engineering immediately and, by the second semester, greater confidence they could succeed in the field.
The results highlight two high-level implications. First, they
suggest the power of social marginalization to cause gender inequality in STEM settings. This inequality arises in settings in
which women are grossly underrepresented (see also Inzlicht &
Ben-Zeev, 2000; Murphy et al., 2007; Stout et al., 2011; Yoshida
et al., 2012); it is mitigated by interventions that help women cope
with marginalization. At least among selective samples, this marginalization may be a primary cause of gender inequality in STEM
fields (Walton & Spencer, 2009; Walton, Spencer, & Erman,
2013). Second, the results suggest the importance of students’
reactions to social marginalization in determining its impact on
their achievement over time. In the present context, women’s
underperformance was not due simply to a lack of opportunities or
to high levels of sexism; the interventions addressed neither factor.
Rather, when students enter settings in which their group is underrepresented and negatively stereotyped, they contend with psychological challenges that other students do not face. They must
make sense of daily adversities, which could seem to signal a
global lack of belonging, and they contend with high levels of
stress and threat. By helping students meet these challenges, the
two interventions helped women succeed in male-dominated
STEM environments over time.
In addition, the results carry implications for brief psychological
interventions. First, in replicating and extending the basic effects
of past social-belonging and value-affirmation interventions on
achievement among women in STEM (Cohen et al., 2009; Harackiewicz et al., 2014; Miyake et al., 2010; Walton & Cohen,
2011), the results increase confidence in this general approach and
invite us to consider the broader array of students who may benefit
from it in specific school contexts, for instance, where their group
is underrepresented or socially marginalized (e.g., men in some
settings).
Second, even as the two interventions caused similar improvements in women’s outcomes, they encouraged different responses

to social marginalization and set students on divergent paths. By
providing a more positive narrative for interpreting daily adversities, the social-belonging intervention helped women integrate in
engineering. It led women to feel, on an automatic level, that
women were more valued in engineering, and it facilitated friendships with male engineers. The latter finding is especially striking:
It suggests that a brief intervention aimed narrowly at the meaning
of adversities can change students’ social circumstance over time.
By the second semester, social-belonging-condition women were
embedded in social networks with male engineers— one potential
route to success for women in STEM (cf. Shook & Clay, 2012;
Walton & Carr, 2012). By contrast, even as affirmation training
produced the same improvement in women’s grades, it did not
promote this social integration. It had no effect on women’s
implicit norms or friendships with male engineers. Instead, in
encouraging women to express broader aspects of their selfidentity in engineering, affirmation training led women to place
greater value on their gender identity, which they might otherwise
selectively suppress in STEM, and to form marginally more friendships with women outside engineering. An important question for
future research concerns how these divergent strategies affect
women’s well-being and retention in STEM over a longer period
of time, for instance, as they enter the profession. In addition, this
analysis raises questions about how these interventions would
interact. Although it is natural to assume that two interventions,
both of which improve women’s experience in STEM, would be
more effective together, it is possible that, insofar as they set in
motion divergent strategies for navigating a chilly environment, a
combination may produce less optimal results.
Third, a significant ongoing question in the field involves how
and when brief psychological interventions can cause lasting gains
in achievement (Cohen et al., 2009; Garcia & Cohen, 2012; Sherman et al., 2013; Walton & Cohen, 2011; Yeager & Walton, 2011).
In demonstrating change in students’ friendship groups, the present
results suggest that, at least in some cases, an interplay between
psychological processes and the development of positive social
relationships may contribute to lasting benefits. Perhaps less
threatening construals of daily social interactions inspired by the
social-belonging intervention “locked in” to improve women’s
downstream outcomes by facilitating positive cross-sex friend-

B ⫽ 0.34, t(139) ⫽ 1.99,
p ⫽ .049, d ⫽ 1.02

B ⫽ 0.35, t(139) ⫽ 2.16,
p ⫽ .033, d ⫽ 1.04

B ⫽ 0.34, t(143) ⫽ 2.39,
p ⫽ .018, d ⫽ 1.03

t⬍1

t⬍1

Contrasts derived from multiple regression analyses. For contrasts for the other three Gender ⫻ Major groups, see Table S10.

B ⫽ 0.34, t(133) ⫽ 2.62,
p ⫽ .010, d ⫽ 1.09

B ⫽ 0.35, t(133) ⫽ 2.80,
p ⫽ .006, d ⫽ 1.12

B ⫽ 0.34, t(137) ⫽ 3.17,
p ⫽ .002, d ⫽ 1.10

Control (0)

Affirmation training (0)

Affirmation-training
intervention (1) vs.
control (0)

B ⫽ ⫺0.35, t(143) ⫽ ⫺2.04,
p ⫽ .043

B ⫽ ⫺0.37, t(137) ⫽ ⫺2.77,
p ⫽ .006

Gender ⫻ Condition in
male-dominated majors

Note.

B ⫽ 0.12, t(136) ⫽ 1.73,
p ⫽ .086, d ⫽ 0.71
B ⫽ 0.20, t(124) ⫽ 2.62,
p ⫽ .010, d ⫽ 1.19
B ⫽ 0.98, t(141) ⫽ 2.48,
p ⫽ .014, d ⫽ 1.06

B ⫽ 0.13, t(132) ⫽ 1.66,
p ⫽ .099, d ⫽ 0.79
B ⫽ 0.20, t(120) ⫽ 2.38,
p ⫽ .019, d ⫽ 1.21
B ⫽ 1.00, t(137) ⫽ 2.20,
p ⫽ .029, d ⫽ 1.08

Social belonging (0)

Control (0)

B ⫽ 0.10, t(132) ⫽ 1.28,
p ⫽ .20, d ⫽ 0.63
B ⫽ 0.19, t(120) ⫽ 2.16,
p ⫽ .033, d ⫽ 1.17
B ⫽ 0.96, t(137) ⫽ 2.05,
p ⫽ .042, d ⫽ 1.04

Affirmation-training intervention (1) vs.

t⬍1

t⬍1

t⬍1

Social-belonging
intervention (1) vs.
control (0)

Contrasts derived from multiple regression analyses. For contrasts for the other three Gender ⫻ Major groups, see Table S11.

Percentage of female nonengineers in
students’ friendship group
Retaining participants with missing
preintervention data
Dropping participants with missing
preintervention data
Gender identification

Second semester

Social belonging and
control (0)

Contrasts among women in male-dominated majors

B ⫽ ⫺0.09, t(136) ⫽ ⫺1.14,
p ⫽ .26
B ⫽ 0.20, t(124) ⫽ ⫺2.22,
p ⫽ .028
B ⫽ ⫺1.03, t(141) ⫽ ⫺2.12,
p ⫽ .035

Gender ⫻ Condition in maledominated majors

B ⫽ 0.18, t(124) ⫽ 1.48,
p ⫽ .14
B ⫽ 1.70, t(141) ⫽ 2.59,
p ⫽ .011

B ⫽ 0.05, t ⬍ 1

Gender ⫻ Major ⫻
Condition

Interactions (social-belonging intervention and control
condition combined)

B ⫽ 0.52, t(143) ⫽ 2.25,
p ⫽ .026

B ⫽ 0.26, t(137) ⫽ 1.46,
p ⫽ .15

Gender ⫻ Major ⫻
Condition

Interactions (affirmation-training intervention and control
condition combined)

Table 5
Effects of Affirmation-Training Intervention on Outcomes Predicted to Yield Effects Only for This Intervention Among Women in Male-Dominated Majors

Note.

Percentage of male engineers
in students’ friendship
groups
Implicit normative
evaluations of female
engineers

Second semester

Affirmation training and
control (0)

Social-belonging intervention (1) vs.

Contrasts among women in male-dominated majors

Table 4
Effects of the Social-Belonging Intervention on Outcomes Predicted to Yield Effects Only for This Intervention Among Women in Male-Dominated Majors

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

482
WALTON, LOGEL, PEACH, SPENCER, AND ZANNA

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

INTERVENTIONS FOR WOMEN’S EXPERIENCE IN ENGINEERING

ships. The present study is limited in its ability to test specific
meditational processes. However, it points to the kinds of psychological and social-relational measures that future studies could
track with larger samples, including perceptions of threat in daily
events and peer and mentor relationships, for instance using sociometric measures. In so doing, it will be exciting to assess both
how changes in the construal of daily events affect developing
relationships and potential recursive processes, such as how a
change in friendship groups or the acquisition of a mentor feeds
back to promote resilience in the face of adversity.
Fourth, an important contribution of the present research was to
demonstrate the moderating role of the school context. Only
women in male-dominated majors had worse outcomes than men,
and only they benefited from the interventions (see also Inzlicht &
Ben-Zeev, 2000; Murphy et al., 2007; Stout et al., 2011; Yoshida
et al., 2012). Although psychological interventions can be brief,
their effects depend on the context (Walton, 2014). If the process
that an intervention targets does not serve as a barrier to achievement for a given group or in a given setting, the intervention will
not affect behavior (Hanselman et al., 2014). In addition, in contexts in which other conditions for learning are not met—such as
when instruction or students’ academic preparation is poor—
interventions that open students up to learning opportunities may
be insufficient. Contexts may also differ in the extent to which they
propagate the benefits of psychological interventions or undermine
their effects. For instance, if the effectiveness of the socialbelonging intervention depends on the potential for students to
become more integrated in a school setting, long-term effects may
depend on the willingness of peers and instructors to develop
positive working relationships with target students. Further exploring these questions will shed light on pressing theoretical questions
and applied issues, including where psychological interventions
will be most effective, where they may be unnecessary, and where
they may need to be paired with other reforms.
The present study also has its limitations; addressing these
points to exciting directions for future research. One is that participating students chose to take part in the study; they were thus
not representative, either of the university they attended or of
STEM students in general. What benefits would we see in broader
and more representative samples? A second limitation involves the
small sample. Can we develop effective ways to deliver socialpsychological interventions to larger samples, for instance, in
collaboration with STEM educators (Aguilar et al., 2014; Yeager
& Walton, 2011) or online (Paunesku et al., 2014; Yeager et al.,
2014)? Larger samples would further test intervention effects and
address important questions of moderation and mediation. It would
also test whether these interventions can be a practical solution for
education reform—that is, when delivered in ways that would be
practical en masse.
At a time when it is essential to promote women’s achievement
in STEM, the results highlight the importance of addressing feelings of social marginalization. Yet in a very real sense, the interventions tested here are “second-choice” interventions. They help
women navigate a difficult environment— one in which their
group is grossly underrepresented and subject to stigma and negative stereotypes. Although these interventions were successful, it
would be far better, if possible, to improve STEM settings themselves—to reduce sexism (Logel et al., 2009), to remove cues that
convey a strongly masculine representation of STEM fields

483

(Cheryan et al., 2009; Murphy et al., 2007; Ramsey, Betz, &
Sekaquaptewa, 2013; see also Purdie-Vaughns, Steele, Davies,
Ditlmann, & Crosby, 2008), and to increase the representation of
women. Consistent with the concept of critical mass (Etzkowitz,
Kemelgor, Neuschatz, Uzzi, & Alonzo, 1994), a community of
women may reduce social marginalization and the need for specific intervention. Efforts to increase the representation of women
in STEM thus go hand-in-hand with efforts to help women function well in male-dominated STEM settings as means to promote
gender equality.

References
Aguilar, L., Walton, G., & Wieman, C. (2014). Psychological insights for
improved physics teaching. Physics Today, 67, 43– 49. doi:10.1063/PT
.3.2383
Appel, M., & Kronberger, N. (2012). Stereotypes and the achievement gap:
Stereotype threat prior to test taking. Educational Psychology Review,
24, 609 – 635. doi:10.1007/s10648-012-9200-4
Arkes, H. R., & Tetlock, P. E. (2004). Attributions of implicit prejudice, or
“Would Jesse Jackson ‘fail’ the Implicit Association Test?” Psychological Inquiry, 15, 257–278. doi:10.1207/s15327965pli1504_01
Bowen, N. K., Wegmann, K. M., & Webber, K. C. (2013). Enhancing a
brief writing intervention to combat stereotype threat among middleschool students. Journal of Educational Psychology, 105, 427– 435.
doi:10.1037/a0031177
Carrigan, C., Quinn, K., & Riskin, E. A. (2011). The gendered division of
labor among STEM faculty and the effects of critical mass. Journal of
Diversity in Higher Education, 4, 131–146. doi:10.1037/a0021831
Cheryan, S., Plaut, V. C., Davies, P., & Steele, C. M. (2009). Ambient
belonging: How stereotypical environments impact gender participation
in computer science. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 97,
1045–1060. doi:10.1037/a0016239
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Apfel, N., & Brzustoski, P.
(2009, April 17). Recursive processes in self-affirmation: Intervening to
close the minority achievement gap. Science, 324, 400 – 403. doi:
10.1126/science.1170769
Cohen, G. L., & Garcia, J. (2005). “I am us”: Negative stereotypes as
collective threats. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89,
566 –582. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.89.4.566
Cohen, G. L., & Sherman, D. K. (2014). The psychology of change:
Self-affirmation and social psychological intervention. Annual Review of
Psychology, 65, 333–371. doi:10.1146/annurev-psych-010213-115137
Conway, M., & Ross, M. (1984). Getting what you want by revising what
you had. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 47, 738 –748.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.47.4.738
Dal Cin, S., MacDonald, T. K., Fong, G. T., Zanna, M. P., & EltonMarshall, T. E. (2006). Remembering the message: The use of a reminder cue to increase condom use following a safer sex intervention.
Health Psychology, 25, 438 – 443. doi:10.1037/0278-6133.25.3.438
Etzkowitz, H., Kemelgor, C., Neuschatz, M., Uzzi, B., & Alonzo, J. (1994,
October 7). The paradox of critical mass for women in science. Science,
266, 51–54. doi:10.1126/science.7939644
Flam, F. (1991, June 21). Still a “chilly climate” for women? Science, 252,
1604 –1606. doi:10.1126/science.252.5013.1604
Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (2012). A social psychological approach to
educational intervention. In E. Shafir (Ed.), Behavioral foundations of
policy (pp. 329 –350). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Good, C., Aronson, J., & Inzlicht, M. (2003). Improving adolescents’
standardized test performance: An intervention to reduce the effects of
stereotype threat. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 24,
645– 662. doi:10.1016/j.appdev.2003.09.002
Good, C., Rattan, A., & Dweck, C. S. (2012). Why do women opt out?
Sense of belonging and women’s representation in mathematics. Journal

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

484

WALTON, LOGEL, PEACH, SPENCER, AND ZANNA

of Personality and Social Psychology, 102, 700 –717. doi:10.1037/
a0026659
Greenwald, A. G., Poehlman, T. A., Uhlmann, E. L., & Banaji, M. R.
(2009). Understanding and using the Implicit Association Test: III.
Meta-analysis of predictive validity. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 97, 17– 41. doi:10.1037/a0015575
Hanselman, P., Bruch, S. K., Gamoran, A., & Borman, G. D. (2014).
Threat in context: School moderation of the impact of social identity
threat on racial/ethnic achievement gaps. Sociology of Education, 87,
106 –124. doi:10.1177/0038040714525970
Harackiewicz, J. M., Canning, E. A., Tibbetts, Y., Giffen, C. J., Blair, S. S.,
Rouse, D. I., & Hyde, J. S. (2014). Closing the social class achievement
gap for first-generation students in undergraduate biology. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 106, 375–389. doi:10.1037/a0034679
Harackiewicz, J. M., Rozek, C. S., Hulleman, C. S., & Hyde, J. S. (2012).
Helping parents to motivate adolescents in mathematics and science: An
experimental test of a utility-value intervention. Psychological Science,
23, 899 –906. doi:10.1177/0956797611435530
Hoshino-Browne, E., Zanna, A. S., Spencer, S. J., Zanna, M. P., Kitayama,
S., & Lackenbauer, S. (2005). On the cultural guises of cognitive
dissonance: The case of Easterners and Westerners. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89, 294 –310. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.89.3
.294
Hulleman, C. S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2009, December 4). Promoting
interest and performance in high school science classes. Science, 326,
1410 –1412. doi:10.1126/science.1177067
Hyde, J. S., & Mertz, J. E. (2009). Gender, culture, and mathematics
performance. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 106, 8801– 8807. doi:10.1073/pnas
.0901265106
Inzlicht, M., & Ben-Zeev, T. (2000). A threatening intellectual environment: Why females are susceptible to experiencing problem-solving
deficits in the presence of males. Psychological Science, 11, 365–371.
doi:10.1111/1467-9280.00272
Jamieson, J. P., Mendes, W. B., Blackstock, E., & Schmader, T. (2010).
Turning the knots in your stomach into bows: Reappraising arousal
improves performance on the GRE. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 46, 208 –212. doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2009.08.015
Johns, M., Inzlicht, M., & Schmader, T. (2008). Stereotype threat and
executive resource depletion: Examining the influence of emotion regulation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 137, 691–705.
doi:10.1037/a0013834
Kernis, M. H. (2005). Measuring self-esteem in context: The importance of
stability of self-esteem in psychological functioning. Journal of Personality, 73, 1569 –1605. doi:10.1111/j.1467-6494.2005.00359.x
Logel, C., Walton, G. M., Spencer, S. J., Iserman, E. C., von Hippel, W.,
& Bell, A. (2009). Interacting with sexist men triggers social identity
threat among female engineers. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96, 1089 –1103. doi:10.1037/a0015703
Lott, J. L., Gardner, S. K., & Powers, D. A. (2009 –2010). Doctoral student
attrition in the STEM fields: An exploratory event history analysis.
Journal of College Student Retention: Research, Theory, & Practice, 11,
247–266.
MacKinnon, D. P., Lockwood, C. M., Hoffman, J. M., West, S. G., &
Sheets, V. (2002). A comparison of methods to test mediation and other
intervening variable effects. Psychological Methods, 7, 83–104.
Markus, H., & Nurius, P. (1987). Possible selves: The interface between
motivation and the self-concept. In K. Yardley & T. Honess (Eds.), Self
and identity: Psychosocial perspectives (pp. 157–172). New York, NY:
Wiley.
McFarland, C., & Ross, M. (1982). Impact of causal attributions on
affective reactions to success and failure. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 43, 937–946. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.43.5.937

Miyake, A., Smith-Kost, L. E., Finkelstein, N. D., Pollock, S. J., Cohen,
G. L., & Ito, T. A. (2010, November 26). Reducing the gender achievement gap in college science: A classroom study of values affirmation.
Science, 330, 1234 –1237. doi:10.1126/science.1195996
Moss-Racusin, C. A., Dovidio, J. F., Brescoll, V. L., Graham, M., &
Handelsman, J. (2012). Science faculty’s subtle gender biases favor male
students. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, 109, 16474 –16479.
Murphy, M. C., Steele, C. M., & Gross, J. J. (2007). Signaling threat: How
situational cues affect women in math, science, and engineering settings.
Psychological Science, 18, 879 – 885. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007
.01995.x
National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, and
Institute of Medicine of the National Academies. (2007). Rising above
the gathering storm: Energizing and employing America for a brighter
economic future. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
National Science Foundation, National Center for Science and Engineering
Statistics. (2013). Women, minorities, and persons with disabilities in
science and engineering: 2013 [Special Report NSF 13–304]. Arlington,
VA: Author. Retrieved from http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/wmpd/
Nosek, B. A., Banaji, M. R., & Greenwald, A. G. (2002). Math ⫽ male,
me ⫽ female, therefore math ⫽ me. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 83, 44 –59. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.83.1.44
Nosek, B. A., & Smyth, F. L. (2011). Implicit social cognitions predict sex
differences in math engagement and achievement. American Educational Research Journal, 48, 1125–1156. doi:10.3102/
0002831211410683
Oyserman, D., Brickman, D., Bybee, D., & Celious, A. (2006). Fitting in
matters: Markers of in-group belonging and academic outcomes. Psychological Science, 17, 854 – 861. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2006
.01794.x
Paunesku, D., Walton, G. M., Romero, C. L., Smith, E. N., Yeager, D. S.,
& Dweck, C. S. (2014). Mindset interventions are a scalable treatment
for academic underperformance. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Peach, J. M., Yoshida, E., Spencer, S. J., Zanna, M. P., & Steele, J. R.
(2011). Recognizing discrimination explicitly while denying it implicitly: Implicit social identity protection. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 47, 283–292. doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2010.09.007
Pronin, E., Steele, C. M., & Ross, L. (2004). Identity bifurcation in
response to stereotype threat: Women and mathematics. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 40, 152–168. doi:10.1016/S00221031(03)00088-X
Purdie-Vaughns, V., Steele, C. M., Davies, P. G., Ditlmann, R., & Crosby,
J. R. (2008). Social identity contingencies: How diversity cues signal
threat or safety for African Americans in mainstream institutions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 94, 615– 630. doi:10.1037/
0022-3514.94.4.615
Ramsey, L. R., Betz, D. E., & Sekaquaptewa, D. (2013). The effects of an
academic environment intervention on science identification among
women in STEM. Social Psychology of Education, 16, 377–397. doi:
10.1007/s11218-013-9218-6
Shapiro, C. A., & Sax, L. J. (2011). Major selection and persistence for
women in STEM [Special issue]. New Directions for Institutional Research, 2011, 5–18. doi:10.1002/ir.404
Sherman, D. K., & Cohen, G. L. (2006). The psychology of self-defense:
Self-affirmation theory. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental
social psychology (Vol. 38, pp. 183–242). San Diego, CA: Academic
Press.
Sherman, D. K., & Hartson, K. A. (2011). Reconciling self-defense with
self-criticism: Self-affirmation theory. In M. D. Alicke & C. Sedikides
(Eds.), Handbook of self-enhancement and self-protection (pp. 128 –
151). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Sherman, D. K., Hartson, K. A., Binning, K. R., Purdie-Vaughns, V.,
Garcia, J., Taborsky-Barba, S., . . . Cohen, G. L. (2013). Deflecting the

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

INTERVENTIONS FOR WOMEN’S EXPERIENCE IN ENGINEERING
trajectory and changing the narrative: How self-affirmation affects academic performance and motivation under identity threat. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 104, 591– 618. doi:10.1037/
a0031495
Shook, N., & Clay, R. (2012). Interracial roommate relationships: A
mechanism for promoting a sense of belonging at university and academic performance. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48,
1168 –1172. doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2012.05.005
Smeding, A. (2012). Women in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM): An investigation of their implicit gender stereotypes and stereotypes’ connectedness to math performance. Sex Roles,
67, 617– 629. doi:10.1007/s11199-012-0209-4
Smeding, A., Dumas, F., Loose, F., & Régner, I. (2013). Order of administration of math and verbal tests: An ecological intervention to reduce
stereotype threat on girls’ math performance. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 105, 850 – 860. doi:10.1037/a0032094
Steele, C. M., Spencer, S. J., & Aronson, J. (2002). Contending with group
image: The psychology of stereotype and social identity threat. In M. P.
Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 34, pp.
379 – 440). San Diego, CA: Elsevier Science.
Stinson, D. A., Logel, C., Zanna, M. P., Holmes, J. G., Cameron, J. J.,
Wood, J. V., & Spencer, S. J. (2008). The cost of lower self-esteem:
Testing a self- and social-bonds model of health. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 94, 412– 428. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.94.3.412
Stout, J. G., Dasgupta, N., Hunsinger, M., & McManus, M. A. (2011).
STEMing the tide: Using ingroup experts to inoculate women’s selfconcept in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM).
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 100, 255–270. doi:
10.1037/a0021385
The College Board. (2013). 2013 college-bound seniors: Total group
profile report. Retrieved from http://media.collegeboard.com/digital
Services/pdf/research/2013/TotalGroup-2013.pdf.
Thoman, D. B., Smith, J. L., Brown, E. R., Chase, J., & Lee, J. Y. K.
(2013). Beyond performance: A motivational experiences model of
stereotype threat. Educational Psychology Review, 25, 211–243. doi:
10.1007/s10648-013-9219-1
Times Higher Education. (2013). World university rankings, 2013–2014.
Retrieved from http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/world-univers
ity-rankings/2013-14/subject-ranking/subject/engineering-and-IT/order/
rank%7Casc.
Walton, G. M. (2014). The new science of wise psychological interventions. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 23, 73– 82. doi:
10.1177/0963721413512856

485

Walton, G. M., & Carr, P. B. (2012). Social belonging and the motivation
and intellectual achievement of negatively stereotyped students. In M.
Inzlicht & T. Schmader (Eds.), Stereotype threat: Theory, processes, and
application (pp. 89 –106). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2007). A question of belonging: Race,
social fit, and achievement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 82–96. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.92.1.82
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011, March 18). A brief social-belonging
intervention improves academic and health outcomes of minority students. Science, 331, 1447–1451. doi:10.1126/science.1198364
Walton, G. M., Paunesku, D., & Dweck, C. S. (2012). Expandable selves.
In M. R. Leary & J. P. Tangney (Eds.), Handbook of self and identity
(pp. 141–154). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Walton, G. M., & Spencer, S. J. (2009). Latent ability: Grades and test
scores systematically underestimate the intellectual ability of negatively
stereotyped students. Psychological Science, 20, 1132–1139. doi:
10.1111/j.1467-9280.2009.02417.x
Walton, G. M., Spencer, S. J., & Erman, S. (2013). Affirmative meritocracy. Social Issues and Policy Review, 7, 1–35. doi:10.1111/j.1751-2409
.2012.01041.x
Wilson, T. D., Damiani, M., & Shelton, N. (2002). Improving the academic
performance of college students with brief attributional interventions. In
J. Aronson (Ed.), Improving academic achievement: Impact of psychological factors on education (pp. 89 –108). Oxford, England: Academic
Press. doi:10.1016/B978-012064455-1/50008-7
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological interventions
in education: They’re not magic. Review of Educational Research, 81,
267–301. doi:10.3102/0034654311405999
Yeager, D. S., Walton, G. M., Brady, S. T., Akcinar, E. N., Paunesku, D.,
Keane, L., . . . Dweck, C. S. (2014). Brief pre-matriculation messages
can reduce postsecondary inequality at institutional scale. Manuscript
submitted for publication.
Yoshida, E., Peach, J. M., Zanna, M. P., & Spencer, S. J. (2012). Not all
automatic associations are created equal: How implicit normative evaluations are distinct from attitudes and uniquely predict meaningful
behavior. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48, 694 –706.
doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2011.09.013

Received October 24, 2013
Revision received May 19, 2014
Accepted May 21, 2014 䡲

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

ANNUAL
REVIEWS

Further

Click here for quick links to
Annual Reviews content online,
including:
• Other articles in this volume
• Top cited articles
• Top downloaded articles
• Our comprehensive search

Stereotype Threat in
Organizations: Implications
for Equity and Performance
Gregory M. Walton,1, Mary C. Murphy,2, and
Ann Marie Ryan3,
1

Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305;
email: gwalton@stanford.edu

2

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, Bloomington,
Indiana 47405

3

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.
2:523–50
First published online as a Review in Advance on
January 30, 2015
The Annual Review of Organizational Psychology
and Organizational Behavior is online at
orgpsych.annualreviews.org
This article’s doi:
10.1146/annurev-orgpsych-032414-111322
Copyright © 2015 by Annual Reviews.
All rights reserved


All three authors contributed equally to this work.

Department of Psychology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824

Keywords
stereotype threat, gender, race, performance

Abstract
Over the past 20 years, a large body of laboratory and field research
has shown that, when people perform in settings in which their group
is negatively stereotyped, they may experience a phenomenon called
stereotype threat that can undermine motivation and trust and cause
underperformance. This review describes that research and places it
into an organizational context. First, we describe the processes by
which stereotype threat can impair outcomes among people in the
workplace. Next, we delineate the situational cues in organizational
settings that can exacerbate stereotype threat, and explain how and
why these cues affect stereotyped individuals. Finally, we discuss relatively simple empirically based strategies that organizations can implement to reduce stereotype threat and create conditions in which
employees and applicants from all groups can succeed.

523

INTRODUCTION

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Stereotype threat is a situational phenomenon that arises when people face the prospect of being
viewed or evaluated in light of a negative stereotype about a group they belong to (Steele &
Aronson 1995). When a woman performs in a technology setting, for instance, she may know that,
if she performs poorly, other people could view her performance as confirming a negative stereotype about women and technology. This prospect is psychologically threatening. A significant
body of research demonstrates that, under certain boundary conditions—especially when the
person believes that his or her ability is being evaluated and when he or she is “identified with”
(i.e., cares about) the domain of evaluation (Steele 1997, 2010)—stereotype threat can cause
people to perform less well than they are capable of performing (Inzlicht & Schmader 2012,
Walton & Spencer 2009).
The situational nature of stereotype threat means that anyone can experience stereotype threat
if a group they belong to faces a negative stereotype in the situation at hand. It is not an experience
restricted to members of minority or chronically low-status groups. In the workplace, stereotype
threat can occur in the context of (a) preemployment assessments of constructs associated with
group differences in performance, such as women taking math, science, or technology tests; ethnic
minorities taking cognitive ability tests; older workers applying for jobs in innovative, fast-paced
organizations (e.g., technology); and White men in math contexts where Asians are stereotyped as
superior; (b) performance evaluations for promotion, salary raises, and other decisions, such as when
women are considered for senior leadership positions in male-dominated fields; and (c) everyday
workplace exchanges, such as when minority-group members share ideas at a team meeting. Because
evaluative contexts are ubiquitous in the workplace and because individuals’ livelihoods and often
their self-concepts are inextricably affected by being valued and respected in the workplace (Kray &
Shirako 2012), the potential for stereotype threat effects in work contexts is great.
Before reviewing evidence about stereotype threat in the workplace and potential remedies for
it, we review the basic tenets of stereotype threat theory and key findings in other contexts. Our
review focuses on stereotype threat as well as social identity threat more broadly. The former refers
to the worry that one could confirm or be seen as confirming a negative stereotype about his or her
group (Steele 1997, 2010). The latter refers to broader situational cues that signal that one’s
identity may be devalued in a setting (Murphy & Taylor 2012, Purdie-Vaughns et al. 2008,
Steele et al. 2002).

What Affects Whether and When Stereotype Threat Will Occur?
In general, stereotype threat occurs when a negative stereotype about a group one belongs to exists
in a context or setting and when cues elicit or fail to remove this threat. Basic theory put forth by
Steele (1997, 2010) highlights the conditions that create the risk of stereotype threat: (a) A
consistent stereotype exists that group members are aware of (e.g., that alleges that women are bad
at math), (b) a task one is engaged in is viewed as diagnostic or evaluative of the skill or ability that
is negatively stereotyped (e.g., of math ability), (c) the task is difficult (“at the frontier of one’s
skills,” p. 108; Steele 2010), and (d) the individual cares about performing well and identifies with
the stereotyped group to some extent. These factors, which may vary in degrees of magnitude, help
determine whether stereotype threat arises in a given context.
In workplace contexts, these conditions are often, although not always, present, as many work
tasks and interactions contain some level of evaluation and individuals in general care about being
seen as competent and effective workers (Roberson & Kulik 2007, Ryan & Sackett 2013). Perhaps
the one boundary condition that sometimes goes unmet in the workplace is that of task difficulty. If

524

Walton



Murphy



Ryan

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

individuals perform familiar and routine work or are placed in jobs that contain little challenge,
stereotype threat may be less likely to affect their performance. However, many jobs in today’s
workplace not only involve challenging tasks but have demands related to the rapidly changing
environment, which makes work less likely to be routine or easy (Roberson & Kulik 2007).
When people enter settings in which a group to which they belong faces a negative stereotype,
they tend to be vigilant for cues indicating that others may view them through the lens of a negative
stereotype (see Garcia & Cohen 2012). This vigilance does not necessarily translate into stereotype
threat. It rather sensitizes people to cues about whether their identity is at risk. If cues effectively
take the stereotype off the table, conveying a sense of identity safety, people may not experience
threat (Steele & Cohn-Vargas 2013). But as we describe below, many common cues in workplace
contexts can signal to people that they could be evaluated negatively or marginalized because of
a group they belong to. Exposure to these identity contingency cues makes stereotype threat
more likely.

Who Experiences Stereotype Threat?
As noted above, stereotype threat is a general phenomenon; it is not simply a consequence of low
social status but rather an experience that can be felt by anyone in a circumstance in which a group
the person belongs to faces a negative stereotype. Thus, although past stereotype threat research
has focused primarily on women in math, science, and engineering settings and on African
American and Hispanic students in academics generally, researchers have also shown that stereotype threat can arise in other contexts. For example, it can undermine memory performance
among the elderly (Hess et al. 2003), verbal test performance among people from low social-class
backgrounds (Croizet & Claire 1998), the quality of gay men’s interactions with preschool-aged
children (Bosson et al. 2004), and the performance of White men on a math test said to assess why
Asians are so good at math (Aronson et al. 1999). It has even been shown to weaken the golf
performance of Whites on a putt-putt task said to assess “natural athletic ability” and that of
Blacks on the same task when it was said to assess “sports intelligence” (Stone et al. 1999).
In diverse work settings, then, employees with specific group identities, including racial-ethnic
and gender identities as well as other identities (e.g., nationality; language; work status, such as
expatriate, temporary work visa, or permanent resident; religion) may experience stereotype
threat if a particular identity of theirs is associated with a negative stereotype in that environment.
Further exploring how different groups experience stereotype threat in diverse work settings is an
important direction for future research.

What Processes Underlie Stereotype Threat?
Summarizing dozens of laboratory experiments conducted by researchers around the world,
Schmader & Beilock (2012; see also Schmader et al. 2008) describe a model by which stereotype
threat triggers a network of affective and cognitive processes to undermine performance on
challenging cognitive and social tasks. The model highlights both the physiological stress that
results from stereotype threat and a process by which people closely monitor their task performance. In this process, people experience a cycle—perhaps better termed a cyclone—of negative
thoughts, emotions, and appraisal processes (e.g., if I do poorly, will they think people like me can’t
do this; I’ll show them we can do it; am I doing well enough?). To focus on the task at hand, people
try to suppress this monitoring process and emotional response. This suppression itself, however,
takes up needed working-memory resources and undermines executive functioning, which ultimately weakens performance on challenging tasks.
www.annualreviews.org



Stereotype Threat in Organizations

525

What Are the Effects of Stereotype Threat?

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

The primary consequence of stereotype threat investigated in the literature is underperformance
on diverse challenging tasks, including on tests adapted from standardized tests (e.g., GRE,
GMAT, and SAT), intelligence tests, subject-specific tests (e.g., engineering tests), memory tests,
emotional-sensitivity tests, and physical (e.g., athletic) tasks (for reviews, see Steele 2010, Steele
et al. 2002). More than 400 studies have found that stereotype threat can cause people to
underperform relative to their ability; correspondingly, cues that remove stereotype threat can
cause members of stereotyped groups to perform better, often significantly so (e.g., Spencer et al.
1999, Steele & Aronson 1995). How large is the stereotype threat effect? Four meta-analyses
suggest that, on average, it is moderate in size. First, in the context of examining other questions
within portions of the literature, two meta-analyses estimated the stereotype threat effect as approximately one-half of a standard deviation (g ¼ 0.45 and 0.64 with 28 and 39 studies; Walton &
Cohen 2003 and Walton & Spencer 2009, respectively). A larger meta-analysis (116 studies)
found an effect size of d ¼ 0.26 (Nguyen & Ryan 2008). (Hedge’s g and Cohen’s d are different
effect-size indicators, but they are highly correlated.) A fourth meta-analysis of 259 experiments
again found a one-half-standard-deviation effect (g ¼ 0.54) (V.J. Taylor & G.M. Walton, unpublished manuscript). This effect is relatively robust across the wide range of populations and
contexts represented in the literature; however, the relative effect of stereotype threat as compared
to other factors will vary in different settings. Regardless of its specific magnitude, this range of
effect-size estimates suggests that stereotype threat can have a significant impact in the lives and
outcomes of individuals and the organizations in which they work.
In addition to task performance, stereotype threat can affect other outcomes of importance in
organizational contexts. When people attempt to learn in stereotype threat circumstances, they
tend to learn less effectively and efficiently (Grand 2012, Rydell et al. 2010, Taylor & Walton
2011). Other behaviors affected by stereotype threat include how people seek out and respond to
feedback (Cohen et al. 1999, Roberson et al. 2003), negotiate (e.g., Kray et al. 2001), and interact
with others (Goff et al. 2008, Richeson & Shelton 2012).
In the original theoretical description of stereotype threat, Steele (1997) hypothesized that, in
addition to task underperformance, repeated exposure to stereotype threat can lead to disidentification and disengagement over time (for related evidence, see Woodcock et al. 2012). In the
workplace, this could include outcomes such as job dissatisfaction, a lack of organizational
commitment, absenteeism, less engagement in organizational citizenship behaviors, counterproductive behavior, and turnover.

What Is the Evidence for Stereotype Threat Effects in the Workplace?
Although research on the effects of stereotype threat on performance are well established in the
laboratory and in educational contexts (Massey & Fischer 2005, Nguyen & Ryan 2008, Walton &
Spencer 2009), they have been investigated to a lesser extent in employment-testing contexts (see
Sackett & Ryan 2012 for a review). Given the sizeable body of research on group differences in
employment testing (Hough et al. 2001), the role of stereotype threat as a contributing factor to
such differences has been a subject of considerable speculation but relatively little direct empirical
investigation in actual hiring contexts (see Chung et al. 2010; Kirnan et al. 2009 for exceptions).
Interestingly, stereotype threat has also been relatively unexplored in actual employee performance
evaluation contexts, although evidence of ethnic-group differences in performance ratings provides a rationale for investigating stereotype threat as a possible contributor (see Roberson et al.
2007 for a review on bias in performance appraisal). As we describe below, there is a considerable

526

Walton



Murphy



Ryan

body of evidence regarding cues in the workplace that signal identity threat, so, despite a lack of
direct evidence testing the contribution of stereotype threat to underperformance in job contexts,
the likelihood of such effects is high.

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Antecedents of Threat in the Workplace: Identity Contingency Cues
Stereotype threat and social identity threat heighten vigilance to situational cues in the local environment as members of stereotyped groups seek information about whether their group is
valued and accepted there (Garcia & Cohen 2012, Murphy & Taylor 2012, Murphy et al. 2007,
Steele et al. 2002) (see Table 1). Some situational cues—like the numeric underrepresentation of
a negatively stereotyped group—evoke identity threat by suggesting that one’s group membership
may be a source of stigma or marginalization. Environments that contain cues like these are
considered identity threatening (Cohen & Garcia 2008, Murphy et al. 2007). Notably, such cues
can cause threat even in settings in which people are generally nonprejudiced and well intentioned
(Murphy & Walton 2013), as cues can have negative meanings even when such meanings are not
intended. Other cues, by contrast, signal identity safety by suggesting that group membership is not
a barrier to inclusion or success. These identity safety cues suggest to individuals that their social
group is welcomed and respected and not a barrier to advancement (Davies et al. 2005, Singh et al.
2013, Steele & Cohn-Vargas 2013). In the organizational literature, positive climates for diversity
or inclusive workplace climates (Herdman & McMillan-Capehart 2010, McKay et al. 2007)
would be considered identity safe. In these settings, people who face negative stereotypes may be
able to relax their psychological and physiological vigilance and perform without the impediment
of identity threat (Cohen & Garcia 2008, Murphy et al. 2007).
Research and theory on identity contingency cues draw directly on a basic lesson of social
psychology: the importance of subjective construal. As Ross & Nisbett (1991, p. 12) write, “The
impact of any ‘objective’ stimulus situation depends upon the personal and subjective meaning that
the actor attaches to that situation. To predict the behavior of a given person successfully, we must
be able to appreciate the actor’s construal of the situation—that is, the manner in which the person
understands the situation as a whole.” As with all social-information processing and all objects of
judgment, identity contingency cues gain meaning in part from the perspective from which they are
viewed. For members of stereotyped groups, this perspective includes the risk of devaluation in
a setting as a consequence of a widely known stereotype. Women know that in math contexts
people could judge their gender group negatively should they perform poorly; as a result, evaluative math tasks can be threatening for women. Men do not face this risk, so they do not experience the same threat (Spencer et al. 1999). When an African American person receives critical
feedback on his work, he faces the possibility that this feedback could result from bias or reflect
a stereotypical judgment; a White person does not face this possibility, so the event, even if
negative, does not have the same identity-threatening meaning for him (Cohen et al. 1999).
Because the meaning of cues depends on the vantage point of perceivers, cues that seem insignificant to a majority-group person can nonetheless have strong meanings and large effects if
they tap into the concerns of people who face the possibility of group-based devaluation (e.g.,
Cheryan et al. 2009, Walton & Cohen 2007). Consider a recent reflection from Michelle Obama
about her experience entering college:
When I first arrived at school as a first-generation college student, I didn’t know anyone on campus
except my brother. I didn’t know how to pick the right classes or find the right buildings. I didn’t even
bring the right size sheets for my dorm room bed. I didn’t realize those beds were so long. So I was
a little overwhelmed and a little isolated. (Obama & Obama 2014)

www.annualreviews.org



Stereotype Threat in Organizations

527

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Table 1 Identity contingency cues
Identity-threatening

Psychological concern

situational cue

engendered by the cue

Outcomes examined

Numeric
underrepresentation

Will I represent my group well?
Will I be able to disprove
negative stereotypes?

Motivation, executive
functioning,
physiological
responding, belonging,
performance

Cultivate critical mass throughout
the organization’s ranks; provide
same-group mentors and
sponsors.

Interpersonal cues,
including incivility and
negative nonverbal
behavior and treatment

Am I respected and valued in this
organization?

Motivation, belonging,
performance

Develop clear and consistent
policies and consequences of this
behavior.

Critical feedback

Is the supervisor biased and
applying stereotypes to me?

Motivation, belonging,
performance

Explicitly convey that critical
feedback reflects the
organization’s high standards
coupled with a statement
expressing confidence that, with
revision, the employee can meet
this standard.

Color-blind diversity
statements and policies

Does the organization value me
and my group’s cultural
background and respect ways
we may be different?

Belonging, performance

Value diversity; use all-inclusive
multicultural statements and
policies.

Fixed-ability beliefs and
messages

Does the organization believe I
(and my group) have (has) what
it takes to be successful?

Motivation, belonging,
performance

Encourage growth-mindset beliefs
and messages.

Ambient cues, including
stereotypical objects and
depictions in the physical
environment

Do I (and my group) belong here?
Am I (are we) valued by the
organization?

Motivation, belonging,
performance

Incorporate diverse, inclusive
images and nonstereotypical
objects in the physical
environment.

Ambiguous hiring and
promotion practices and
procedures

Will this company discriminate
against me? Will my group
membership impede my
progress in the organization?

Interest, motivation,
belonging

Provide clear, unambiguous
guidelines for hiring and
promotion.

Selection tests

Are these tests fair to me and my
group?

Motivation,
performance

Place identity questions (e.g., race,
gender) at the end of the test;
represent such tests in ways that
assure test takers that their
performance will not be viewed as
evidence for a negative group
stereotype; conduct itemsensitivity analysis and remove
problematic items.

Ways to mitigate threat

It is striking that three decades later, after enormous personal success, the First Lady still
remembers the feeling of isolation she experienced when she found that her sheets did not fit her
college dorm room bed. Would misfitting sheets have carried the same meaning to a continuing528

Walton



Murphy



Ryan

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

generation, majority group student? Presumably not. When people enter settings that feel foreign,
places where they might be judged or treated negatively or where they might not belong, they can be
highly attentive to even subtle cues relevant to these concerns. A primary goal of research on
stereotype and social identity threat is to map the subjective construals that common events in school
and work contexts hold for members of stereotyped groups. Understanding these construals informs
ways to structure environments so as to mitigate people’s experience of threat and improve outcomes.
When people feel threatened in a setting, a host of problematic psychological and performance
outcomes follow: They may conclude that they do not belong or fit there (e.g., Cheryan et al. 2009,
Walton & Cohen 2007) or feel less trust and motivation and greater anxiety (e.g., Bosson et al.
2004, Emerson & Murphy 2015, Johns et al. 2008), and their executive functioning—critical for
optimal performance—can be impaired (e.g., Beilock et al. 2007, Johns et al. 2008, Schmader &
Johns 2003). In the workplace, experiences of identity threat produce gender and racial disparities
in job and career aspirations (e.g., Cheryan et al. 2009, Correll 2004, Davies et al. 2005,
Greenhaus et al. 1990, Niemann & Dovidio 1998). Employees who report greater levels of identity
threat are perceived by supervisors as poor performers and as less suitable for promotion; they also
show higher levels of turnover and absenteeism (Avery et al. 2007, Browne 1999, Greenhaus et al.
1990, Ilgen & Youtz 1986, James 2000, Kanter 1979, Landau 1995).
Given the importance of these outcomes, it is essential to understand how cues give rise to
identity threat in workplace settings.

THREATENING CUES IN WORKPLACE SETTINGS
This section reviews the kinds of situational cues that can trigger identity threat. These include cues
in the physical environment, such as numeric underrepresentation; interpersonal cues, such as
incivility and critical feedback; and organizational policies and practices that signal the value the
organization places on diversity, such as in diversity messages, and how the organization views
intelligence and effort, such as in recruitment materials and hiring and promotion practices. The
vast majority of this research is experimental; it randomly exposes a group of students to either one
cue or another and assesses the causal effects.
As noted above, many identity contingency cues can be subtle—they need not overtly impugn
the competence of stereotyped-group members or reflect bias or animus. Suppose a White supervisor provides substantive critical feedback to a Black employee with the best of intentions—
say, to help the employee improve and become eligible for a promotion. Yet to the employee,
unvarnished criticism could seem threatening—it could seem an indication that the supervisor
views him or her as incapable of improvement. If, as a consequence, the employee responds poorly
to the feedback, this may surprise and disappoint the supervisor. In some cases, the very subtlety
and ambiguity of potentially threatening cues can make them especially taxing for people from
stereotyped groups. Because subtle cues are harder to decipher than overt expressions of animus or
bias, they require more cognitive labor to make sense of and can thus be more cognitively disruptive for recipients (Salvatore & Shelton 2007).

Cues in the Physical Environment
Both numerical underrepresentation and ambient cues in the physical environment signal to stereotyped individuals whether their identity is valued by an organization. Here, we describe research that demonstrates the effects of these cues on people’s experiences of identity threat,
motivation, physiology, and performance.

www.annualreviews.org



Stereotype Threat in Organizations

529

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Underrepresentation. A primary trigger of identity threat is when stereotyped-group members
lack critical mass in a setting. Critical mass refers to “the point at which there are enough minorities
in a setting, like a school or workplace, that individual minorities no longer feel uncomfortable
there because they are minorities” (Steele 2010, p. 135; see also Avery 2003, Cohen & Swim 1995,
Duguid 2011, Ely 1995, Inzlicht & Ben-Zeev 2000, Kanter 1979, Niemann & Dovidio 1998,
Roberson et al. 2003, Sekaquaptewa & Thompson 2002, Stoker et al. 2012). Underrepresentation
can cause a host of negative psychological, motivational, and physiological outcomes. In one
study, science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) college students watched one of two
videos for a summer science conference (Murphy et al. 2007). In one video, the gender representation of conference attendees reflected the ratio typically found in STEM disciplines—
approximately three men to every woman. In the other video, gender representation was balanced
(1:1). The results of the study revealed that women’s outcomes were significantly influenced by the
representation, whereas men’s were not. In response to the gender-unbalanced video, women
reported feeling as though they would belong less at the conference, expressed less interest in
attending the conference, and showed a physiological stress response characterized by increased
cardiovascular reactivity (Murphy et al. 2007). Other studies have further illuminated the harmful
effects of performing in settings in which one’s group is underrepresented. These include higher
blood pressure, anxiety, and depression (e.g., Blascovich et al. 2001, Jackson et al. 1995, Murphy
et al. 2007, Osborne 2006). Underrepresentation also leads stereotyped-group members to discount critical feedback (Roberson et al. 2003), to expect to perform worse (Stangor et al. 1998),
and to actually perform worse (e.g., Inzlicht & Ben-Zeev 2000). Finally, it undermines people’s
trust and commitment to their organizations (Purdie-Vaughns et al. 2008).
One of the main problems with underrepresentation in organizations—both at peer and supervisor levels—is that it creates ambiguity that risks negative interpretation and construal. Why
are there few employees like me here? Why are there few supervisors from my group? Does this
mean that people like me cannot advance? Another problem stemming from underrepresentation
is that it places undue, disproportionate pressure on individuals to disprove stereotypes and
positively “represent” their group (Saenz & Lord 1989, Sekaquaptewa & Thompson 2003). Although individuals may try to cope with identity threat by behaving counter-stereotypically, research
reveals that perceivers often attribute both stereotype-consistent and -inconsistent behaviors to
factors that ultimately confirm and maintain group-based stereotypes (Sekaquaptewa et al. 2003).
For example, a human resources officer may believe that a Black woman scored high on a cognitive
ability test because she took a test-prep course, not because she is competent. Such patterns of
attributions make stereotypes sticky. By contrast, nonstereotyped individuals are more often given
the benefit of the doubt; their behavior is attributed to them as individuals (Sekaquaptewa et al.
2003).
Ambient cues. Another set of cues that can engender identity threat involves the physical makeup
of the local environment. Walls lined with photos of senior executives that exclude women and
people of color may cause members of underrepresented groups to doubt their prospects in the
organization. Even more subtle ambient cues can evoke identity threat when they seem to confirm
stereotypes about the setting and the kinds of people who succeed in it. Several studies found that
when undergraduates completed questionnaires in a computer science room containing objects
associated with a masculine, geeky stereotype of the field (e.g., Star Trek posters, video games,
comics), women’s interest in computer science was lower than men’s. However, when these objects
were replaced with neutral objects (e.g., nature posters, art, general interest books), women’s
interest matched men’s (Cheryan et al. 2009). Women also expressed less interest in working at
a technology company that projected a stereotypical physical environment, preferring a company
530

Walton



Murphy



Ryan

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

without stereotypical objects. Why do such physical cues have a large effect on women’s professional motivations? Further studies showed that stereotypical objects signal to women that
technology companies value men and masculinity—so women inferred that they would not fit in.
Related research examined gender cues in job advertisements. This research found that online job
advertisements for male-dominated areas used more words associated with male stereotypes (e.g.,
leader, dominant); in turn, the use of such words led people to view men as predominant in these
work settings. This undermined women’s anticipated sense of belonging and motivation to pursue
these opportunities (Gaucher et al. 2011).
If organizations wish to attract and retain members of stereotyped groups, they should attend
to their physical environments and the subtle messages they send about who belongs, is valued,
and can succeed.

Interpersonal Cues
Many studies have found that stereotyped individuals are particularly attuned to the verbal and
nonverbal behavior of dominant-group members because these behaviors communicate how
stereotyped individuals are perceived (e.g., Dovidio et al. 2006, Hebl et al. 2002, Murphy et al.
2013). In modern society, the expression of prejudice has largely shifted from negative explicit
attitudes—such as endorsements of racial inferiority and de jure segregation—to negative implicit
attitudes and associations with stereotyped groups. These implicit attitudes predict relevant
preferences and behaviors, such as the preference to associate with in-group members more than
with out-group members (Dovidio & Gaertner 2004, Dovidio et al. 2002). Importantly, these
different types of attitudes are reflected in people’s verbal and nonverbal behaviors. For instance,
explicit attitudes—the kinds of attitudes people self-report on questionnaires—are reflected in
verbal behavior. Thus, people’s explicit, largely egalitarian attitudes predict what people say to
members of stereotyped groups. But their implicit attitudes and associations, which are often
negative, tend to predict how they behave toward members of stereotyped groups (Dovidio et al.
2002, Hebl et al. 2002, McConnell & Leibold 2001). Thus, from the perspective of stereotyped
individuals, modern prejudice is often communicated by a mismatch between positive verbal
behavior (“You did great!”) and negative nonverbal behavior (e.g., sitting far away in the
workplace cafeteria; leering at women). In the workplace, stereotyped individuals often attend to
interpersonal behavior—people’s verbal and nonverbal behaviors—to determine whether they
will be valued and respected.
Subtle harassment and sexist treatment. Overt harassment and sexist treatment are clear signals
that an environment is rife with prejudice and stereotyping—an unequivocal trigger of stereotype
threat. Research over several decades has shown that when these interpersonal behaviors are
present in the workplace, members of stereotyped groups suffer (e.g., Mueller et al. 2001,
Schneider et al. 1997). This is the case for many stereotyped groups, including women, racial and
ethnic minorities, and gay individuals (e.g., Bruce 2013, Kabat-Farr & Cortina 2014, Karsten
2006, Raeburn 2004, Schneider et al. 1997). However, harassment and sexist treatment in the
workplace is not always blatant—expressed by catcalls, lewd jokes, or offensive posters in
a cubical (e.g., Leskinen & Cortina 2014). It can also be expressed by more subtle nonverbal
behavior, which simply conveys to recipients that they are not fully respected as work partners. In
a series of studies, Logel and colleagues (2009b) found that male engineering students who scored
high on a subtle measure of sexism made no overtly sexist, demeaning, or stereotypical verbal
statements during a conversation with a female peer about engineering. However, their nonverbal
behavior exhibited dominance and sexual interest. They sat closer to the woman than less sexist
www.annualreviews.org



Stereotype Threat in Organizations

531

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

men did, displayed a more open body posture (shoulders back, knees apart), and gazed more at her
body. Women exposed to these behaviors performed worse on a subsequent engineering test than
did women who interacted with nonsexist men. This was despite the fact that women liked the
subtly sexist man more. He paid them more attention, after all, and this attention was not overtly
hostile. However, his behavior put women in a role that undermined their task performance.
Logel and colleagues’ (2009b) research was experimental and conducted in a laboratory.
However, field studies show that interpersonal interactions can be threatening for women in
professional environments, too. One experience-sampling study with STEM faculty members
found that talking with male colleagues about research predicted greater work engagement among
men; for women, by contrast, shoptalk with men predicted disengagement (Holleran et al. 2011).
Critical feedback. Workplaces thrive when people feel comfortable giving and receiving specific,
critical feedback about how to improve. Indeed, substantive critical feedback is one of the most
valuable resources for growth and improvement. However, the receipt of critical feedback is often
marked by defensiveness and a loss of motivation. How can supervisors and mentors provide
feedback in a way that sustains recipients’ motivation? This problem, known as “the mentor’s
dilemma” (Cohen et al. 1999, Cohen & Steele 2002), is especially acute when people from majority
groups give critical feedback to people from negatively stereotyped groups (e.g., men to women,
Whites to people of color). Majority-group members generally want to avoid appearing prejudiced; as a consequence, they may withhold criticism from stereotyped individuals (Harber 1998).
Stereotyped individuals are vigilant for potential instances of bias and may thus discount both
positive and negative feedback when their group membership is known and could thus bias any
feedback they receive (Crocker et al. 1991). Indeed, African American professionals are more likely
to discount feedback in contexts in which they report experiencing stereotype threat (Roberson
et al. 2003), and they may not seek out such feedback either, concerned that it may be taken as
a sign of low ability or insecurity (Roberson et al. 2003, Williams et al. 1999). The mentor’s
dilemma thus doubly disadvantages members of lower status groups: It denies them access to
potentially valuable critical feedback, and it creates an attributional context that leads them to
discount feedback they receive.

Organizational Policies and Practices
An organization communicates its views about diversity through its policies, practices, and
characterization of the skills and abilities required to do well and advance in the organization. An
organization’s diversity philosophy as well as the mindset about ability it conveys can signal to
members of negatively stereotyped groups whether they are included and respected and thus
influence people’s experience of identity threat or safety.
Diversity philosophies. One way that organizations signal their support of racial and ethnic
minorities in the workplace is through diversity philosophies included in company materials—on
websites, in recruiting brochures, and in mission statements (e.g., Avery et al. 2007). Two diversity
philosophies are among the most studied by social scientists: the color-blind philosophy and the
multicultural philosophy (e.g., Ely & Thomas 2001).
A colorblind philosophy is the dominant philosophy in American workplaces, rooted in
egalitarian norms and the protestant work ethic. It maintains that hard work and merit should be
the primary metric of success at work and that differences in social status or group membership
(e.g., race, gender, class, and sexuality differences) should not affect people’s success or failure
(Plaut et al. 2009). The goal of the color-blind philosophy is to unite people in an organization
532

Walton



Murphy



Ryan

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

regardless of their social group membership; it is therefore characterized by messages that emphasize commonalities and similarities between employees (Ely & Thomas 2001). Despite these
well-meaning goals, research suggests that Black and Latino individuals often experience colorblind messages as exclusionary attempts to conceal important group differences (Bonilla-Silva
2006, Markus et al. 2000, Ryan et al. 2007), especially when such messages seem insincere (e.g., if
promulgated by an organization that is not diverse; Avery et al. 2013, Purdie-Vaughns et al. 2008).
Thus, color-blind messages can reduce trust and task engagement and undermine cognitive
performance among stereotyped individuals (Holoien & Shelton 2012, Plaut et al. 2009).
A multicultural philosophy, by contrast, explicitly acknowledges that people from different social
groups bring with them social and cultural differences and, further, represents these differences as
a source of value and strength (Ely & Thomas 2001, Homan et al. 2007, Wolsko et al. 2000). Racial
and ethnic minorities generally perceive multicultural philosophies more favorably because they
welcome group differences (e.g., Bonilla-Silva 2006, Markus et al. 2000, Ryan et al. 2007). Yet, when
organizations endorse this approach, majority-group members can feel excluded if they see their
group left out of celebrations and events that value diversity (Brief et al. 2005, Kalev et al. 2006,
Mannix & Neale 2006, Thomas 2008).
Most recently, a new diversity philosophy has been gaining attention. Termed all-inclusive
multiculturalism (AIM), this philosophy explicitly stresses that diversity includes everyone—
majority and minority groups alike (Plaut et al. 2011, Stevens et al. 2008). Organizations signal
this message by including both majority and minority groups in images of company diversity and
by inviting cross-group dialogue that acknowledges and respects the perspectives of both groups
(Stevens et al. 2008). So far, research on AIM suggests that it reduces identity threat among
minority- and majority-group members and that majority-group members feel more included in
organizations that endorse this approach, relative to those that endorse the multicultural philosophy (Plaut et al. 2011).
Organizational mindsets about ability. Another identity-threatening message that organizations
may communicate to employees is the idea that ability and talent is fixed—you either have it or you
don’t—and, moreover, that ability is held by only a select few (Murphy & Dweck 2010). This fixed
organizational mindset can become part of an organization’s culture in which some groups or
divisions are thought to “have it,” whereas others do not. Fixed mindset companies emphasize
high performance over growth and learning, and employees feel they must constantly prove their
ability and worth. Alternatively, companies can endorse a mindset that emphasizes personal
growth and development through effort and hard work. This growth organizational mindset
suggests that all employees are capable of succeeding if they apply themselves, seek ways to
improve and develop, and receive appropriate training and support. Organizational mindsets can
be communicated through mission statements that profess companies’ values (e.g., smarts, intelligence, and innate talent versus growth, development, and motivation) and through evaluation
and promotion metrics that assess and reward talent and performance over development and
improvement. A prototypical example of a fixed organizational mindset is that of Enron. Enron was,
according to McLean & Elkind (2003, p. 36), a company that prized “sheer brainpower” above all
else, where the task of sorting out intellectual “stars” from the “merely superbright” was the top
priority when making hires and promotions. It was an environment in which one of the most
powerful executives was described as being “so sure that he was the smartest guy in the room that
anyone who disagreed with him was summarily dismissed as just not bright enough to ‘get it’” (p. 33).
Organizational mindsets are also conveyed by design elements of performance management
and compensation systems that convey to employees how behaviors and results are valued. For
example, forced-distribution performance evaluation systems clearly convey that not all can
www.annualreviews.org



Stereotype Threat in Organizations

533

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

succeed (i.e., some people are rated in the bottom 10%) and often set up an environment in which
people feel the need to continually prove their worth (Blume et al. 2009, Schleicher et al. 2009).
Similarly, performance management systems that are not well connected to employee development
processes may convey a fixed mindset (Frear & Paustian-Underdahl 2011). Indeed, simulation
research has shown that “rank and yank” systems such as forced distribution can be associated
with disproportionate numbers of minority-group members receiving lower evaluations under
certain conditions (Giumetti et al. 2014).
Although organizational mindsets do not explicitly reference social group differences, the
exclusionary message of the fixed mindset can trigger identity threat for people who belong to
groups whose ability is impugned by negative stereotypes. When only “some” people are thought
to have the smarts and talent to succeed in a professional setting, people who belong to negatively
stereotyped groups may well worry that others will view them as lacking. For example, in several
studies, Emerson & Murphy (2015) found that women showed worse outcomes in business
settings that endorsed a fixed rather than a growth organizational mindset. They reported less trust
and commitment to the organization, were more likely to worry that they would be negatively
stereotyped by company management, and, when attempting a performance task, disengaged
more and performed worse (Emerson & Murphy 2014; M.C. Murphy, J.A. Garcia & S. Zirkel,
unpublished manuscript). Similar performance effects have been found for Black and Latino
individuals when they expect to be evaluated by a fixed versus growth mindset organization
(K.T.U. Emerson & M.C. Murphy, unpublished manuscript).
Hiring, promotion, and referral policies. Lastly, some hiring, promotion, and referral policies and
procedures can foster stereotype and social identity threat in the workplace. For example, subjective and unstructured evaluations are often used to assess employee performance (e.g., Bommer
et al. 1995, Ford et al. 1986). Members of stereotyped groups might worry that such assessments
will be tainted by subtle and implicit biases or that they could be overlooked for promotion because
they do not fit the prototypical image of a leader or supervisor, especially if their group is underrepresented in management positions (e.g., Eagly & Karau 2002). These concerns are warranted, as research shows that subjective, unstructured evaluations are indeed more vulnerable to
bias and often disadvantage stigmatized individuals (Arvey & Faley 1988, Huffcutt & Roth 1998,
Madera & Hebl 2013).
Notably, “objective” criteria also raise problems. Simply treating a test as a valid indicator of
merit can cause test takers who face a negative stereotype in that context to view the test as unfair
for their group and to underperform (Autin et al. 2014). Indeed, simply representing cognitive
performance and intelligence (IQ) tests as evaluative, as is typical, evokes stereotype threat, causing
members of stereotyped groups to underperform (Steele & Aronson 1995; see also Brown & Day
2006). As we discuss below, evidence suggests that, as a result, such tests show a systematic predictive
bias: They underestimate the ability and potential of people from negatively stereotyped groups to
succeed in contexts in which stereotype threat has been reduced (Walton & Spencer 2009).
As a result, some organizations may wish to subject people from stereotyped groups to a lower
threshold score on important tests. However, such policies may themselves seem to confirm
a negative stereotype and can thus evoke identity threat (Autin et al. 2014; see also Brown et al.
2000; see Turner & Pratkanis 1994 for a review). However, the consideration of group identity
may not be threatening when this consideration challenges the stereotype. Autin and colleagues
(2014) showed that when women believed that gender would be taken into account in the interpretation of test scores to mitigate bias in the measurement of merit—the bias actually observed
(Walton & Spencer 2009)—women performed significantly better. This message, however, tended
to undermine men’s outcomes.
534

Walton



Murphy



Ryan

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Lastly, employee referral policies can exacerbate gender and racial gaps in hiring by drawing
from current employees’ friendship and social networks, which tend to be relatively homogenous
(DiTomaso 2012, McDonald 2011). Many organizations heavily rely on referrals to identify
potential employees (Breaugh 2013, Breaugh et al. 2003, Ioannides & Loury 2004, Marsden &
Gorman 2001, Topa 2011). However, in practice, these recommendations are largely for samegender and same-race/ethnicity candidates (e.g., 63.5% and 71.5%, respectively, in one large US
corporation; Brown et al. 2012) and thus reproduce the demographics of the current employee
pool while limiting access to underrepresented groups (Bielby 2008, Kasinitz & Rosenberg 1996,
Moss & Tilly 2001). From the perspective of underrepresented groups, referral policies may
suggest that organizations are uninterested in recruiting a diverse workforce, preferring to
maintain a status quo that disadvantages their group.

WAYS TO REDUCE STEREOTYPE AND SOCIAL IDENTITY THREAT IN
ORGANIZATIONAL CONTEXTS
High levels of stereotype and social identity threat can undermine people’s performance and thus
an organization’s success. Organizations may aim to reduce threat to ensure that all members can
perform their jobs well and learn and grow unhampered by threat. In addition, organizations may
wish to ensure that selection and promotion decisions are not biased by stereotype threat but
identify and advance the most promising candidates. This section reviews strategies to address
these goals.
In general, to reduce threat, organizations can pursue one or both of two complementary
strategies: They can either change cues present in the environment, removing and replacing cues
that reliably signal threat, or they can change how people interpret or construe such cues—that is,
the meaning they draw from them. The first strategy is often preferable but is not always possible;
for instance, a nondiverse organization may not be able to quickly become diverse. However, at
least in education contexts, even brief interventions that encourage people to construe important
aspects of the environment in nonthreatening ways can cause large and lasting improvements in
performance and achievement (for reviews, see Garcia & Cohen 2012, Walton et al. 2013, Yeager &
Walton 2011). For instance, the social-belonging intervention—a 30–60-min exercise to encourage students to view adversities in school as normal and temporary—raised African American
college students’ GPAs over the next three years, halving the achievement gap (Walton & Cohen
2011), and, in another trial, eliminated the gender gap in grades in engineering over an academic
year (Walton et al. 2014). How are such effects possible? In general, a change in how people
construe a setting can become self-reinforcing—people who see threat in a setting may avoid others
or interact with others in ways that do not build better relationships; people who feel comfortable
may be better positioned to learn and grow. Thus, brief interventions that target people’s construals of an environment, when implemented effectively and at an appropriate time, can set in
motion cycles that improve outcomes long into the future. Such interventions have generally not
yet been carried out in work contexts. However, the results from education contexts suggest that
significant gains may be possible.
In this section, we review how organizations can reduce stereotype threat in four key contexts:
recruiting, selecting and promoting, socializing and onboarding, and training employees.

Recruiting Employees
To signal to potential employees that they have an identity-safe environment, organizations can replace cues liable to signal threat with cues that allay such concerns. For instance, when possible,
www.annualreviews.org



Stereotype Threat in Organizations

535

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

organizations can become diverse and promote their diversity (Murphy et al. 2007); they can ensure
that their physical environments and job advertisements signal the inclusion and valuing of people
from diverse backgrounds (Cheryan et al. 2009, Gaucher et al. 2011); they can articulate their
commitment to diversity and valuing of diverse groups in mission statements, recruiting materials,
and elsewhere (Purdie-Vaughns et al. 2008); and they can promulgate and advertise a culture that
values growth and improvement, not the identification of who “has it” and who does not (Murphy &
Dweck 2010). These steps can lead ethnic minorities and women to anticipate greater belonging in
work settings, to trust companies more, to feel less identity threat, and to be more motivated to pursue
professional opportunities (Avery et al. 2013). Notably, it is essential that companies back up
words with deeds. For instance, African American professionals may express trust in companies that
articulate a goal to treat all people in similar ways regardless of background (a color-blind philosophy) but only insofar as the company employs people from diverse backgrounds (Purdie-Vaughns
et al. 2008; see also Shih et al. 2013). Similar to companies engaged in practices like greenwashing who
mislead consumers about environmental practices, companies that make disingenuous statements
about their values and practices regarding diversity are likely viewed with skepticism.

Selecting and Promoting Employees
In addition to creating and representing a positive climate, organizations may attend to specific
contexts in which threat is likely to arise and where relatively straightforward steps may improve
outcomes. One such context involves selection tests used to hire and promote employees. Tests are
generally viewed as evaluative of ability, a powerful cue of stereotype threat. In addition, the
salience of people’s group identity in a testing setting can cause threat (Steele & Aronson 1995)
Reducing threat on selection tests. How can organizations reduce stereotype threat on selection
tests? In some cases, it may be difficult or inappropriate (e.g., inaccurate) to represent such tests as
not evaluative of ability. However, it may be possible to reduce the salience of test takers’ group
identity. In this way, recruiting and evaluation contexts differ to some extent. In general, in
recruiting employees, organizations may wish to highlight their commitment to and valuing of
diversity (Avery & McKay 2006, Purdie-Vaughns et al. 2008). However, if group identity is salient
when people take tests, it may risk evoking the worry that group identity could be a basis for
negative evaluation or treatment. For instance, when test takers are asked to report their race/
ethnicity and gender before a test, this may trigger identity threat and undermine performance.
Indeed, research in laboratory (e.g., Steele & Aronson 1995), educational (Danaher & Crandall
2008), and work settings (Kirnan et al. 2009) shows that moving demographic queries to after
instead of before a test can improve performance, especially among people who face negative
stereotypes in the setting at hand. An important, ongoing question involves the effectiveness of this
approach in mitigating stereotype threat when other potent threat-inducing cues are present (e.g.,
when the test is seen as evaluative); however, insofar as this strategy is often relatively cost free and
can be effective even in such contexts, it is advisable. Although more research is needed, the use of
Internet assessments may provide a further opportunity to reduce the salience of group identity in
testing situations, as individuals can perform in relative privacy.
Research has explored the effectiveness of a variety of additional strategies to help people cope
with stereotype threat on evaluative tests. One strategy is to reduce people’s apprehension that
their group identity will be a source of negative judgment. For instance, threat is less likely when
people take tests among a critical mass of in-group members (Inzlicht & Ben-Zeev 2000), when
positive in-group role models are salient (e.g., Marx & Goff 2005, McIntyre et al. 2003),
when people are treated by majority-group members as partners in working on challenging
536

Walton



Murphy



Ryan

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

material (L.J. Aguilar, P.B. Carr & G.M. Walton, unpublished manuscript; see also Walton &
Carr 2012) rather than in disrespectful ways (Logel et al. 2009b), and when tests are represented in
ways that assure test takers that performance will not be viewed as evidence for a negative group
stereotype (e.g., Good et al. 2008). Another strategy is to help people manage negative thoughts
and feelings that can arise from threat and undermine performance. For instance, performance
improves when people learn about stereotype threat and thus that negative thoughts and feelings
may be due to threat, not a cue of poor performance (Johns et al. 2005); when people learn that
arousal and anxiety can promote not hinder success (Johns et al. 2008; see also Jamieson et al.
2010); when they learn to displace negative thoughts with neutral thoughts (Logel et al. 2009a);
and when they reflect on important personal values and other sources of identity unrelated to the
threat (Martens et al. 2006; see also Cohen et al. 2009). This past research has been conducted
primarily (but not exclusively) in laboratory settings and in education contexts. An important
direction for future research involves evaluating the potential of these techniques in field-settings
and in organizational contexts.
These approaches complement revisions to test materials themselves. Sensitivity reviews are
designed to remove items that are offensive or unfamiliar to people from a particular background
(Golubovich et al. 2014). Although a few studies have directly investigated the effects of cues
within prototypical items that might trigger identity threat (e.g., the use of gendered names in word
problems, Hmurovic et al. 2009; the use of gender-stereotyped activities or gendered occupational
references, Grand et al. 2011), there is surprisingly little empirical investigation of how item
content might increase the salience of group membership and/or stereotypes about one’s group.
Further, newer forms of tests (e.g., situational judgment tests employing avatars or videos) often
depict diverse individuals in scenarios; however, there is some evidence that the performance of
members of stereotyped groups might be affected by the demographic characteristics of those
depicted in such test items (Golubovich & Ryan 2012).
Interpreting and using test scores and other indicators of ability and potential: test bias. Even
when an organization takes steps to reduce stereotype threat on selection tests, the mere evaluative
nature of such tests can cause some threat to remain (Steele & Aronson 1995). More broadly, given
the ubiquity of evaluative cues that can cause stereotype threat, typical circumstances in which
standardized tests and other indicators of ability are administered may induce stereotype threat. As
a consequence, researchers have hypothesized that such indicators may, on average, underestimate
the ability of people from negatively stereotyped groups, as compared with people from nonstereotyped groups (Brown & Day 2006). This hypothesis is termed the latent-ability hypothesis
because it posits that a portion of stereotyped individuals’ ability is latent or hidden on standard
assessments (Walton & Spencer 2009). If this is the case, then using such measures in personnel
decisions may have detrimental effects on the outcomes (e.g., selection, promotion) of people from
stereotyped groups (Walton et al. 2013).
Evidence for this hypothesis comes from meta-analyses of experiments testing exercises to
reduce stereotype threat in laboratory and field settings. These analyses show that, when people
perform in contexts in which stereotype threat has been experimentally reduced, women in STEM
subjects and ethnic minorities, generally, outperform men and nonminorities with identical prior
test scores and grades (Walton & Spencer 2009). In typical circumstances, people subject to
stereotype threat perform facing a headwind. This headwind prevents them from scoring as well as
they are capable—some of their ability is latent. Accordingly, when the headwind is lifted—when
stereotype threat is removed—people from stereotyped groups outperform nonstereotyped peers
they equaled in the prior, typical context (Walton et al. 2013).

www.annualreviews.org



Stereotype Threat in Organizations

537

Notably, although there is a large body of evidence documenting test score differences between
groups, there is debate as to the extent to which those differences translate into differences in work
performance (i.e., do tests underpredict success on the job for some groups?) (e.g., Aguinis et al.
2010; Berry et al. 2011, 2014; Roth et al. 2014). The empirical literature that informs this debate
consists primarily of correlational and simulation studies. However, for the purpose of detecting
an effect of stereotype threat on test performance or validity, experimental data that vary the
experience of threat are preferable. As Brown & Day (2006, p. 983) write,

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

The extent to which stereotype threat influences predictive validity will depend on the degree
to which stereotype threat differentially influences predictor and criterion scores (see Cullen,
Hardison, & Sackett, 2004). Indeed, the possibility that predictor variables such as the SAT and
ACT are influenced by stereotype threat to similar degrees as criterion variables such as college GPA
(Aronson, Fried, & Good, 2002; Brown et al., 2000; Brown & Lee, 2005) might explain why
differential predictive validity for African Americans and Whites is not typically observed with
standardized cognitive ability tests.

The Walton & Spencer (2009) meta-analyses draw together the existing experimental evidence
and provide sufficient cause for concern that stereotype threat affects both test scores and grades
administered in typical (e.g., evaluative) environments. Using such scores as nonbiased indicators
of merit and potential may risk judgments that have disproportionately negative effects on the
hiring and promotion of women and ethnic minorities.
What should organizations do? These issues are complicated scientifically, legally, and for
policy. Here we suggest some options (for more comprehensive reviews, see Emerson & Murphy
2014, Erman & Walton 2015, Walton et al. 2013). For instance, the presence of group-based
biases on performance indices may lead some to advocate group-based score corrections (Sackett &
Wilk 1994). However, in the United States at least, mechanical race- and gender-based score
corrections are prohibited on employment-related tests by Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(as amended). Others have suggested using techniques such as banding or treating all those within
a certain score range as equivalent in standing, typically determined by the standard error of the
difference (Aguinis 2004). However, banding’s effectiveness in increasing the number of minorities
selected is limited in many contexts (i.e., if not testing or hiring large numbers of individuals) and
also may not increase representation if the organization does not also preferentially select minorities from within the band (Sackett & Roth 1991). Nonetheless, there are some simple steps
organizations can take. First, when schools and employers make sustained efforts to reduce
stereotype threat in their internal settings, they simultaneously (a) create positive environments
that allow all people to perform well and (b) help individuals establish nonbiased performance
track records as they seek to compete for subsequent positions. Second, organizations can
choose to give less weight to indicators likely to be susceptible to stereotype threat (e.g., using
Pareto-optimal methods, DeCorte et al. 2007; or criterion-based methods, Hattrup & Rock
2002) or consider using measures less impugned by negative group stereotypes (e.g., creative and
practical skills, Sternberg & Rainbow Proj. Collab. 2006; second-stratum cognitive abilities,
Wee et al. 2014; noncognitive skills like self-control or grit, Duckworth & Seligman 2005,
Duckworth et al. 2007). Third, schools and employers may “educate selection officers of the bias
in performance measures and allow them to weigh this information in making individualized
evaluations of candidates” (Walton et al. 2013, p. 27). This approach retains predictive performance measures while taking bias into account. It also raises novel legal questions (see
Erman & Walton 2015, Walton et al. 2013).

538

Walton



Murphy



Ryan

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Socializing and Onboarding Employees
When people enter new academic and professional settings in which their group is underrepresented and may be negatively stereotyped, they often experience high levels of threat and
worry about whether other people will include and value them in the setting. This can prevent
people from learning and growing in a new organization or role, from developing essential relationships there, and, ultimately, from performing at a high level.
One remedy for underrepresentation is simply to increase the representation of people from
stereotyped groups in a given setting. Indeed, organizations and settings with greater diversity
have workers who report higher workplace satisfaction and better performance, as members of
stereotyped groups report fewer concerns about identity threat (e.g., Allmendinger & Hackman
1995, Niemann & Dovidio 1998). However, as an organization strives to achieve critical mass, it
can also reduce the identity threat engendered by underrepresentation by supporting the underrepresented individuals it currently has. For example, organizations that endorse diversity as
a value can promote trust, even absent critical mass (Purdie-Vaughns et al. 2008). In addition,
helping women and minorities cultivate a broad network of relationships including with peers,
mentors, and sponsors as well as with role models can buffer their sense of fit within the organization
and help them advance. Positive relationships with majority-group peers and mentors can help
minority-group members feel integrated and included within an organization; this can also help
normalize struggles and adverse experiences that could otherwise be threatening for minority-group
members, and thus help them overcome challenges to succeed (Walton & Cohen 2011, Walton et al.
2014; see also Walton & Carr 2012; L.J. Aguilar, P.B. Carr & G.M. Walton, unpublished manuscript). Same-race mentors and role models can also reduce threat and provide strategies to help
mentees move up (Avery et al. 2008, Kirby & Jackson 1999, Marx & Goff 2005, McIntyre et al.
2003). Indeed, senior-level sponsors are often instrumental in advancing the careers of their mentees
by advocating for them over a sustained period of time and introducing them to opportunities and
individuals who can help them advance (Tapia & Kvasny 2004, Thomas & Kram 1988). This type of
support can alleviate feelings of anxiety and isolation and increase career satisfaction (Chao 1997,
Crosby 1999, Reskin et al. 1999). Thus, connecting stereotyped and underrepresented individuals
with peers, role models, mentors, and sponsors is one way organizations can enhance identity safety,
particularly when they lack critical mass.
In addition to these strategies, in education contexts two specific interventions—valueaffirmation and social-belonging interventions—have been shown to reduce threat in academic
transitions and improve performance among people from negatively stereotyped groups. Because
these interventions are typically delivered early in a setting, they can change the trajectory of
people’s experience over long periods of time (for reviews, see Garcia & Cohen 2012, Yeager &
Walton 2011). A small, well-timed push in a more favorable direction can have lasting effects if it
puts people on a more productive path.
Value-affirmation interventions. Value-affirmation interventions consist of a short series of
exercises that encourage people to reflect on valued aspects of their self-concept. In its most
common form, people view a list of values, identify those that are most important to them, and
then write for 15–20 min about why those values matter to them and times when such values were
especially important. This is thought to help people think about potential threats and stressors in
a broader psychological context; when adversities loom less large, people can thus respond more
effectively (Sherman & Cohen 2006, Sherman & Hartson 2011). When administered in school
settings—for instance, as several in-class writing exercises beginning early in the school year—valueaffirmation interventions have been shown to increase core-academic GPAs among African

www.annualreviews.org



Stereotype Threat in Organizations

539

American and Latino middle students up to three years later while reducing reports of stereotype
threat and helping sustain minority students’ sense of belonging (Cohen et al. 2009, Sherman et al.
2013). Value-affirmation interventions can also improve women’s achievement in STEM subjects in
college (Miyake et al. 2010, Walton et al. 2014). There is also evidence that similar exercises can
improve performance and retention in work contexts (Cable et al. 2013; see also Wiesenfeld et al.
1999).

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Social-belonging interventions. Whereas value-affirmation interventions are designed to help
people think about themselves in ways that make it easier to contend with threatening experiences,
social-belonging interventions give people a positive narrative for understanding a new social
context and the struggles that arise there (see Garcia & Cohen 2012, Walton & Cohen 2011, Walton
et al. 2014). In this type of intervention, people entering a new setting read stories from people who
have transitioned before them. These stories describe how people typically worry about their belonging at first in the new setting but come to feel at home with time as they reach out and build
relationships. This message is designed to give people a positive narrative for understanding the
inevitable challenges and worries about belonging they encounter in a new setting (e.g., feelings of
loneliness, struggle, disrespect, criticism). People who face negative stereotypes may risk seeing such
experiences as evidence they do not belong in general (Walton & Cohen 2007); the intervention
provides a more hopeful interpretation. After reading these stories, people write about how their
personal experiences so far or their anticipated experiences reflect the same process of change. Some
of these materials, people are told, will be shared with future people ostensibly to help them in their
transition. This “saying-is-believing” exercise helps drive home the key idea, encourages people to
connect this idea to their own lives, and forestalls stigmatization—it treats people as benefactors, not
beneficiaries. In total, the intervention lasts an hour or less. As noted above, this intervention has
raised GPAs among African American first-year college students over three years, halving the
achievement gap with European American students (Walton & Cohen 2011). It has also eliminated
gender differences in first-year GPA among women enrolled in male-dominated engineering majors
and, simultaneously, helped women form more friendships with male peers (Walton et al. 2014). In
three more trials, online versions of social-belonging interventions delivered to full cohorts of incoming college students (total N > 9,500) increased the percentage of ethnic minority and firstgeneration students who successfully completed the first year of college full-time enrolled, and raised
GPA over the first year among such students, reducing group inequalities by 35–50%. The
interventions also helped such students integrate more effectively in college, for instance by joining
student groups, developing mentors, and making close friends on campus (D.S. Yeager, G.M. Walton,
S.T. Brady, E.N. Akcinar, D. Paunesku, unpublished manuscript). This type of intervention is not
unlike some socialization activities (e.g., hearing employee testimonials) designed to help organizational newcomers, which are considered best practices in onboarding programs (Klein & Polin
2012). However, social-belonging interventions are precise in their emphasis on people’s beliefs
about belonging and on how challenges that arise in transitions can be overcome. An important
question for future research involves the effectiveness of this approach in organizational contexts and
how best to embed it in organizational entry programs.

Training Employees
People under stereotype threat learn less effectively than they otherwise would (Grand 2012,
Rydell et al. 2010, Taylor & Walton 2011); thus mitigating stereotype threat can promote learning
in complex environments. For instance, experimental research shows that value-affirmations,
which also improve test performance among people under stereotype threat in laboratory settings
540

Walton



Murphy



Ryan

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

(Martens et al. 2006) and achievement in field settings (Cohen et al. 2009), enhance learning in
otherwise threatening (e.g., evaluative) contexts (Taylor & Walton 2011).
Growth-mindset interventions. Another strategy that can help people learn more under threat is to
convey the malleability of human intelligence (see Dweck 2006). Such messages, called growthmindset interventions, disabuse people of the misperception that intelligence is fixed and thus
something that some people (or some kinds of people) have and others do not. That view can lead
people to view mistakes and setbacks as evidence that they cannot succeed. Instead, growth-mindset
interventions convey that, with hard work and effective learning strategies, anyone can become
smarter. This message can improve learning and achievement (for a review, see Yeager et al. 2013),
for instance among adolescents (Blackwell et al. 2007), especially those who are struggling (Paunesku
et al. in press) and, in math, girls (Good et al. 2003), and among diverse college students (Aronson
et al. 2002). In addition, as noted earlier, promulgating a culture that values growth and learning
rather than the identification of who “has it” reduces stereotype threat and improves trust, commitment, and performance among women in business settings (Emerson & Murphy 2015). This
work reflects the broader literature on the important role of training transfer and continuous learning
climates in enabling individuals to develop and utilize new skills (Tracey et al. 1995).
Wise feedback. As discussed above, supervisors face a dilemma in providing critical feedback to
subordinates: How can substantive critical feedback be given in a way that helps recipients learn
without undermining motivation? This dilemma is most acute when feedback is provided across
group lines, a situation in which criticism can be interpreted as evidence of the application of
a negative stereotype.
Several studies have illuminated a strategy, termed wise feedback, to reduce threat in such
exchanges (Cohen et al. 1999, Cohen & Steele 2002, Yeager et al. 2013). The goal of this strategy is
to disambiguate the meaning of critical feedback for members of stereotyped groups. In wise
feedback, the feedback giver explicitly conveys, first, that he or she holds high standards for the
task (e.g., the report, product, service) and, second, that he or she believes the recipient can meet
that standard. This clarifies why the giver provides critical feedback—to help the recipient reach
the higher standard. This strategy is similar to standard advice for providing effective feedback in
the organizational literature (London 1997), but it is especially important in the context of
stereotype threat. Laboratory and field-experimental research show that wise feedback increases
motivation among members of minority groups to improve their work, including among African
American college students (Cohen et al. 1999), women in science (Cohen & Steele 2002), and
adolescents. In one field experiment, wise feedback notes (“I have high standards but I believe
you have the potential to meet them. . .I am providing this critical feedback to help you meet
those standards”) appended by researchers to a teacher-graded essay (to keep teachers unaware
of students’ condition assignment) increased the percentage of ethnic-minority middle school
students who chose to revise a class essay from 17% to 72% (Yeager et al. 2013). In another
study, teaching students to view critical feedback in general as emanating from the high
standards of the task and teachers’ motivation to help students improve raised semester grades
among ethnic-minority high school students (Yeager et al. 2013). Further, the benefits of wise
feedback were strongest among students who mistrusted the school more to begin with.

CONCLUSION
An extensive body of research on stereotype threat has accumulated over the past two decades.
However, the implications of this research for work contexts have received much less attention than
www.annualreviews.org



Stereotype Threat in Organizations

541

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

deserved, especially given the strong desire of many people in organizations to create inclusive
workplace climates and just human resource decision-making processes and policies. This lack of
attention may be due in part to a lack of understanding of the phenomenon: A recent issue of Industrial
and Organizational Psychology: Perspectives on Science and Practice contained numerous commentaries focused on clarifying exactly what stereotype threat is and what the theory behind the
phenomenon’s effects actually proposes (e.g., Czukor & Bayazit 2014, Kalokerinos et al. 2014, Voyles
et al. 2014). Our aim in this review has been to provide this clarity and to conduct a comprehensive
analysis of how research on stereotype and social identity threat applies to the workplace. We have also
provided concrete suggestions as to interventions and changes to practices that may lessen or prevent
stereotype threat effects. We are hopeful that this information will spur further research on stereotype
and social identity threat in organizational contexts (see below) and, more broadly, the creation of
workplace conditions that provide identity safety and support the success of all individuals.

FUTURE ISSUES
1. Assess the relationship between experiences of stereotype threat and disidentification
and disengagement outcomes in the workplace (e.g., job dissatisfaction, lack of organizational commitment, absenteeism, counterproductive behaviors, turnover).
2. Assess stereotype threat effects in operational hiring contexts.
3. Evaluate stereotype threat effects in operational performance evaluation contexts.
4. Map how members of stereotyped groups construe local work contexts including
ambient cues, promotional materials, and diversity and mission statements; investigate
ways to structure environments so as to mitigate experiences of threat.
5. Investigate the usefulness of wise feedback in organizational contexts as a means to
overcome the “mentor’s dilemma”—that is, how to define wise feedback, how to train
supervisors in giving wise feedback, effects on employee attitudes and performance.
6. Examine how organizational mindsets influence experiences of identity threat and the
evaluation of employees.
7. Evaluate the generalizability of social-belonging, value-affirmation, and growth-mindset
interventions in educational contexts for workplace contexts.
8. Evaluate whether and how the use of Internet assessments may reduce identity threat.
9. Evaluate strategies to help individuals manage negative thoughts and feelings stemming
from threat in operational workplace evaluative contexts.

DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that
might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

LITERATURE CITED
Aguinis H, ed. 2004. Test Score Banding in Human Resource Selection: Legal, Technical and Societal Issues.
Westport, CT: Praeger
Aguinis H, Culpepper SA, Pierce CA. 2010. Revival of test bias research in preemployment testing. J. Appl.
Psychol. 95(4):648–80

542

Walton



Murphy



Ryan

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Allmendinger J, Hackman JR. 1995. The more, the better? A four-nation study of the inclusion of women in
symphony orchestras. Soc. Forces 74:423–60
Aronson J, Fried CB, Good C. 2002. Reducing the effect of stereotype threat on African American college
students by shaping theories of intelligence. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 38:113–25
Aronson J, Lustina MJ, Good C, Keough K, Steele CM, Brown J. 1999. When white men can’t do math:
necessary and sufficient factors in stereotype threat. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 35:29–46
Arvey RD, Faley RH. 1988. Fairness in Selecting Employees. Reading, MA:Addison-Wesley. 2nd ed.
Autin F, Branscombe NR, Croizet J-C. 2014. Creating, closing, and reversing the gender gap in test performance: how selection policies trigger social identity threat or safety among women and men. Psychol.
Women Q. 38:327–39
Avery DR. 2003. Reactions to diversity in recruitment advertising—Are differences black and white? J. Appl.
Psychol. 88(4):672–79
Avery DR, McKay PF. 2006. Target practice: an organizational impression management approach to
attracting minority and female job applicants. Pers. Psychol. 59(1):157–87
Avery DR, McKay PF, Wilson DC. 2008. What are the odds? How demographic similarity affects the
prevalence of perceived employment discrimination. J. Appl. Psychol. 93(2):235–49
Avery DR, McKay PF, Wilson DC, Tonidandel S. 2007. Unequal attendance: the relationships between race,
organizational diversity cues, and absenteeism. Pers. Psychol. 60(4):875–902
Avery DR, Volpone SD, Stewart RW, Luksyte A, Hernandez M, et al. 2013. Examining the draw of diversity:
how diversity climate perceptions affect job-pursuit intentions. Hum. Resour. Manag. 52:175–93
Beilock SL, Rydell RJ, McConnell AR. 2007. Stereotype threat and working memory: mechanisms, alleviation,
and spillover. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 136(2):256–76
Berry CM, Clark MA, McClure TK. 2011. Racial/ethnic differences in the criterion-related validity of cognitive
ability tests: a qualitative and quantitative review. J. Appl. Psychol. 96(5):881–906
Berry CM, Cullen MJ, Meyer JM. 2014. Racial/ethnic subgroup differences in cognitive ability test range
restriction: implications for differential validity. J. Appl. Psychol. 99(1):21–37
Bielby WT. 2008. Promoting racial diversity at work: challenges and solutions. In Diversity at Work, ed.
AP Brief, pp. 53–88. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press
Blackwell LA, Trzesniewski KH, Dweck CS. 2007. Theories of intelligence and achievement across the junior
high school transition: a longitudinal study and an intervention. Child Dev. 78:246–63
Blascovich J, Spencer SJ, Quinn D, Steele C. 2001. African Americans and high blood pressure: the role of
stereotype threat. Psychol. Sci. 12(3):225–29
Blume BD, Baldwin TT, Rubin RS. 2009. Reactions to different types of forced distribution performance
evaluation systems. J. Bus. Psychol. 24(1):77–91
Bommer WH, Johnson J, Rich GA, Podsakoff PM, MacKenzie SB. 1995. On the interchangeability of objective
and subjective measures of employee performance: a meta-analysis. Pers. Psychol. 48(3):587–605
Bonilla-Silva E. 2006. Racism Without Racists: Color-Blind Racism and the Persistence of Racial Inequality in
the United States. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield
Bosson JK, Haymovitz EL, Pinel EC. 2004. When saying and doing diverge: the effects of stereotype threat on
self-reported versus non-verbal anxiety. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 40:247–55
Breaugh JA. 2013. Employee recruitment. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 64:388–416
Breaugh JA, Greising LA, Taggart JW, Chen H. 2003. The relationship of recruiting sources and pre-hire
outcomes: examination of yield ratios and applicant quality. J. Appl. Soc. Psychol. 33:2267–87
Brief AP, Umphress EE, Dietz J, Burrows JW, Butz RM, Scholten L. 2005. Community matters: realistic group
conflict theory and the impact of diversity. Acad. Manag. J. 48:830–44
Brown M, Setren E, Topa G. 2012. Do informal referrals lead to better matches? Evidence from a firm’s
employee referral system. Staff Rep. No. 568, Fed. Reserv. Bank N.Y. http://www.newyorkfed.org/
research/staff_reports/sr568.pdf
Brown RP, Charnsangavej T, Keough KA, Newman ML, Rentfrow PJ. 2000. Putting the “affirm” into affirmative action: preferential selection and academic performance. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 79:736–37
Brown RP, Day EA. 2006. The difference isn’t black and white: stereotype threat and the race gap on Raven’s
advanced progressive matrices. J. Appl. Psychol. 91:979–85

www.annualreviews.org



Stereotype Threat in Organizations

543

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Brown RP, Lee MN. 2005. Stigma consciousness and the race gap in college academic achievement. Self
Identity 4(2):149–57
Browne I, ed. 1999. Latinas and African American Women at Work: Race, Gender, and Economic Inequality.
New York: Russell Sage Found.
Bruce TA. 2013. Sexual orientation harassment in the workplace: the development of a measure. Master’s
Thesis, Mich. State Univ., East Lansing
Cable DM, Gino F, Staats BR. 2013. Breaking them in or eliciting their best? Reframing socialization around
newcomers’ authentic self-expression. Adm. Sci. Q. 58(1):1–36
Chao GT. 1997. Mentoring phases and outcomes. J. Vocat. Behav. 51:15–28
Cheryan S, Plaut VC, Davies P, Steele CM. 2009. Ambient belonging: how stereotypical environments impact
gender participation in computer science. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 97:1045–60
Chung BG, Ehrhart MG, Ehrhart KH, Hattrup K, Solamon J. 2010. Stereotype threat, state anxiety, and
specific self-efficacy as predictors of promotion exam performance. Group Organ. Manag. 35(1):77–107
Cohen GL, Garcia J. 2008. Identity, belonging, and achievement: a model, interventions, implications. Curr.
Dir. Psychol. Sci. 17:365–69
Cohen GL, Garcia J, Purdie-Vaughns V, Apfel N, Brzustoski P. 2009. Recursive processes in self-affirmation:
intervening to close the minority achievement gap. Science 324:400–3
Cohen GL, Steele CM. 2002. A barrier of mistrust: how stereotypes affect cross-race mentoring. In Improving
Academic Achievement: Impact of Psychological Factors on Education, ed. J Aronson, pp. 305–31.
Oxford, UK: Academic
Cohen GL, Steele CM, Ross LD. 1999. The mentor’s dilemma: providing critical feedback across the racial
divide. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 25:1302–18
Cohen LL, Swim JK. 1995. The differential impact of gender ratios on women and men: tokenism, selfconfidence, and expectations. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 21:876–84
Correll SJ. 2004. Constraints into preferences: gender, status, and emerging career aspirations. Am. Sociol.
Rev. 69:93–113
Crocker J, Voelkl K, Testa M, Major B. 1991. Social stigma: the affective consequences of attributional
ambiguity. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 60(2):218–28
Croizet JC, Claire T. 1998. Extending the concept of stereotype threat to social class: the intellectual
underperformance of students from low socioeconomic backgrounds. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull.
24:588–94
Crosby FJ. 1999. The developing literature on developmental relationship. In Mentoring Dilemmas:
Developmental Relationship Within Multicultural Organizations, ed. AJ Murrell, FJ Crosby, RJ Ely,
pp. 1–18. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum
Cullen MJ, Hardison CM, Sackett PR. 2004. Using SAT-grade and ability-job performance relationships to test
predictions derived from stereotype threat theory. J. Appl. Psychol. 89:220–30
Czukor G, Bayazit M. 2014. Casting a wide net? Performance deficit, priming, and subjective performance
evaluation in organizational stereotype threat research. Ind. Organ. Psychol. 7:409–13
Danaher K, Crandall CS. 2008. Stereotype threat in applied settings re-examined. J. Appl. Soc. Psychol.
38:1639–55
Davies PG, Spencer SJ, Steele CM. 2005. Clearing the air: Identity safety moderates the effects of stereotype
threat on women’s leadership aspirations. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 88:276–87
De Corte W, Lievens F, Sackett PR. 2007. Combining predictors to achieve optimal trade-offs between selection quality and adverse impact. J. Appl. Psychol. 92(5):1380–93
DiTomaso N. 2012. The American Non-Dilemma: Racial Inequality Without Racism. New York: Russell Sage
Found.
Dovidio JF, Gaertner SL. 2004. Aversive racism. Adv. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 36:1–52
Dovidio JF, Hebl MR, Richeson JA, Shelton JN. 2006. Nonverbal communication, race, and intergroup
interaction. In The Sage Handbook of Nonverbal Communication, ed. V Manusov, ML Patterson,
pp. 481–500. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Dovidio JF, Kawakami K, Gaertner SL. 2002. Implicit and explicit prejudice and interracial interaction.
J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 82(1):62–68

544

Walton



Murphy



Ryan

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Duckworth AL, Peterson C, Matthews MD, Kelly DR. 2007. Grit: perseverance and passion for long-term
goals. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 92:1087–101
Duckworth AL, Seligman ME. 2005. Self-discipline outdoes IQ in predicting academic performance of
adolescents. Psychol. Sci. 16(12):939–44
Duguid M. 2011. Female tokens in high-prestige work groups: catalysts or inhibitors of group diversification?
Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 116(1):104–15
Dweck CS. 2006. Mindset: The New Psychology of Success. New York: Random House
Eagly AH, Karau SJ. 2002. Role congruity theory of prejudice toward female leaders. Psychol. Rev. 109:573–98
Ely RJ. 1995. The power of demography: women’s social constructions of gender identity at work. Acad.
Manag. J. 38:589–634
Ely RJ, Thomas DA. 2001. Cultural diversity at work: the effects of diversity perspectives on work group
processes and outcomes. Adm. Sci. Q. 46:229–73
Emerson KTU, Murphy MC. 2014. Identity threat at work: how social identity threat and situational cues
contribute to racial and ethnic disparities in the workplace. Cult. Divers. Ethnic Minor. Psychol.
20(4):508–20
Emerson KTU, Murphy MC. 2015. A company I can trust? Organizational lay theories moderate stereotype
threat for women. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 41(2):295–307
Erman S, Walton GM. 2015. Stereotype threat and anti-discrimination law: Affirmative steps to promote
meritocracy and racial equality in education. South. Calif. Law Rev. 88(2). In press
Ford JK, Kraiger K, Schechtman SL. 1986. Study of race effects in objective indices and subjective evaluations of
performance: a meta-analysis of performance criteria. Psychol. Bull. 99(3):330–37
Frear KA, Paustian-Underdahl S. 2011. From elusive to obvious: improving performance management through
specificity. Ind. Organ. Psychol. 4(2):198–200
Garcia J, Cohen GL. 2012. A social psychological approach to educational intervention. In Behavioral
Foundations of Public Policy, ed. E Shafir, pp. 329–47. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press
Gaucher D, Friesen J, Kay AC. 2011. Evidence that gendered wording in job advertisements exists and sustains
gender inequality. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 101:109–28
Giumetti GW, Schroeder AN, Switzer FS, 2014. Forced distribution rating systems: When does “rank and
yank” lead to adverse impact? J. Appl. Psychol. 100(1):180–93
Goff PA, Steele CM, Davies PG. 2008. The space between us: stereotype threat and distance in interracial
contexts. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 94:91–107
Golubovich J, Grand J, Ryan AM, Schmitt N. 2014. An examination of common sensitivity review practices in
test development. Int. J. Sel. Assess. 22:1–11
Golubovich J, Ryan AM. 2012. Demographic cues in video-based situational judgment items. Presented at
Annu. Conf. Soc. Ind. Organ. Psych. Conference, 27th, Apr. 26–28, San Diego
Good C, Aronson J, Harder JA. 2008. Problems in the pipeline: stereotype threat and women’s achievement in
high-level math courses. J. Appl. Dev. Psychol. 29:17–28
Good C, Aronson J, Inzlicht M. 2003. Improving adolescents’ standardized test performance: an intervention
to reduce the effects of stereotype threat. J. Appl. Dev. Psychol. 24:645–62
Grand J. 2012. An examination of stereotype threat effects on knowledge acquisition in an exploratory
learning paradigm. PhD Thesis, Mich. State Univ., East Lansing
Grand JA, Ryan AM, Schmitt N, Hmurovic J. 2011. How far does stereotype threat reach? The potential
detriment of face validity in cognitive ability testing. Hum. Perform. 24:1–28
Greenhaus JH, Parasuraman S, Wormley WM. 1990. Effects of race on organizational experiences, job
performance evaluations, and career outcomes. Acad. Manag. J. 33:64–86
Harber KD. 1998. Feedback to minorities: evidence of a positive bias. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 74(3):622–28
Hattrup K, Rock J. 2002. A comparison of predictor-based and criterion-based methods for weighing predictors to reduce adverse impact. Appl. HRM Res. 7(1/2):22–38
Hebl MR, Foster JB, Mannix LM, Dovidio JF. 2002. Formal and interpersonal discrimination: a field study of
bias toward homosexual applicants. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 28(6):815–25
Herdman AO, McMillan-Capehart A. 2010. Establishing a diversity program is not enough: exploring the
determinants of diversity climate. J. Bus. Psychol. 25:39–53

www.annualreviews.org



Stereotype Threat in Organizations

545

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Hess TM, Auman C, Colcombe S, Rahhal T. 2003. The impact of stereotype threat on age differences in
memory performance. J. Gerontol. B Psychol. Sci. Soc. Sci. 58:3–11
Hmurovic J, Ryan AM, Schmitt N, Grand J 2009. Sensitivity or stereotype threat? Effects of gendered test
content. Presented at Annu. Conf. Soc. Ind. Organ. Psychol., 24th, Apr. 2–4, New Orleans, LA
Holleran SE, Whitehead J, Schmader T, Mehl MR. 2011. Talking shop and shooting the breeze: a study of
workplace conversation and job disengagement among STEM faculty. Soc. Psychol. Personal. Sci.
2(1):65–71
Holoien DS, Shelton JN. 2012. You deplete me: the cognitive costs of colorblindness on ethnic minorities.
J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 48(2):562–65
Homan AC, Van Knippenberg D, Van Kleef GA, De Dreu CKW. 2007. Interacting dimensions of diversity:
cross-categorization and the functioning of diverse work groups. Group Dyn. 11(2):79–94
Hough LM, Oswald FL, Ployhart RE. 2001. Determinants, detection and amelioration of adverse impact in
personnel selection procedures: issues, evidence and lessons learned. Int. J. Sel. Assess. 9(1/2):152–94
Huffcutt AI, Roth PL. 1998. Racial group differences in employment interview evaluations. J. Appl. Psychol.
83(2):179–89
Ilgen DR, Youtz MA. 1986. Factors affecting the evaluation and development of minorities in organizations. In
Research in Personnel and Human Resource Management: A Research Annual, ed. K Rowland, G Ferris,
pp. 307–37. Greenwich, CT: JAI
Inzlicht M, Ben-Zeev T. 2000. A threatening intellectual environment: why females are susceptible to experiencing problem-solving deficits in the presence of males. Psychol. Sci. 11:365–71
Inzlicht M, Schmader T, eds. 2012. Stereotype Threat: Theory, Process, and Application. New York: Oxford
Univ. Press
Ioannides YM, Loury LD. 2004. Job information networks, neighborhood effects, and inequality. J. Econ. Lit.
42:1056–93
Jackson PB, Thoits PA, Taylor HF. 1995. Composition of the workplace and psychological well-being: the
effects of tokenism on America’s Black elite. Soc. Forces 74(2):543–57
James EH. 2000. Race-related differences in promotions and support: underlying effects of human and social
capital. Organ. Sci. 11:493–508
Jamieson JP, Mendes WB, Blackstock E, Schmader T. 2010. Turning the knots in your stomach into bows:
Reappraising arousal improves performance on the GRE. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 46(1):208–12
Johns J, Inzlicht M, Schmader T. 2008. Stereotype threat and executive resource depletion: examining the
influence of emotion regulation. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 137:691–705
Johns M, Schmader T, Martens A. 2005. Knowing is half the battle: teaching stereotype threat as a means of
improving women’s math performance. Psychol. Sci. 16:175–79
Kabat-Farr D, Cortina LM. 2014. Sex-based harassment in employment: new insights into gender and context.
Law Hum. Behav. 38(1):58–72
Kalev A, Dobbin F, Kelly E. 2006. Best practices or best guesses? Assessing the efficacy of corporate affirmative
action and diversity policies. Am. Sociol. Rev. 71:589–617
Kalokerinos EK, Von Hippel C, Zacher H. 2014. Is stereotype threat a useful construct for organizational
psychology research and practice? Ind. Organ. Psychol. 7:381–402
Kanter RM. 1979. Differential access to opportunity and power. In Discrimination in Organizations, ed.
R Alvarez, pp. 52–68. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass
Karsten MF, ed. 2006. Gender, Race, and Ethnicity in the Workplace: Management, Gender, and Ethnicity in
the United States, Vol. 1. Westport, CT: Praeger
Kasinitz P, Rosenberg J. 1996. Missing the connection: social isolation and employment on the Brooklyn
waterfront. Soc. Probl. 43:180–96
Kirby D, Jackson JS. 1999. Mitigating perceptions of racism: the importance of work group composition and
supervisor’s race. In Mentoring Dilemmas: Developmental Relationship Within Multicultural Organizations, ed. AJ Murrell, FJ Crosby, RJ Ely, pp. 143–55. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum
Kirnan JP, Alfieri JA, Bragger JD, Harris RS. 2009. An investigation of stereotype threat in employment tests.
J. Appl. Soc. Psychol. 39:359–88

546

Walton



Murphy



Ryan

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Klein HJ, Polin B. 2012. Are organizations on board with best practices onboarding? In The Oxford Handbook
of Organizational Socialization, ed. CR Wanberg, pp. 267–87. New York: Oxford Univ. Press
Kray LJ, Shirako A. 2012. Stereotype threat in organizations: an examination of its scope, triggers and possible
interventions. See Inzlicht & Schmader 2012, pp. 173–87
Kray LJ, Thompson L, Galinsky A. 2001. Battle of the sexes: gender stereotype confirmation and reactance in
negotiations. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 80:942–58
Landau J. 1995. The relationship of race and gender to managers’ ratings of promotion potential. J. Organ.
Behav. 16:391–400
Leskinen EA, Cortina LM. 2014. Dimensions of disrespect: mapping and measuring gender harassment in
organizations. Psychol. Women Q. 38(1):107–23
Logel C, Iserman EC, Davies PG, Quinn DM, Spencer SJ. 2009a. The perils of double consciousness: the role of
thought suppression in stereotype threat. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 45:299–312
Logel C, Walton GM, Spencer SJ, Iserman EC, Von Hippel W, Bell A. 2009b. Interacting with sexist men
triggers social identity threat among female engineers. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 96:1089–103
London M. 1997. Job Feedback: Giving, Seeking, and Using Feedback for Performance Improvement.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum
Madera JM, Hebl MR. 2013. “Don’t stigmatize”: the ironic effects of equal opportunity guidelines in
interviews. Basic Appl. Soc. Psych. 35:123–30
Mannix E, Neale MA. 2006. What differences make a difference? The promise and reality of diverse teams in
organizations. Psychol. Sci. Public Interest 6:31–55
Markus HR, Steele CM, Steele DM. 2000. Color blindness as a barrier to inclusion: assimilation and nonimmigrant minorities. In Engaging Cultural Differences: The Multicultural Challenge in Liberal Democracies, ed. RA Shweder, Minow M, pp. 453–72. New York: Russell Sage Found.
Marsden PV, Gorman EH. 2001. Social networks, job changes, and recruitment. In Sourcebook of Labor
Markets: Evolving Structures and Processes, Vol. 4, ed. I Berg, AL Kalleberg, pp. 467–502. New York:
Kluwer Academic/Plenum
Martens A, Johns M, Greenberg J, Schimel J. 2006. Combating stereotype threat: the effect of self-affirmation
on women’s intellectual performance. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 42:236–43
Marx DM, Goff PA. 2005. Clearing the air: the effect of experimenter race on target’s test performance and
subjective experience. Br. J. Soc. Psychol. 44:645–57
Massey DS, Fischer MJ. 2005. Stereotype threat and academic performance: new findings from a racially
diverse sample of college freshmen. Du Bois Rev. 2:45–67
McConnell AR, Leibold JM. 2001. Relations among the Implicit Association Test, discriminatory behavior,
and explicit measures of racial attitudes. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 37:435–42
McDonald S. 2011. What’s in the “old boys” network? Accessing social capital in gendered and racialized
networks. Soc. Netw. 33(4):317–30
McIntyre RB, Paulson RM, Lord CG. 2003. Alleviating women’s mathematics stereotype threat through
salience of group achievements. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 39:83–90
McKay PF, Avery DR, Tonidandel S, Morris MA, Hernandez M, Hebl MR. 2007. Racial differences in
employee retention: Are diversity climate perceptions the key? Pers. Psychol. 60:35–62
McLean B, Elkind P. 2003. Smartest Guys in the Room: The Amazing Rise and Scandalous Fall of Enron. New
York: Penguin
Miyake A, Smith-Kost LE, Finkelstein ND, Pollock SJ, Cohen GL, Ito TA. 2010. Reducing the gender
achievement gap in college science: a classroom study of values affirmation. Science 330:1234–37
Moss P, Tilly C. 2001. Stories Employers Tell: Race, Skill, and Hiring in America. New York: Russell Sage
Found.
Mueller CW, De Coster S, Estes SB. 2001. Sexual harassment in the workplace: unanticipated consequences of
modern social control in organizations. Work Occup. 28(4):411–46
Murphy MC, Dweck CS. 2010. A culture of genius: how an organization’s lay theory shapes people’s
cognition, affect, and behavior. Personal. Psychol. Bull. 36:283–96
Murphy MC, Richeson JA, Shelton JN, Rheinschmidt ML, Bergsieker HB. 2013. Cognitive costs of contemporary prejudice. Group Process. Intergroup Relat. 16:560–71

www.annualreviews.org



Stereotype Threat in Organizations

547

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Murphy MC, Steele CM, Gross JJ. 2007. Signaling threat: how situational cues affect women in math, science,
and engineering settings. Psychol. Sci. 18:879–85
Murphy MC, Taylor VJ. 2012. The role of situational cues in signaling and maintaining stereotype threat. See
Inzlicht & Schmader 2012, pp. 17–33
Murphy MC, Walton GM. 2013. From prejudiced people to prejudiced places. In Stereotyping and Prejudice,
ed. C Stangor, CS Crandall, pp. 181–203. New York: Psychol. Press
Nguyen HD, Ryan AM. 2008. Does stereotype threat affect test performance of minorities and women? A
meta-analysis of experimental evidence. J. Appl. Psychol. 93:1314–34
Niemann YF, Dovidio JF. 1998. Relationship of solo status, academic rank, and perceived distinctiveness to job
satisfaction of racial/ethnic minorities. J. Appl. Psychol. 83:55–71
Obama M, Obama B. 2014. Remarks by the President and First Lady. Presented at Coll. Oppor. Summit, Jan.
16, Washington, DC. http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/01/16/remarks-president-andfirst-lady-college-opportunity-summit
Osborne JW. 2006. Gender, stereotype threat, and anxiety: psychophysiological and cognitive evidence.
Electron. J. Res. Educ. Psychol. 4(1):109–38
Paunesku D, Walton GM, Romero CL, Smith EN, Yeager DS, Dweck CS. In press. Mindset interventions are
a scalable treatment for academic underperformance. Psychol. Sci.
Plaut VC, Garnett FG, Buffardi L, Sanchez-Burks J. 2011. What about me? Perceptions of exclusion and
Whites’ reactions to multiculturalism. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 101:337–53
Plaut VC, Thomas KM, Goren MJ. 2009. Is multiculturalism or color blindness better for minorities? Psychol.
Sci. 20:444–46
Purdie-Vaughns V, Steele CM, Davies PG, Ditlmann R, Crosby JR. 2008. Social identity contingencies: how
diversity cues signal threat or safety for African Americans in mainstream institutions. J. Personal. Soc.
Psychol. 94(4):615–30
Raeburn N. 2004. Lesbian and Gay Workplace Rights: Changing Corporate America from Inside Out.
Minneapolis: Univ. Minn. Press
Reskin BF, McBrier DB, Kmec JA. 1999. The determinants and consequences of workplace sex and race
composition. Annu. Rev. Sociol. 25:335–61
Richeson JA, Shelton JN. 2012. Stereotype threat in interracial interactions. See Inzlicht & Schmader 2012,
pp. 231–48
Roberson L, Deitch EA, Brief AP, Block CJ. 2003. Stereotype threat and feedback seeking in the workplace.
J. Vocat. Behav. 62(1):176–88
Roberson L, Galvin BM, Charles AC. 2007. When group identities matter: bias in performance appraisal.
Acad. Manag. Ann. 1:617–50
Roberson L, Kulik CT. 2007. Stereotype threat at work. Acad. Manag. Perspect. 21(2):24–40
Ross L, Nisbett RE. 1991. The Person and the Situation: Perspectives of Social Psychology. New York:
McGraw-Hill
Roth PL, Le H, Oh I, Van Iddekinge CH, Buster MA, et al. 2014. Differential validity for cognitive ability
tests in employment and educational settings: not much more than range restriction? J. Appl. Psychol.
99(1):1–20
Ryan AM, Sackett PR. 2013. Stereotype threat in assessments. In APA Handbook of Testing and Assessment in
Psychology, Vol. 1: Test Theory and Testing and Assessment in Industrial and Organizational Psychology, ed. KF Geisinger, BA Bracken, JF Carlson, JC Hansen, NR Kuncel, pp. 661–73. Washington,
DC: Am. Psychol. Assoc.
Ryan CS, Hunt JS, Weible JA, Peterson CR, Casas JF. 2007. Multicultural and colorblind ideology, stereotypes, and ethnocentrism among Black and White Americans. Group Process. Intergroup Relat.
10:617–37
Rydell RJ, Shiffrin RM, Boucher KL, Van Loo K, Rydell MT. 2010. Stereotype threat prevents perceptual
learning. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107:14042–47
Sackett PR, Roth L. 1991. A Monte Carlo examination of banding and rank order methods of test score use in
personnel selection. Hum. Perform. 4:279–95

548

Walton



Murphy



Ryan

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Sackett PR, Ryan AM. 2012. Concerns about generalizing stereotype threat research findings to operational
high-stakes testing. See Inzlicht & Schmader 2012, pp. 249–63
Sackett PR, Wilk SL. 1994. Within-group norming and other forms of score adjustment in preemployment
testing. Am. Psychol. 49:929–54
Saenz DS, Lord CG. 1989. Reversing roles: a cognitive strategy for undoing memory deficits associated with
token status. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 56:698–708
Salvatore J, Shelton JN. 2007. Cognitive costs of exposure to racial prejudice. Psychol. Sci. 18:810–15
Schleicher DJ, Bull RA, Green SG. 2009. Rater reactions to forced distribution rating systems. J. Manag.
35(4):899–927
Schmader T, Beilock S. 2012. An integration of processes that underlie stereotype threat. See Inzlicht &
Schmader 2012, pp. 34–50
Schmader T, Johns M. 2003. Converging evidence that stereotype threat reduces working memory capacity.
J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 85:440–52
Schmader T, Johns M, Forbes C. 2008. An integrated process model of stereotype threat effects on performance. Psychol. Rev. 115(2):336–56
Schneider KT, Swan S, Fitzgerald LF. 1997. Job-related and psychological effects of sexual harassment in the
workplace: empirical evidence from two organizations. J. Appl. Psychol. 82:401–15
Sekaquaptewa D, Espinoza P, Thompson M, Vargas P, Von Hippel W. 2003. Stereotypic explanatory bias:
implicit stereotyping as a predictor of discrimination. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 39(1):75–82
Sekaquaptewa D, Thompson M. 2002. The differential effects of solo status on members of high- and lowstatus groups. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 28(5):694–707
Sekaquaptewa D, Thompson M. 2003. Solo status, stereotype threat, and performance expectancies: their
effects on women’s performance. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 39(1):68–74
Sherman DK, Cohen GL. 2006. The psychology of self-defense: self-affirmation theory. In Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology, Vol. 38, ed. MP Zanna, pp. 183–242. San Diego: Academic
Sherman DK, Hartson KA. 2011. Reconciling self-defense with self-criticism: self-affirmation theory. In
Handbook of Self-Enhancement and Self-Protection, ed. MD Alicke, C Sedikides, pp. 128–51. New York:
Guilford
Sherman DK, Hartson KA, Binning KR, Purdie-Vaughns V, Garcia J, et al. 2013. Deflecting the trajectory and
changing the narrative: how self-affirmation affects academic performance and motivation under identity
threat. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 104:591–618
Shih M, Young MJ, Bucher A. 2013. Working to reduce the effects of discrimination: identity management
strategies in organizations. Am. Psychol. 68(3):145–57
Singh B, Winkel DE, Selvarajan TT. 2013. Managing diversity at work: Does psychological safety hold the key
to racial differences in employee performance? J. Occup. Organ. Psychol. 86:242–63
Spencer SJ, Steele CM, Quinn DM. 1999. Stereotype threat and women’s math performance. J. Exp. Soc.
Psychol. 35:4–28
Stangor C, Carr C, Kiang L. 1998. Activating stereotypes undermines task performance expectations.
J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 75(5):1191–97
Steele CM. 1997. A threat in the air: how stereotypes shape intellectual identity and performance. Am. Psychol.
52:613–29
Steele CM. 2010. Whistling Vivaldi: And Other Clues to How Stereotypes Affect Us. New York: Norton
Steele CM, Aronson J. 1995. Stereotype threat and the intellectual test performance of African Americans.
J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 69:797–811
Steele CM, Spencer SJ, Aronson J. 2002. Contending with group image: the psychology of stereotype and social
identity threat. In Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, Vol. 34, ed. MP Zanna, pp. 379–440. San
Diego: Academic
Steele DM, Cohn-Vargas B. 2013. Identity Safe Classrooms: Places to Belong and Learn. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Corwin
Sternberg RJ, Rainbow Proj. Collab. 2006. The Rainbow Project: enhancing the SAT through assessments of
analytical, practical, and creative skills. Intelligence 34:321–50

www.annualreviews.org



Stereotype Threat in Organizations

549

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Stevens FG, Plaut VC, Sanchez-Burks J. 2008. Unlocking the benefits of diversity: all-inclusive multiculturalism
and positive organizational change. J. Appl. Behav. Sci. 44:116–33
Stoker JI, Van der Velde M, Lammers J. 2012. Factors relating to managerial stereotypes: the role of gender of
the employee and the manager and management gender ratio. J. Bus. Psychol. 27:31–42
Stone J, Lynch CI, Sjomeling M, Darley JM. 1999. Stereotype threat effects on Black and White athletic
performance. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 77:1213–27
Tapia AH, Kvasny L. 2004. Recruitment is never enough: retention of women and minorities in the IT
workplace. Proc. 2004 SIGMIS Conf. Comput. Pers. Res.: Careers Cult. Ethics Netw. Environ., Tucson,
AZ, pp. 84–91. New York: Assoc. Comput. Mach.
Taylor VJ, Walton GM. 2011. Stereotype threat undermines academic learning. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull.
37:1055–67
Thomas DA, Kram KE. 1988. Promoting career-enhancing relationships in organizations: the role of the
human resource professional. In The Human Resource Professional and Employee Career Development,
ed. M London, E Mone, pp. 49–66. New York: Greenwood
Thomas KM. 2008. Diversity Resistance in Organizations. New York: Erlbaum-Taylor Francis
Topa G. 2011. Labor markets and referrals. In Handbook of Social Economics, ed. J Benhabib, A Bisin,
MO Jackson, pp. 1193–221. Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland
Tracey JB, Tannenbaum SI, Kavanagh MJ. 1995. Applying trained skills on the job: the importance of the work
environment. J. Appl. Psychol. 80(2):239–52
Turner ME, Pratkanis AR. 1994. Social identity maintenance prescriptions for preventing groupthink: reducing identity protection and enhancing intellectual conflict. Int. J. Conflict Manag. 5(3):254–70
Voyles E, Finkelstein L, King E. 2014. A tale of two theories: stereotype threat and metastereotypes. Ind.
Organ. Psychol. 7:419–22
Walton GM, Carr PB. 2012. Social belonging and the motivation and intellectual achievement of negatively
stereotyped students. See Inzlicht & Schmader 2012, pp. 89–106
Walton GM, Cohen GL. 2003. Stereotype lift. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 39:456–67
Walton GM, Cohen GL. 2007. A question of belonging: race, social fit, and achievement. J. Personal. Soc.
Psychol. 92:82–96
Walton GM, Cohen GL. 2011. A brief social-belonging intervention improves academic and health outcomes
of minority students. Science 331:1447–51
Walton GM, Logel C, Peach J, Spencer S, Zanna MP. 2014. Two brief interventions to mitigate a “chilly
climate” transform women’s experience, relationships, and achievement in engineering. J. Educ. Psychol.
In press
Walton GM, Spencer SJ. 2009. Latent ability: grades and test scores systematically underestimate the intellectual ability of negatively stereotyped students. Psychol. Sci. 20:1132–39
Walton GM, Spencer SJ, Erman S. 2013. Affirmative meritocracy. Soc. Issues Policy Rev. 7:1–35
Wee S, Newman DA, Joseph DL. 2014. More than g: selection quality and adverse impact implications of
considering second-stratum cognitive abilities. J. Appl. Psychol. 99(4):547–63
Wiesenfeld BM, Brockner J, Martin C. 1999. A self-affirmation analysis of survivors’ reactions to unfair
organizational downsizings. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 35(5):441–60
Williams JR, Miller CE, Steelman LA, Levy PE. 1999. Increasing feedback seeking in public contexts: It takes
two (or more) to tango. J. Appl. Psychol. 84(6):969–76
Wolsko C, Park B, Judd CM, Wittenbrink B. 2000. Framing interethnic ideology: effects of multicultural and
color-blind perspectives on judgments of groups and individuals. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 78:635–54
Woodcock A, Hernandez PR, Estrada M, Schultz PW. 2012. The consequences of chronic stereotype threat:
domain disidentification and abandonment. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 103(4):635–46
Yeager DS, Paunesku D, Walton GM, Dweck CS. 2013. How can we instill productive mindsets at scale? A
review of the evidence and an initial R&D agenda. Prepared for White House Meet. Excell. Educ.:
Importance Acad. Mindsets, May 10, Washington, DC
Yeager DS, Walton GM. 2011. Social-psychological interventions in education: They’re not magic. Rev. Educ.
Res. 81:267–301

550

Walton



Murphy



Ryan

Annual Review of
Organizational
Psychology and

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Organizational Behavior

Volume 2, 2015

Contents
Organizational Psychology Then and Now: Some Observations
Edgar H. Schein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Group Affect
Sigal G. Barsade and Andrew P. Knight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
The Modeling and Assessment of Work Performance
John P. Campbell and Brenton M. Wiernik . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Justice, Fairness, and Employee Reactions
Jason A. Colquitt and Kate P. Zipay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Methodological and Substantive Issues in Conducting Multinational and
Cross-Cultural Research
Paul E. Spector, Cong Liu, and Juan I. Sanchez . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
Leadership Development: An Outcome-Oriented Review Based on Time and
Levels of Analyses
David V. Day and Lisa Dragoni . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
Beyond Lewin: Toward a Temporal Approximation of Organization
Development and Change
Jean M. Bartunek and Richard W. Woodman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157
Beyond the Big Five: New Directions for Personality Research and Practice in
Organizations
Leaetta M. Hough, Frederick L. Oswald, and Jisoo Ock . . . . . . . . . . . . . 183
Corporate Social Responsibility: Psychological, Person-Centric, and
Progressing
Deborah E. Rupp and Drew B. Mallory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 211
Time in Individual-Level Organizational Studies: What Is It, How Is It Used,
and Why Isn’t It Exploited More Often?
Abbie J. Shipp and Michael S. Cole . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 237

vi

Dynamics of Well-Being
Sabine Sonnentag . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 261
Low-Fidelity Simulations
Jeff A. Weekley, Ben Hawkes, Nigel Guenole, and Robert E. Ployhart . . . 295

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Emotional Labor at a Crossroads: Where Do We Go from Here?
Alicia A. Grandey and Allison S. Gabriel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 323
Supporting the Aging Workforce: A Review and Recommendations for
Workplace Intervention Research
Donald M. Truxillo, David M. Cadiz, and Leslie B. Hammer . . . . . . . . . 351
ESM 2.0: State of the Art and Future Potential of Experience Sampling
Methods in Organizational Research
Daniel J. Beal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 383
Ethical Leadership
Deanne N. Den Hartog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 409
Differential Validity and Differential Prediction of Cognitive Ability Tests:
Understanding Test Bias in the Employment Context
Christopher M. Berry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 435
Organizational Routines as Patterns of Action: Implications for Organizational
Behavior
Brian T. Pentland and Thorvald Hærem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 465
Pay, Intrinsic Motivation, Extrinsic Motivation, Performance, and Creativity
in the Workplace: Revisiting Long-Held Beliefs
Barry Gerhart and Meiyu Fang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 489
Stereotype Threat in Organizations: Implications for Equity and Performance
Gregory M. Walton, Mary C. Murphy, and Ann Marie Ryan . . . . . . . . . . 523
Technology and Assessment in Selection
Nancy T. Tippins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 551
Workplace Stress Management Interventions and Health Promotion
Lois E. Tetrick and Carolyn J. Winslow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 583
Errata
An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and
Organizational Behavior articles may be found at http://www.annualreviews.org/
errata/orgpsych.

Contents

vii

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

See	discussions,	stats,	and	author	profiles	for	this	publication	at:	https://www.researchgate.net/publication/274781571

Mindset	interventions	are	a	scalable	treatment
for	academic	underachievement
Article		in		Psychological	Science	·	April	2015
DOI:	10.1177/0956797615571017	·	Source:	PubMed

CITATIONS

READS

87

691

6	authors,	including:
Gregory	M	Walton

Eric	Smith

Stanford	University

Stanford	University

38	PUBLICATIONS			2,199	CITATIONS			

1	PUBLICATION			87	CITATIONS			

SEE	PROFILE

SEE	PROFILE

David	S.	Yeager
University	of	Texas	at	Austin
41	PUBLICATIONS			1,483	CITATIONS			
SEE	PROFILE

Some	of	the	authors	of	this	publication	are	also	working	on	these	related	projects:

Online	panels	data	quality	View	project

All	content	following	this	page	was	uploaded	by	David	S.	Yeager	on	30	September	2015.
The	user	has	requested	enhancement	of	the	downloaded	file.

571017
research-article2015

PSSXXX10.1177/0956797615571017Paunesku et al.A Scalable Intervention for Academic Underachievement

Psychological Science OnlineFirst, published on April 10, 2015 as doi:10.1177/0956797615571017

Research Article

Mind-Set Interventions Are a
Scalable Treatment for Academic
Underachievement

Psychological Science
1﻿ ­–10
© The Author(s) 2015
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0956797615571017
pss.sagepub.com

David Paunesku1, Gregory M. Walton1, Carissa Romero1,
Eric N. Smith1, David S. Yeager2, and Carol S. Dweck1
1

Stanford University and 2University of Texas, Austin

Abstract
The efficacy of academic-mind-set interventions has been demonstrated by small-scale, proof-of-concept interventions,
generally delivered in person in one school at a time. Whether this approach could be a practical way to raise school
achievement on a large scale remains unknown. We therefore delivered brief growth-mind-set and sense-of-purpose
interventions through online modules to 1,594 students in 13 geographically diverse high schools. Both interventions
were intended to help students persist when they experienced academic difficulty; thus, both were predicted to be
most beneficial for poorly performing students. This was the case. Among students at risk of dropping out of high
school (one third of the sample), each intervention raised students’ semester grade point averages in core academic
courses and increased the rate at which students performed satisfactorily in core courses by 6.4 percentage points. We
discuss implications for the pipeline from theory to practice and for education reform.
Keywords
academic achievement, motivation, intervention, educational psychology, adolescent development
Received 6/25/14; Revision accepted 1/12/15

Every year, high-quality articles published in the finest
journals demonstrate the power of psychological interventions to bring about meaningful change in academic
achievement (e.g., J. Aronson, Fried, & Good, 2002;
Blackwell, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2007; Cohen, Garcia,
Purdie-Vaughns, Apfel, & Brzustoski, 2009; Good, Aronson,
& Inzlicht, 2003; Harackiewicz, Rozek, Hulleman, & Hyde,
2012; Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009; Jamieson, Mendes,
Blackstock, & Schmader, 2010; Sherman et  al., 2013;
Walton & Cohen, 2011; Wilson & Linville, 1982, 1985). Yet
a critical limitation of these interventions is they are rarely
tested in ways that can be readily scaled up. They often
require that researchers be extensively and personally
involved at school sites to ensure appropriate delivery of
the intervention (see Yeager & Walton, 2011). It is therefore unclear whether any published psychological intervention can move beyond a boutique remedy to raise
achievement or close achievement gaps for large numbers
of students. In the study reported here, we addressed that
issue. We tested, for the first time, whether psychological
interventions could practically be deployed to raise academic achievement on a wide-scale.

Our focus is on underperformance in U.S. high
schools. Millions of students drop out of high school
every year. They tend to be unprepared for either college
or the workforce and consequently suffer poorer job
prospects, worse health, and higher incarceration rates
than people who complete high school (Dianda, 2008).
President Obama recently identified improvement in
educational outcomes as one of the highest domestic priorities in the United States (U.S. Department of Education,
2014). Of course, many reforms have been tried, including improvements to teacher training, accountability
mechanisms, school structures, and curricula, often at
high cost and with limited success (e.g., Fullan, 2001;
Glazerman et  al., 2010). Yet no major reform has
Corresponding Authors:
David Paunesku, Department of Psychology, Stanford University,
Jordan Hall, Bldg. 420, 450 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305
Email: paunesku@stanford.edu
Gregory M. Walton, Department of Psychology, Stanford University,
Jordan Hall, Bldg. 420, 450 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305
E-mail: gwalton@stanford.edu

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on April 30, 2015

Paunesku et al.

2	
prioritized students’ psychological experience in school
or motivation to succeed, despite the fact that it is ultimately students themselves who must capitalize on learning opportunities. Can psychological science provide
scalable techniques to improve students’ approach to
learning and achievement in high school?
Although social-psychological or academic-mind-set
interventions (Farrington et al., 2012) have been influential, none of them have been tested in ways that are
potentially scalable. The problem is not so much that
past interventions included small samples but that they
have generally been tested in only one context at a time
and with far greater researcher involvement and control
than would be feasible in a large-scale implementation
(Farrington et  al., 2012; Yeager & Walton, 2011). This
includes tailoring materials for each school site, extensive
training of participating faculty, and exerting close control over the context and timing of intervention delivery.
These studies provide important tests of psychological
theory and its application. However, if interventions are
not tested in realistic ways with broad samples and minimal researcher input, they remain only exemplary test
cases whose practical impact on education outcomes is
unclear. As Bryk, Gomez, and Grunow (2011) wrote, “the
history of educational innovation is replete with stories
that show how innovations work in the hands of a few,
but lose effectiveness in the hands of the many” (p. 130).
Are academic-mind-set interventions a practical way
to raise achievement in the United States, especially for
underperforming students? If so, this would constitute a
major contribution of psychological science to social policy and justify increased investment in psychological
approaches to educational and social improvement.
To examine whether mind-set interventions could be
effective at scale, we transformed existing in-person
interventions into brief computer-based modules.
Computerized interventions allow materials to be delivered to recipients exactly as designed without extensive
researcher involvement or facilitator training; they eliminate geographic constraints, opening access to students
at multiple school sites and sites far from research centers; and they drastically reduce logistical burdens, the
marginal cost of additional participants, and the costs of
data collection and large-scale evaluation (Marks,
Cavanagh, & Gega, 2007).
We tested two mind-set interventions—one for growth
mind-set of intelligence1 and a second for sense of purpose—with more than 1,500 students in 13 high schools.
The primary outcomes were grades and satisfactory completion rates in core academic subjects. We focused on
effects among poorly performing students, because
mind-sets matter most when students encounter challenges in school (Burnette, O’Boyle, VanEpps, Pollack, &
Finkel, 2013; Dweck & Leggett, 1988).

Academic-Mind-Set Interventions
Academic-mind-set interventions target students’ core
beliefs about school and learning, such as “Can I learn
and grow my intelligence?” (growth-mind-set beliefs) and
“Why should I learn?” (sense-of-purpose beliefs). In so
doing, they can change how students interpret and
respond to challenges in school, increase students’ resilience, and set in motion positive recursive cycles that
increase success over time (Garcia & Cohen, 2012; Yeager
& Walton, 2011).
Growth-mind-set interventions convey that intelligence can grow when students work hard on challenging
tasks—and thus that struggle is an opportunity for
growth, not a sign that a student is incapable of learning.
Past studies featuring activities led by researchers or
researcher-trained tutors show that this message can raise
students’ achievement. In a seminal study, J. Aronson and
his colleagues (2002) taught a growth mind-set to college
students in three 1-hr laboratory sessions and then
encouraged students to internalize this message by teaching it to struggling middle school students. This experience raised the college students’ semester grade point
averages (GPAs). In another study, an eight-session
growth-mind-set workshop led by researchers raised the
math grades of low-achieving seventh-grade students
(Blackwell et  al., 2007; see also Good et  al., 2003).
Because growth-mind-set interventions help students
understand challenges in school in a way that promotes
learning and resilience, they may be most beneficial for
underperforming students (Burnette et al., 2013).
Sense-of-purpose interventions encourage students to
reflect on how working hard and learning in school can
help them accomplish meaningful goals beyond the self,
such as contributing to their community or being examples for other people (Yeager & Bundick, 2009; Yeager,
Henderson, D’Mello, et al., 2014). They draw on relevance interventions (Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009),
which help students relate course content to their lives.
However, they are framed more broadly, in terms of the
value of school in general. Like relevance interventions,
sense-of-purpose interventions can sustain students’
motivation when schoolwork is boring or frustrating but
foundational to learning. In so doing, they can raise
achievement, especially among underperforming students (Yeager, Henderson, D’Mello, et al., 2014).
Because mind-set interventions typically target a single keystone belief, they can be brief (e.g., an hour or
less) and can be delivered using standardized materials
(Cohen et  al., 2009; Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009;
Walton & Cohen, 2011; see Walton, 2014). We focused on
growth-mind-set and sense-of-purpose interventions
because they seemed most suitable to an initial effort to
scale such interventions to heterogeneous settings. They

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on April 30, 2015

A Scalable Intervention for Academic Underachievement	3
do not require customization to course content (unlike,
e.g., Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009) or reference students’ school context (unlike, e.g., Walton & Cohen,
2011). They use common narratives (e.g., stories from
older students) and objective information (e.g., scientific
concepts) to change core beliefs about school ( J. Aronson
et al., 2002). In this way, such interventions can be distributed in a more flexible array of situations than more
experiential interventions, which may need to take place
within the classroom itself (e.g., Cohen et  al., 2009).
Furthermore, they benefit underperforming students
broadly, unlike interventions that focus on the psychological experience of students from negatively stereotyped groups (e.g., Cohen et al., 2009; Walton & Cohen,
2011).
We took a number of steps to test the interventions
under realistic circumstances like those that would be in
force when the interventions were scaled-up. We included
a heterogeneous sample of schools even though this
introduced more variance in outcomes, and we allowed
schools to control when and by whom intervention activities would be administered. To retain schools that could
not offer extended time for the study, we also dispensed
with extensive survey batteries and psychological process measures such as daily diaries (e.g., Walton & Cohen,
2011). By taking these steps and reducing the “superrealization bias” (Cronbach et al., 1980) that can lead to
large effect sizes in trials with small, highly controlled
samples (Ioannidis, Cappelleri, & Lau, 1998; Slavin &
Smith, 2009), we expected to find more modest but more
realistic and broadly reliable effects.
When psychological-science researchers examine
social problems, the remedies that emerge from their
research are often impractical or not tested in ways that
can be meaningfully scaled up. This is perhaps one reason why psychological science has played only a limited
role in many major policy debates. In the current study,
we tested whether academic-mind-set interventions can
have a meaningful impact on academic outcomes when
delivered to a large sample in a scalable way. If so, our
results could stand as a model for research that takes
theory into practice.

Method
Participating schools and students
Thirteen high schools, recruited through a series of presentations to educators or brief phone meetings, agreed to
participate and provide participating students’ academic
records. The schools were located in the eastern, western,
and southwestern United States. Eight were public schools,
four were charter schools, and one was a private school.
They varied widely in socioeconomic characteristics: In

five schools, almost no students received free or reduced
lunch because of low household income; in six, more
than half of students did (see Table 1).
To maximize external validity and power, we sought
to include as many students as possible in the study.
Consequently, we permitted all interested schools to take
part provided that they agreed to try to enroll 100 or
more students and to provide academic outcomes for
participating students (not all schools reached this benchmark). Our analyses focus on the 1,594 students for
whom both preintervention and postintervention semester grades were available.

Procedure
Participating schools were asked to select a study coordinator who would recruit teachers to participate and follow-up with teachers if classrooms lagged. The
coordinator asked teachers to create accounts on the
study Web site (http://www.perts.net) and to schedule
two 45-min sessions about 2 weeks apart (mean = 13
days). Both sessions were administered in the school
computer lab during the spring semester, between
January and May 2012. In an online registration process,
teachers agreed to describe the activities to students as a
part of an ongoing Stanford University study about why
and how students learn. After signing into the study Web
site, each student was individually randomly assigned to
a control condition or to one of three intervention conditions: growth-mind-set intervention, sense-of-purpose
intervention, or the two interventions combined. For all
groups, the growth-mind-set intervention (or related control materials) was delivered in Session 1; the sense-ofpurpose intervention (or related control materials) was
delivered in Session 2. Students from all four conditions
thus took part in both sessions.
The growth-mind-set intervention drew directly on
past research ( J. Aronson et  al., 2002; Blackwell et  al.,
2007; Good et al., 2003) for both content and procedures;
however, the material was revised to be effective within
a single 45-min online session. Students read an article
describing the brain’s ability to grow and reorganize itself
as a consequence of hard work and good strategies on
challenging tasks. The article focused on the implications
of neuroscience findings for students’ potential to become
more intelligent through study and practice. In keeping
with our focus on underperforming students, the article
stressed the fact that struggle and setbacks in school do
not indicate limited potential; rather, they provide opportunities to learn. This message was reinforced through
two writing exercises (see E. Aronson, 1999; J. Aronson
et al., 2002). In one, students summarized the scientific
findings in their own words. In the second, they read
about a hypothetical student who was becoming

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on April 30, 2015

Paunesku et al.

4	
Table 1.  Participating Schools and Their Demographics

School

School
type

 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
10
11
12
13

Public
Public
Public
Public
Public
Public
Charter
Charter
Public
Charter
Private
Charter
Public

Students
Total
on free or
Mean SAT
Racial composition of school
Number of
school reduced-price score (out
participants enrollment lunch (%)
of 2400) Asian (%) Black (%) Hispanic (%) White (%) Other (%)
361
224
172
135
132
119
79
77
76
69
68
52
30

1,824
1,129
1,781
238
2,059
2,037
1,852
416
174
297
2,049
709
192

8
—
68
85
0
64
6
56
71
39
31
4
90

1795
—
1376
1193
1737
1430
1951
—
1268
1255
1785
1562
—

60
8
1
13
8
2
23
9
4
3
11
0
—

1
14
2
27
1
1
4
24
21
64
6
1
—

9
6
90
53
6
88
9
42
56
26
39
5
—

28
54
5
2
81
8
58
15
6
4
41
93
—

2
18
2
4
4
1
7
9
13
3
2
1
—

Note: Not all information was available for all schools. Total school enrollment is reported for the 2011–2012 school year.

discouraged and beginning to think of himself as not
smart enough to do well in school. Participating students
were asked to use what they had read to advise this student. In the control condition, students read and completed similar-seeming materials; however, these materials
focused on functional localization in the brain, not neural
plasticity. They thus lacked the key psychological message that intelligence is malleable.
The sense-of-purpose intervention was designed to
help students articulate how schoolwork could help them
accomplish meaningful, beyond-the-self life goals. The
materials also drew directly on past research (Yeager,
Henderson, D’Mello, et al., 2014). In the intervention, the
students were first asked to write briefly about how they
wished the world could be a better place. It went on to say
that many students work hard in school because they want
to grow up to “make a positive impact on the world,” to
“make their families proud,” or to be “a good example for
other people.” Students were then asked to think about
their own goals and to write about how learning and
working hard in school could help them achieve these
goals. In the control condition, students completed either
of two similarly formatted modules that did not differ from
each other in their impact, ts < 1, and were combined in
analyses. One asked students to describe how their lives
were different in high school than before high school. The
other was very similar to the sense-of-purpose treatment but
put forward economic self-interest rather than prosocial
contribution as a reason to work hard in school. We included
this second control condition to establish that focusing on
beyond-the-self goals, not just any personal future goal, is
an important component of the intervention, a hypothesis

supported by prior work (Yeager, Henderson, D’Mello,
et al., 2014; Yeager & Bundick, 2009).
All students who entered the study and for whom preand postintervention grades were available were included
in the analyses (e.g., students who completed Session 1
but not Session 2 are retained with their original random
condition assignment). Thus, we performed an intentionto-treat analysis. Sample demographics are presented in
Table 2. Degrees of freedom varied because not all students completed all survey questions.

Psychological measures
Brief psychological measures were administered at the
start of Session 1 and at the end of Session 2. First, to
confirm that the growth-mind-set intervention changed
students’ beliefs about the malleability of intelligence, we
assessed this belief using two items: “You can learn new
things, but you can’t really change your basic intelligence” and “You have a certain amount of intelligence
and you really can’t do much to change it” (α = .84; see
Blackwell et  al., 2007). Second, we examined students’
construal of mundane academic tasks using a meaningfulness-of-schoolwork task (Yeager, Henderson, D’Mello,
et al., 2014; see also Steger, Bundick, & Yeager, 2012),
which assesses whether students view schoolwork (e.g.,
“Doing your math homework”) at a low, mechanical level
(e.g., “Typing numbers into a calculator and writing formulas”) or at a high level relevant to learning and growth
(“Building your problem-solving skills”; see Michaels,
Parkin, & Vallacher, 2013). Eight items formed a reliable
composite, α = .72. Although this measure is more closely

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on April 30, 2015

A Scalable Intervention for Academic Underachievement	5
Table 2.  Demographic Characteristics of the Sample
Characteristic
Gender
 Female
 Male
Race
 Hispanic
 White
 Asian
 Black
  Other, mixed
Grade level
 9th
 10th
 11th
 12th

n

%

800
794

50
50

 

 
525
371
277
174
247
1,307
68
156
63

33
23
17
11
15
 
82
4
10
4

Note: Data on individual students’ socioeconomic status (SES) were
not collected; however, the percentage of students receiving free or
reduced-price lunches, a measure of school-level SES, was known
for all public and charter schools (12 of 13 participating schools; see
Table 1).

matched to the purpose of schoolwork, it seemed reasonable that the results of the meaningfulness-of-schoolwork task could be influenced by both interventions
insofar as both interventions attempted to induce students to perceive the purpose of schoolwork to be learning and growth.

Measures of academic performance
Schools provided participating students’ transcripts. Ten
schools coded students’ performance on a five-letter
grading scale (A, B, C, D, F), whereas three assigned “no
credit” (NC) in place of Ds and Fs. To numerically transform letter grades for analysis, we always coded A, B, and
C as 4, 3, and 2, respectively. Because there was no single
a priori basis by which to code D, F, and NC, we used
three schemes: D = 1, F = 0, and NC = missing; D = 1, F =
1, and NC = 1 (because they are all unsatisfactory); or F =
0, D = 1, and NC = 1 (because D and NC are immediately
below C). The current results are presented using the
final coding scheme because it (a) retained all data
(unlike the first scheme) and (b) distinguished between F
and D (unlike the second scheme); however, all three
coding methods provided comparable results. We also
created a dichotomous measure of unsatisfactory progress, with grades of D, F, NC, and incomplete (I) marked
as unsatisfactory and grades of A, B, C, pass (P), and
credit (CR) marked as satisfactory.
We calculated each student’s end-of-semester GPA in
core academic courses (i.e., math, English, science, and
social studies) in the fall (preintervention) and in the spring
(postintervention). We focused on core academic courses

because these courses are generally most crucial to students’ success and because they are the most challenging
(mean core GPA = 2.45; mean noncore GPA = 3.15). Thus,
they are the most relevant to the interventions.2

Results
Baseline associations
After we controlled for school, race, and gender, prestudy
GPA was positively associated with baseline values for both
growth mind-set, β = 0.06, 95% confidence interval (CI) =
[0.03, 0.09], t(1561) = 3.47, p < .001, and sense of purpose,
β = 0.05, 95% CI = [0.01, 0.08], t(1551) = 2.67, p = .008.

Manipulation checks
A linear regression analysis in which we controlled for
prestudy beliefs about intelligence showed that the
growth-mind-set intervention led to a more malleable
view of intelligence, β = 0.17, 95% CI = [0.05, 0.28],
t(1007) = 2.82, p = .005, but the sense-of-purpose and
combined interventions did not, ps > .24.
A linear regression controlling for preintervention
meaningfulness of schoolwork showed that the sense-ofpurpose group perceived mundane academic tasks as
more relevant to learning and growth than did the control group, β = 0.17, 95% CI = [0.03, 0.32], t(1000) = 2.37,
p = .018; this was also true for the growth-mind-set group,
but only marginally, β = 0.11, 95% CI = [−0.01, 0.23],
t(1000) = 1.77, p = .078. The combined interventions
again showed no significant effect, t < 1.

Grade point average
To determine whether the intervention influenced poststudy GPA and did so to a greater extent for students with
a history of underperformance, we tested whether intervention effects would emerge among students who met
“high-yield” indicators of dropping out from high school.
This threshold was created by the Consortium for Chicago
School Research using decades of official records from
Chicago public schools (see Allensworth & Easton, 2007;
Heppen & Therriault, 2008). In our sample, 519 students
(33%) earned a baseline first-semester GPA of 2.0 or less
or failed at least one core academic course.
In the semester before the intervention, the intervention and control groups did not differ in GPA, ts < 1. We
conducted a linear regression analysis that included risk
(0 = not at risk, 1 = at risk), a dummy variable for each
intervention condition, and a dummy variable for each
Risk × Intervention (growth mind-set, sense of purpose,
combined) interaction. The outcome was core GPA for
the semester after intervention. We controlled for prestudy
GPA, race, gender, and school. The regression revealed

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on April 30, 2015

Paunesku et al.

6	
Control Condition
Growth-Mind-Set Condition
Sense-of-Purpose Condition
Combined-Interventions Condition

Residual Standardized Poststudy Core GPA

0.10

0.05

0.00

−0.05

−0.10

Not At Risk for Dropping
Out of High School

At Risk for Dropping
Out of High School

Fig. 1.  The effect of the interventions on grade point average (GPA). Residual standardized poststudy core GPA is graphed as a function of risk (n = 519 students at risk of dropping out of high school; n = 1,075 students not at risk of dropping out) and condition.
These residuals were calculated controlling for at-risk status, prior GPA, school, race, and
gender. Error bars indicate ±1 SE.

the predicted Risk × Intervention interaction for each
intervention condition: This interaction was significant
for the growth-mind-set intervention, b = 0.13, 95% CI =
[0.00, 0.26], t(1568) = 1.97, p = .048, and the sense-ofpurpose intervention, b = 0.17, 95% CI = [0.03, 0.32],
t(1568) = 2.31, p = .021, and it was marginally significant
for the combined interventions, b = 0.14, 95% CI = [−0.01,
0.28], t(1568) = 1.81, p = .071 (Fig. 1).
Because our primary research question concerned the
efficacy of academic-mind-set interventions in general
when delivered via online modules, we then collapsed
the intervention conditions into a single intervention
dummy code (0 = control, 1 = intervention). We again
controlled for prestudy GPA, race, gender, and school.
The regression analysis revealed a significant At Risk ×
Intervention interaction, b = 0.14, 95% CI = [0.03, 0.25],
t(1572) = 2.56, p = .011, such that the intervention effect
was significant among at-risk students, b = 0.13, 95% CI =
[0.02, 0.25], t(499) = 2.30, p = .022, but not among other
students, t < 1.3 The three intervention conditions produced similar benefits for at-risk students (mean change
in GPA—control condition: 0.04; growth-mind-set condition: 0.15, sense-of-purpose condition: 0.18, combinedinterventions condition: 0.13),4 and the effect of
intervention among at-risk students was not moderated
by race or gender, ps > .21.

It is intriguing that students who received both interventions did not show greater benefits. To our knowledge, only two past studies have tested the effects of
combining mind-set interventions; neither found that the
combination yielded greater benefits than the individual
interventions (Good et al., 2003; Yeager, Walton, Brady,
et al., 2014, Experiment 2). Why? In the case of the present study, one possibility is that the two psychological
messages were not integrated. Absent this, it may have
been difficult for students to fully incorporate two simultaneous and distinct changes to their basic beliefs about
schoolwork; that is, students may have received only a
partial “dose” of each intervention. This interpretation is
consistent with the lack of manipulation-check effects in
the combined condition (for a similar pattern, see Yeager,
Walton, Brady, et al., 2014, Experiment 2). Future research
on combined interventions should integrate the chosen
interventions so that they enhance and support each
other rather than presenting separate and possibly confusing messages about learning and school.5

Satisfactory performance
Satisfactory grades (e.g., A, B, C) denote minimal acceptable proficiency in a subject and are often required for
entry into higher-level courses. To assess whether the

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on April 30, 2015

A Scalable Intervention for Academic Underachievement	7
Intervention Conditions
Control Condition

a

English

b

Math

All Core Courses

40%
30%
20%

Science

Social Studies

50%
40%

Satisfactory Course Completion

Satisfactory Course Completion

50%
50%

40%

30%

30%
20%

20%
Before

After

Before

After

Before

Semester Relative to Intervention

After

Semester Relative to Intervention

Fig. 2.  The effect of the interventions on satisfactory course completion in core courses among students at risk of dropping out of high
school. The graphs in (a) show the percentage of students who received satisfactory grades (A, B, C, pass, or credit) in all core courses
in the semesters before and after the interventions were conducted. The graph in (b) shows the average percentage of satisfactory course
completion across all core courses in the same semesters. The error bars represent ±1 SE.

interventions helped at-risk students clear this academic
threshold, we used a logistic mixed-effect model to assess
the effect of the intervention on students’ likelihood of
satisfactory performance in each core academic class
(Bates, Maechler, & Bolker, 2012). This analysis was
restricted to at-risk students, because these students
accounted for the vast majority of postintervention course
failures. As the outcomes, we specified satisfactory course
completion (earning A, B, C, P, or CR vs. D, F, NC, or I)
in each core course before and after intervention; as
fixed effects, we specified intervention (dummy-coded),
time (0 = preintervention, 1 = postintervention), and their
interaction; as random intercepts, we specified each student, course, and school.
There was no effect of condition on preintervention
satisfactory course completion rates, t < 1. However, the
regression revealed a significant Time × Intervention
interaction, odds ratio (OR) = 1.48, 95% CI = [1.04, 2.10],
Z = 2.18, p = .029. Intervention-group students were significantly more likely to earn satisfactory grades in core
academic classes after the intervention (raw mean = 49%)
compared with control-group students (raw mean =
41%), OR = 1.58, Z = 2.68, p = .007. Moreover, whereas
there was no difference in satisfactory completion rates
before and after the intervention among control-condition students (−0.4%), t < 1, students in the intervention

group showed a significant increase (+6.0%), Z = 4.38,
p < .001 (see Fig. 2). The 367 at-risk students in the intervention group took a total of 1,358 core courses; the
intervention thus led them to earn satisfactory grades in
87 more courses than would be expected on the basis of
control-group rates (1,358 × 6.4%).

Discussion
Are academic-mind-set interventions effective on a small
scale only with carefully managed administration? Or do
they have the potential to scale up and thereby serve as a
partial solution for pervasive underachievement in U.S.
high schools? The goal of the present research was to
answer these questions. Two interventions, each lasting
about 45 min and delivered online, raised achievement in
a large and diverse group of underperforming students
over an academic semester. Among these students, who
accounted for the bottom third of students in the sample,
the interventions raised GPA in core academic classes and
led students to earn satisfactory grades in more core
classes. Crucially, these effects were obtained across a
sample of heterogeneous schools and in response to
interventions that could be scaled to virtually unlimited
numbers of students at low marginal cost. Among the 4.93
million students who constitute the lowest-performing

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on April 30, 2015

Paunesku et al.

8	
third of high school students nationwide, could this translate into a proportional 1.18 million additional successfully completed courses? The results suggest this possibility.
Moreover, the methods tested here provide a feasible way
to disseminate these interventions and evaluate them on a
large scale.
A critical next step is to examine how mind-set interventions interact with diverse contexts (Hanselman,
Bruch, Gamoran, & Borman, 2014; Walton, Logel, Peach,
Spencer, & Zanna, in press). Our sample was heterogeneous, but it was nonetheless a convenience sample.
Mind-set interventions depend on resources and learning
opportunities in the academic environment: They encourage students to take advantage of such opportunities and
may be ineffective if these opportunities are absent.
Evaluating mind-set interventions with a larger and more
representative group of adolescents will help identify settings in which students’ beliefs serve as barriers to
achievement; in such settings, mind-set interventions
may be essential, but in other settings, the interventions
may have less impact. For instance, further research
might reveal settings in which mind-set interventions are
redundant with messages already present or in which
students lack access to challenging learning opportunities. In conducting this research, it will be critical to
ensure that intervention modules retain their psychological essence; mind-set interventions “are not magic . . .
they are tools to target important psychological processes
in schools” (Yeager & Walton, 2011, p. 293). If a mind-set
intervention does not speak to students’ psychological
experience, it will not be effective. More broadly, this
future research will deepen our understanding of the role
of psychological processes in the context of other factors
that shape student achievement.
It is also important to examine potential long-term
effects among high-achieving students, for whom the
benefits of mind-set interventions may not emerge until
schoolwork becomes challenging, such as when students
take advanced coursework or transition to college.

(e.g., Mueller & Dweck, 1998), and small-scale field
experiments (e.g., J. Aronson et al., 2002; Blackwell et al.,
2007). Our research simultaneously advances this lineage
and addresses an important social problem in a scalable
way.

Conclusion

1. This has also been called an incremental theory of intelligence in past research.
2. When we included all reported grades, the pattern of results
was similar to that derived from core GPA, albeit weaker. Even
so, the contrast between the three intervention conditions and
control condition remained significant (p < .05).
3. Nearly identical results for the collapsed intervention conditions were obtained using a mixed model with individual course
grade as the outcome, b = 0.14, 95% CI = [0.03, 0.25], p = .011.
Individual intervention effects using a mixed model were also
similar to those reported, .034 < ps < .054 (see Supplemental
Material available online).
4. Changes in psychological measures were not related to
changes in achievement, ts < 1.50, a pattern in keeping with the

In recent years, psychologists have called for a new
emphasis on testing the replicability of psychological
research (Pashler & Wagenmakers, 2012) and on examining real-world behavioral outcomes (Schneider, Gruman,
& Coutts, 2011). In demonstrating the potential for academic-mind-set interventions to be effective on a wide
scale, the present research provides a case study of the
health of our field and its relevance to public concerns.
The interventions we tested draw directly from an intellectual lineage in psychology, including basic theory (e.g.,
Dweck & Leggett, 1988), careful laboratory experiments

Author Contributions
D. Paunesku and G. M. Walton developed the study concept.
D. Paunesku, G. M. Walton, C. Romero, D. S. Yeager, and C. S.
Dweck contributed to the study design. Data collection was
performed by D. Paunesku and C. Romero. D. Paunesku and
E. N. Smith performed the data analysis. D. Paunesku and G. M.
Walton drafted the manuscript. All authors provided critical
revisions and approved the final version of the manuscript for
submission.

Acknowledgments
We thank the participating schools and the staff of the Stanford
University Project for Education Research That Scales (PERTS),
especially Benjamin Haley, Chris Macrander, Jacquie Beaubien,
Rachel Herter, Abby Howard, and Brian Spitzer.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The authors declared that they had no conflicts of interest with
respect to their authorship or the publication of this article.

Funding
The research reported in this article was supported by William
and Flora Hewlett Foundation Grants 2011-6513 and 2013-8860,
by Raikes Foundation Grants 13027 and 227, and by National
Science Foundation Research and Evaluation on Education in
Science and Engineering (REESE) Program Grant DRL-1247283.
The opinions expressed in the article are those of the authors
only and do not reflect the opinions of the funders.

Supplemental Material
Additional supporting information can be found at http://pss
.sagepub.com/content/by/supplemental-data

Notes

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on April 30, 2015

A Scalable Intervention for Academic Underachievement	9
inconsistency with which self-report measures mediate behavioral changes (e.g., J. Aronson et  al., 2002; Wilson & Linville,
1982).
5. A second possibility is that the two interventions, even though
they differed in substantive ways, shared a common underlying
ingredient and were therefore partly redundant. Indeed, each
provided a reason to work hard in school for students who
lacked such a reason. The lack of manipulation-check effects
in the combined condition does not suggest this interpretation;
however, other measures of beliefs/motivation could suggest
such a common ingredient.

References
Allensworth, E. M., & Easton, J. Q. (2007). What matters for staying on track and graduating in Chicago public high schools.
Chicago, IL: Consortium on Chicago School Research.
Aronson, E. (1999). The power of self-persuasion. American
Psychologist, 54, 875–884.
Aronson, J., Fried, C. B., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the effects
of stereotype threat on African American college students
by shaping theories of intelligence. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 38, 113–125.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., & Bolker, B. (2012). lme4: Linear
mixed-effects models using S4 classes [Software]. R package version 1.1-7. Retrieved from http://CRAN.R-project
.org/package=lme4
Blackwell, L. S., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007).
Implicit theories of intelligence predict achievement across
an adolescent transition: A longitudinal study and an intervention. Child Development, 78, 246–263.
Bryk, A. S., Gomez, L. M., & Grunow, A. (2011). Getting ideas
into action: Building networked improvement communities
in education. In M. T. Hallinan (Ed.), Frontiers in sociology
of education (Vol. 1, pp. 127–162). New York, NY: Springer.
Burnette, J. L., O’Boyle, E. H., VanEpps, E. M., Pollack, J. M.,
& Finkel, E. J. (2013). Mind-sets matter: A meta-analytic
review of implicit theories and self-regulation. Psychological
Bulletin, 139, 655–701.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Apfel, N., &
Brzustoski, P. (2009). Recursive processes in self-affirmation: Intervening to close the minority achievement gap.
Science, 324, 400–403.
Cronbach, L. J., Ambron, S. R., Dornbusch, S. M., Hess, R. D.,
Hornik, R. C., Phillips, D. C., . . . Weiner, S. S. (1980).
Toward reform of program evaluation: Aims, methods, and
institutional arrangements. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Dianda, M. (2008). Preventing future high school dropouts: An
advocacy and action guide for NEA state and local affiliates. Washington, DC: National Education Association.
Dweck, C. S., & Leggett, E. L. (1988). A social-cognitive
approach to motivation and personality. Psychological
Review, 95, 256–273.
Farrington, C. A., Roderick, M., Allensworth, E., Nagaoka, J.,
Keyes, T. S., Johnson, D. W., & Beechum, N. O. (2012).
Teaching adolescents to become learners: The role of noncognitive factors in shaping school performance. Chicago,
IL: University of Chicago, Consortium on Chicago School
Research.

Fullan, M. (2001). The new meaning of educational change.
New York, NY: Teachers College Press.
Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (2012). A social psychological perspective on educational intervention. In E. Shafir (Ed.),
Behavioral foundations of policy (pp. 329–350). Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Glazerman, S., Isenberg, E., Dolfin, S., Bleeker, M., Johnson, A.,
Grider, M., & Jacobus, M. (2010). Impacts of comprehensive
teacher induction: Final results from a randomized controlled study (Publication No. NCEE 20104027). Retrieved
from U.S. Department of Education Web site: http://ies
.ed.gov/ncee/pubs/20104027/pdf/20104027.pdf
Good, C., Aronson, J., & Inzlicht, M. (2003). Improving adolescents’ standardized test performance: An intervention to
reduce the effects of stereotype threat. Journal of Applied
Developmental Psychology, 24, 645–662.
Hanselman, P., Bruch, S. K., Gamoran, A., & Borman, G. D.
(2014). Threat in context: School moderation of the impact
of social identity threat on racial/ethnic achievement gaps.
Sociology of Education, 87, 106–124.
Harackiewicz, J. M., Rozek, C. S., Hulleman, C. S., & Hyde,
J. S. (2012). Helping parents to motivate adolescents in
mathematics and science: An experimental test of a utilityvalue intervention. Psychological Science, 23, 899–906.
doi:10.1177/0956797611435530
Heppen, J. B., & Therriault, S. B. (2008). Developing early
warning systems to identify potential high school dropouts. Retrieved from National High School Center Web
site at http://www.betterhighschools.org/pubs/documents/
IssueBrief_EarlyWarningSystemsGuide.pdf
Hulleman, C. S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2009). Promoting
interest and performance in high school science classes.
Science, 326, 1410–1412.
Ioannidis, J. P., Cappelleri, J. C., & Lau, J. (1998). Issues in comparisons between meta-analyses and large trials. Journal of
the American Medical Association, 279, 1089–1093.
Jamieson, J. P., Mendes, W. B., Blackstock, E., & Schmader,
T. (2010). Turning the knots in your stomach into bows:
Reappraising arousal improves performance on the GRE.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 208–212.
Marks, I. M., Cavanagh, K., & Gega, L. (2007). Hands-on help:
Computer-aided psychotherapy. New York, NY: Psychology
Press.
Michaels, J. L., Parkin, S. S., & Vallacher, R. R. (2013). Destiny
is in the details: Action identification in the construction
and destruction of meaning. In J. Hicks & C. Routledge
(Eds.), The experience of meaning in life: Emerging themes
and controversies (pp. 103–115). New York, NY: Springer.
Mueller, C. M., & Dweck, C. S. (1998). Praise for intelligence
can undermine children’s motivation and performance.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 33–52.
Pashler, H., & Wagenmakers, E. J. (2012). Editors’ introduction
to the special section on replicability in psychological science: A crisis of confidence? Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 7, 528–530.
Schneider, F. W., Gruman, J. A., & Coutts, L. M. (Eds.).
(2011). Applied social psychology: Understanding and
addressing social and practical problems. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on April 30, 2015

Paunesku et al.

10	
Sherman, D. K., Hartson, K. A., Binning, K. R., Purdie-Vaughns,
V., Garcia, J., Taborsky-Barba, S., . . . Cohen, G. L. (2013).
Deflecting the trajectory and changing the narrative: How
self-affirmation affects academic performance and motivation under identity threat. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 104, 591–618.
Slavin, R., & Smith, D. (2009). The relationship between sample sizes and effect sizes in systematic reviews in education. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 31,
500–506.
Steger, M., Bundick, M., & Yeager, D. S. (2012). The development of meaning during adolescence. In R. J. Levesque
(Ed.), Encyclopedia of adolescence (pp. 1666–1777). New
York, NY: Springer.
U.S. Department of Education. (2014). Obama administration 2015 budget prioritizes key education investments
to provide opportunities for all Americans [Press release].
Retrieved from http://www.ed.gov/news/press-releases/
obama-administration-2015-budget-prioritizes-key-educa
tion-investments-provide-opportunities-all-americans
Walton, G. M. (2014). The new science of wise psychological
interventions. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
23, 73–82.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A brief social-belonging
intervention improves academic and health outcomes of
minority students. Science, 331, 1447–1451.
Walton, G. M., Logel, C., Peach, J., Spencer, S., & Zanna, M. P.
(in press). Two brief interventions to mitigate a “chilly

climate” transform women’s experience, relationships,
and achievement in engineering. Journal of Educational
Psychology. doi:10.1037/a0037461
Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. (1982). Improving the academic performance of college freshmen: Attribution therapy revisited. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
42, 367–376.
Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. (1985). Improving the performance of college freshmen with attributional techniques.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 287–
293.
Yeager, D. S., & Bundick, M. J. (2009). The role of purposeful
work goals in promoting meaning in life and in schoolwork during adolescence. Journal of Adolescent Research,
24, 423–452.
Yeager, D. S., Henderson, M., D’Mello, S., Paunesku, D., Walton,
G. M., Spitzer, B. J., & Duckworth, A. L. (2014). Boring but
important: A self-transcendent purpose for learning fosters
academic self-regulation. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 107, 559–580.
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological
interventions in education: They’re not magic. Review of
Educational Research, 81, 267–301.
Yeager, D. S., Walton, G. M., Brady, S. T., Akcinar, E. N.,
Paunesku, D., Keane, L., . . . Dweck, C. S. (2014). Brief
psychological interventions can reduce post-secondary
achievement gaps at scale. Manuscript submitted for
publication.

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Stanford University Libraries on April 30, 2015

View publication stats

Wise Interventions

1

Running Head: Wise Interventions

Wise Interventions:
Psychological Remedies for Social and Personal Problems

Gregory M. Walton

Timothy D. Wilson

Stanford University

University of Virginia

Manuscript Under Review. Please Do Not Distribute.

Author note: We are grateful for helpful comments and constructive feedback on earlier versions
of this manuscript from Eddie Brummelman, Ben Castleman, Frances Chen, Angela Duckworth,
Liz Dunn, Carol Dweck, Mike Frank, Christine Logel, Mary Murphy, Dave Paunesku, David
Kirp, Lee Ross, Steve Spencer, Barbara Watkins, Seymour Weingarten, David Yeager, Jamil
Zaki, and members of the Dweck/Walton lab.

!

Wise Interventions

2

Abstract
Long-standing social problems, such as poor school achievement, personal and intergroup
conflicts, bad health, and unhappiness, can seem like permanent features of the social landscape.
We describe a new approach to such problems. Rooted in basic research and theory in social
psychology, wise interventions help people accomplish their goals and flourish by addressing
how they make sense of themselves, other people, and social situations. We provide a
comprehensive theoretical review and organization of wise interventions. This review
emphasizes the importance of meaning-making in human behavior, how meaning-making is
guided by three basic motivations, and how deleterious meanings can be changed with carefully
designed interventions to cause lasting and consequential improvement for large numbers of
people. We also emphasize how meanings arise within social contexts and thus how
interventions cannot be understood or effectively implemented in isolation, how this approach
complements and extends traditional approaches to social reform, which emphasize not meaningmaking but objective change to situations or to the habits and abilities of individuals, and
highlight high-leverage directions for future research.

Keywords: intervention, subjective construal, mindset, education

!

Wise Interventions

Wise Interventions: Psychological Remedies for Social and Personal Problems
I. Introduction
Consider the following everyday problems:
•

A couple has a fight. How can they manage this conflict? Will it help to try to control
their emotions and re-explain their views to one another? Is it best to simply not talk
about the issue any more? Or would a specific kind of dialogue be fruitful?

•

A teacher finds that her students respond poorly to critical feedback. Even though she
wants to help her students improve, they seem discouraged. How can she give feedback
in a way that motivates students?

•

A social worker finds that a new mother in an at-risk family is increasingly angered by
her difficulty getting her baby to sleep at night. How can he help her cope, and prevent
abuse?

•

A college administrator finds that first-generation and racial-ethnic minority students
drop out at high rates, even when they enter college with strong academic credentials.
How can she help these students succeed?
Problems like these can have substantial personal, societal, and economic costs:

marriages fail; children do not learn; babies are harmed; and students drop out. How can we
address them? And what, if anything, do they have in common? At root, we suggest, all
social problems are, in part, psychological problems. To solve them, one must have a viable
theory of human behavior that can be translated into effective ways of helping people
accomplish their goals and flourish (Lewin, 1951). Although many such theories have been
offered, we focus on an approach emanating from social psychology. This approach, which

!

3

Wise Interventions

4

we call wise interventions, involves a set of precise, theory- and research-based techniques
that address specific psychological processes to help people flourish in diverse settings of
life. Wise interventions emphasize subjective meaning-making—how people make sense of
themselves and social situations—and, in doing so, can effectively change behavior in ways
that accrue over time. (Walton, 2014; Walton & Dweck, 2008; Wilson, 2011; see also
Goffman, 1963; Steele, 1997).
Wise interventions represent the application of modern psychological research to classic
interests in the bases of social problems (Asch, 1952; Clark & Clark, 1947; Lewin, 1947).
Indeed, in recent years, an explosion of wise interventions has addressed myriad social and
personal problems. Many of these interventions are striking in their impact. Consider the
problems mentioned above. One intervention comprised three 7-minute exercises designed to
encourage couples to reflect on marital conflicts from the perspective of a neutral third party who
wants the best for all (Finkel, Slotter, Luchies, Walton, & Gross, 2013). This 21-minute exercise
prevented an otherwise typical decline in couples’ marital satisfaction over a year. A second
involved a paper-clipped note appended to teachers’ critical feedback on middle-school students’
essays. The note conveyed that the teacher gave the feedback in an effort to help the student
achieve a higher standard, which the teacher believed the student could reach. This raised the
percentage of African American students who chose to revise their essay from 27% to 64%, and
sustained minority students’ trust in school over the rest of the school year (Yeager, PurdieVaughns et al., 2014). A third involved training paraprofessionals to ask at-risk new mothers a
series of simple questions about struggles in parenting on regular home visits over the baby’s
first year. These questions encouraged mothers to see struggles as normal and solvable problems,
not as meaning they were “a bad mom” or their child was “a bad baby.” This reduced the rate of

!

Wise Interventions

5

abuse over the child’s first year from 23% to 4% (Bugental et al., 2002), reduced later aggression
and stress markers in children, and improved children’s cognitive functioning at least through the
age of three (Bugental, Schwartz, & Lynch, 2010). A fourth intervention used stories from
college students to convey that it is normal to worry at first about whether you belong in college
and these concerns pass with time. Delivered to first-year college students, this raised African
American students’ grades over the next three years, halving the racial achievement gap (Walton
& Cohen, 2011). Illustrating the policy implications, this and related interventions delivered
online prior to college matriculation to full institutional cohorts improved first-year persistence
and achievement for socially disadvantaged students in three samples (N>9,500), reducing
achievement gaps by 31-40% at scale (Yeager, Walton, et al., 2016).
The results of these and many other interventions underscore three essential lessons: (1)
specific psychological processes play a critical role in the unfolding of individuals’ behavior in
the social world; (2) these processes can be altered in precise ways; and (3) doing so can lead to
significant and lasting personal and social improvement.
What are these processes? When people lack an understanding of the bases of
psychological interventions—of the processes they target, of how they may be changed, and of
how change can be sustained over time—results like these can seem magical (Yeager & Walton,
2011). The purpose of this article is to provide a comprehensive review of wise psychological
interventions and thus to demystify them. In so doing, we go beyond other reviews, which have
focused on a single intervention (e.g., Cohen & Sherman, 2014) or content area (e.g., education,
Yeager & Walton, 2011), or have provided only a high level summary (Walton, 2014). In
clarifying this approach for researchers and policy-makers alike, we hope to inspire the further
development and responsible use of wise interventions and its integration with other approaches

!

Wise Interventions

6

to social reform. Doing so, we hope, will both advance psychological theory and promote
positive change.
Our focus is on the psychological processes targeted by wise interventions and their role
in major social problems. We do not restrict our analysis to any one problem space. Instead, we
emphasize critical processes that contribute to virtually all forms of human behavior, including
personal issues (e.g., a lack of well-being), interpersonal problems (e.g., relationship problems,
intergroup conflict), and major societal problems (e.g., persistent achievement gaps, lack of
political participation) (for review methods, see Footnote 1). Although our focus is broad, we
often illustrate key points in the context of education, because many wise interventions have
been tested in this important context.
Roadmap
First, we describe the theoretical foundations of wise interventions and how these arise
from basic research in social psychology. The chief insight is that people’s behavior stems from
how they make sense of themselves and social situations and that this meaning-making is guided
by three basic motivations: the need to be accurate, the need for self-integrity, and the need to
belong. Second, we describe five principles that characterize wise interventions. Third, we
describe specific strategies used to change meanings and group wise interventions into three
“families” according to the three motives that guide meaning-making (accuracy, self-integrity,
and belonging). Fourth, to illustrate the distinctive qualities of wise interventions, we compare
them with two common approaches to social reform. Finally, we review implications and highpriority directions for future research.
II. Theoretical Foundations of Wise Interventions: Social-Psychological Insights about
Human Behavior

!

Wise Interventions

7

Beyond wise interventions, two broad theoretical approaches have guided social reforms.
One assumes that the key determinants of behavior are qualities of the actor—personality traits,
genotypes, brain development, habits, and skills. Interventions based on this approach aim to
equip people with the abilities they need to overcome obstacles and succeed in life, such as
education in general (Brinch & Galloway, 2011) as well as specific programs designed to raise
intelligence in children or resilience in adults (e.g., Jaeggi, Buschkuehl, Jonides, & Perrig, 2008).
A second approach focuses on the environment. It assumes that to flourish people need to be in
situations that help them succeed rather than that constrain their behavior or close off
opportunities (Sachs, 2005). This might involve increasing resources for schools, moving
children to neighborhoods that provide greater opportunities (Sanbonmatsu et al., 2011), or
altering incentive structures (Fryer, 2011).
These approaches address social problems whose root cause involves a lack of essential
capacity—a deficit in either the skills or habits of the person or the resources, opportunities, or
incentives in the environment. To succeed in any endeavor, people need adequate personal
resources and an environment that allows them to draw on these resources effectively. In school,
students need a basic level of ability and a conducive environment, including a stable home life,
three meals a day, and skilled teachers, to succeed.
Wise interventions do not address a lack of capacity. Instead, they assume that among
many people and in many situations there is often already significant room for improvement—
that people are capable and situations afford opportunities yet people fail to take full advantage
of these opportunities. Why? The answer involves meaning making.
Meaning-Making
A key tenet of social psychology is that how people interpret their personal qualities and

!

Wise Interventions

8

social situations determines their behavior (Asch, 1952; Heider, 1944; Jones & Davis, 1965;
Kelley, 1973; Lewin, 1947; Ross & Nisbett, 1991). Even when people have the ability to succeed
and are in environments that allow them to do so they may fail if they view their circumstances
in a self-defeating manner.
A variety of terms have been used to describe these interpretations, including subjective
construal (Ross & Nisbett, 1991), mindsets (Dweck, 2006), and stories (Wilson, 2011). To avoid
confusion and awkward terminology we use colloquial synonyms like “meaning making” and
“interpretation.” Regardless of the term, the key principle is that, to predict behavior, it is
essential to get inside people’s heads and see how they understand their actions and
circumstances. To predict how students will respond to a bad grade, for example, the key is how
they understand that grade. Do they view it as a sign that they lack ability or that more effort or
another type of effort is needed? Critically, this approach prioritizes the person and the situation
together: how people make sense of situations, how situations contribute to this meaningmaking, and the implications this meaning making has for their behavior and well-being.
Certainly some situations are so powerful that most people understand them in the same
way. Some of social psychology’s most famous studies emphasize the power of the situation.
Latané and Darley (1970) showed that the greater the number of people who witnessed an
emergency, the less likely any one person would offer help. But even in these studies it was not
the power of the objective situation per se that determined people’s behavior but how people
understood it. The greater the size of the group the more likely people were to assume that no
assistance was required, that someone else would or had already intervened, or that the
responsibility to do so lay elsewhere.
Most events leave room for interpretation, ranging from the healthy to the toxic. Students

!

Wise Interventions

9

can interpret critical feedback from a teacher as an opportunity to improve their work. Or they
can worry, accurately or inaccurately, that the teacher dislikes them, doubts their ability, or is
biased. Here the goal of a wise intervention is not to restructure the school day so teachers have
more opportunities to provide critical feedback (a situation-centric approach) or to teach students
better study habits (a person-centric approach). It is to shape how feedback is represented to
students and thus the meaning it conveys to them (Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns et al., 2014).
Just as there is considerable latitude in how people make sense of social situations, so
there is latitude in how people make sense of themselves. Many people in Western society are
exposed to the idea that intelligence is essentially fixed at birth, an idea reinforced by “Gifted
and Talented” programs, a corporate focus on “talent” (Murphy & Dweck, 2010), a research
preoccupation with IQ (Herrnstein & Murray, 1994; Jensen, 1969; Terman & Oden, 1947), and
praise like “You’re so smart!” (Gunderson et al., 2013; Mueller & Dweck; 1998; see also
Haimovitz & Dweck, 2016; Rattan, Good, & Dweck, 2012). Students who hold this fixedmindset about intelligence interpret academic struggles as evidence that they lack ability or have
reached the edge of their abilities. This inference undermines subsequent effort, persistence,
learning, and achievement (Dweck, 1999; Dweck & Leggett, 1988). Growth-mindset of
intelligence interventions teach students about modern neuroscience and the potential for
intelligence to grow (“like a muscle”) with effort, effective learning strategies, and the help of
others. This message does not provide students new learning resources (a situation-centric
approach) or make students more intelligent (a person-centric approach). It changes the meaning
of academic struggle. Struggle becomes an opportunity to learn, not a sign of limitations, and
students respond with increased effort and resilience in pursuing learning opportunities. This
message, conveyed in diverse developmentally appropriate exercises, has been shown to improve

!

Wise Interventions 10
performance over an academic term or longer among students in middle school (Blackwell,
Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2007; Good, Aronson, & Inzlicht, 2003), high school (Paunesku,
Walton, Romero, Smith, Yeager, & Dweck, 2015; Yeager, Romero et al., 2016), and college
(Aronson, Fried, & Good, 2002; Yeager, Walton, et al., 2016). Often the greatest effects are for
struggling students, for whom the meaning of academic struggle is most pressing (Paunesku et
al., 2015; Yeager, Romero et al., 2016).
Although subjective meaning-making is a primary focus of social psychology, its
importance is recognized across the social sciences. The seminal Coleman Report found that
variation in school achievement within schools was much larger than variation between schools
(Coleman et al., 1966). Why do some children struggle, even in high-achieving schools? And
why do some children succeed even in struggling schools? One reason involves inequalities in
family circumstances and the broader society, which children bring to school in the form of
differences in preparation. But the Coleman Report also suggested that inequality can take a
psychological form. Experiences of disadvantage can place a child in a circumstance in which
“he cannot assume that the environment will respond to his actions…a general belief…that
nothing he could ever do would change things.” If so, “it may well be…that one of the keys
toward success for minorities which have experienced disadvantage and a particularly
unresponsive environment…is a change in this conception” (p. 321). There is thus a need to
understand how such beliefs and meanings arise and may be changed. This approach does not
deny the powerful role of situational forces like discrimination and poverty. It rather aims to
understand a portion of this power: how it is expressed in how people make sense of important
experiences, and how to remedy this consequence.
Three Basic Motives Underlying Meaning Making

!

Wise Interventions 11
When there is room for interpretation, as there often is, what determines the meaning a
perceiver comes up with? Social psychologists have identified three basic motives driving human
meaning-making: The desires to be accurate, to think well of oneself, and to belong. Each insight
has contributed to the development of effective interventions.
1. Accuracy. First, obviously there needs to be some correspondence between a person’s
perception of the world and what is actually out there; if people lived in a complete fantasy
world they would not survive for long. Infants attend to caregivers’ emotional reactions to assess
the safety of a situation and behave accordingly (Sorce, Emde, Campos, & Klinnert, 1985).
Attribution theory thus portrays people as reasonable information processors—lay scientists
trying to make sense of their own and other people’s behavior as best they can (Heider, 1944;
Jones & Davis, 1965; Kelley, 1967; Weiner, 1985).
However, even when people are trying to be accurate, they draw meanings from the
world as it appears to them—from their perspective and social circumstance. Meanings are thus
not just “in the head” but reflections of the external world (e.g., Gunderson et al., 2013). As a
consequence, the same event can appear differently to people who have different experiences and
vantage points, and this can lead to pejorative inferences. Students who face negative stereotypes
in intellectual settings can reasonably interpret critical academic feedback as a sign of bias on the
part of an evaluator (Cohen, Steele, & Ross, 1999). This interpretation is much less plausible for
students who do not contend with a negative stereotype. Although they are in similar objective
circumstances, they are in radically different psychological circumstances (Steele, 1997).
When meanings are detrimental—like those prompted by pejorative characterizations of
the self (e.g., low self-esteem) or one’s group (e.g., stereotypes) or by toxic lay theories such as
fixed theories of intelligence—people can get stuck in negative ways of thinking and acting that

!

Wise Interventions 12
become self-reinforcing. Many wise interventions aim to “unstick” these patterns and redirect
people into more productive ways of viewing their circumstances. Thus representing critical
feedback as given in an effort to help students meet a higher standard can cause lasting benefits
for racial-minority students (Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns et al., 2014).
2. Self-Integrity. While people want their interpretations to be accurate, they are not
disinterested observers of the world. The second basic motive of meaning making is that people
want to think well of themselves—to believe they are adequate, moral, and competent (Aronson,
1968; Sherman & Cohen, 2006; Steele, 1988). An understanding of this need for “self-integrity”
has led researchers to develop novel ways of helping people maintain a positive global selfimage, which can improve functioning in the face of negative events (e.g., Cohen et al., 2009).
3. Belonging. The third basic motive arises from the fact that human beings are an
inherently social species. Forming and maintaining positive social relationships and membership
in valued social groups is one of our most important tasks from birth (Baumeister & Leary, 1995;
Bowlby, 1988). We want to feel accepted and included by others, to belong to social groups, and
to contribute positively to the lives of others. As a result, our interpretations of important aspects
of world and behavior toward it are highly sensitive to how we think other people view and
behave. Researchers have uncovered novel ways to leverage this need to belong to promote
positive behaviors (e.g., Braga & Bond, 2008; Goldstein, Cialdini, & Griskevicius, 2008; Grant
& Hofmann, 2011).
These three motives—to be accurate, to have self-integrity, and to belong—are not
exhaustive; indeed, the precise characterization of basic motives and how they interact and keep
each other in check is a matter of much discussion (e.g., Baumeister & Leary, 1995; Deci &
Ryan, 2000; Heine, Lehman, Markus, & Kitayama, 1999; Pyszczynski & Greenberg, 1987;

!

Wise Interventions 13
Steele, 1988; Swann, 1983; Weiner, 1985). For our purpose, what is most important is that each
of the three motives described above has led to distinct types of interventions that we will review
shortly.
Before discussing the principles of wise interventions, it is important to note how the
three motives that underpin them were discovered and understood. The answer is with hundreds
of carefully designed laboratory experiments. This foundational work has given rise to
theoretical insights that allowed researchers to design interventions that never would have been
conceived or attempted otherwise, such as the seemingly implausible idea that a short reflection
on personal values would raise African American adolescents’ school achievement for years
(Cohen et al., 2009). Indeed, one purpose of this paper is to illustrate how decades of theoretical
work in social psychology—much of which seemed, at the time, to have little applied benefit—
has blossomed into a theoretically-driven approach to help solve a wide array of personal and
social problems.
III. Principles of Wise Interventions
Wise interventions attempt to change how people make sense of themselves and their
social environment, interpretations driven by the three motives just discussed. Later we review
specific strategies to effect such change. Here we discuss more broadly five principles inherent
to wise interventions.
The term wise originates in the work of the sociologist Erving Goffman (1963), who used
it to describe straight people who saw beyond the homophobia of the 1950s to recognize the full
humanity of gay people. Later Steele (1997) described “wise schooling” as practices sensitive to
the experiences of students who confront negative stereotypes in intellectual settings. Drawing
on this tradition, we use wise to describe insight into how people make sense of themselves or a

!

Wise Interventions 14
situation they are in. Wise interventions are wise to the meanings and inferences people draw
(Walton, 2014). They are characterized by the following principles.
1. Psychological Precision
Wise interventions aim to alter a specific interpretation to bring about positive change.
They are thus not multifaceted “kitchen sink” reforms nor general programs, like a new tutoring
service. Instead, wise interventions often operate within the context of existing programs.
For example, many students worry about whether they will belong when they enter a new
school. Yet this worry is felt most acutely when students enter school settings in which their
group is underrepresented and negatively stereotyped. In this circumstance, students can risk
inferring from even commonplace challenges (e.g., feelings of loneliness, academic criticism),
that they or their group does not belong in the school in general. To address this worry, the
social-belonging intervention uses stories from older students to convey that worries about
belonging are normal at first in a new school and improve with time. The intervention does not
restructure the academic transition. Instead, this message helps students sustain a sense of
belonging in the face of adversities and build peer and mentor relationships. As noted, in one
study, African American students who received this intervention earned a higher college GPA
over 3 years, halving the racial achievement gap (Walton & Cohen, 2011; see also Walton,
Logel, Peach, Spencer, & Zanna, 2015; Yeager, Walton, et al., 2016).
A second intervention aimed to improve romantic relationships for people with low selfesteem. Doubting their own value, such people tend to dismiss compliments from partners, for
instance as “just something she had to say” (Murray, Holmes & Collins, 2006; Murray, Rose,
Bellavia, Holmes, & Kusche, 2002). To encourage people to see a compliment as truly reflecting
a partner’s love, Marigold, Holmes, and Ross (2007, 2010) asked people in dating relationships

!

Wise Interventions 15
to recall a recent compliment from their partners. They then posed a single question, which
assumed the compliment had a broad significance: “Explain why your partner admired you.
Describe what it meant to you and its significance for your relationship.” As compared to simply
recalling the circumstances of the compliment, this query led people with low self-esteem to feel
more confident in their partner’s love immediately and, over the next several weeks, set in
motion a cycle of more positive feelings and behaviors in both members of the couple,
improving the relationship as a whole.
Both interventions precisely targeted self-reinforcing, negative interpretations and
changed these in ways that led to a cycle of enduring improvement in psychology and behavior.
This precision does not mean that wise interventions are simple; to effect change, wise
interventions often rely on multiple processes, as we describe later, and involve a deep
understanding of psychological processes and the context. But the target of this change is a
specific meaning or inference.
The precision of wise interventions is important for both theoretical and applied reasons.
First, it allows researchers to unambiguously identify the causal effect of a specific psychological
process within a complex system. Wise interventions can thus shed light on psychological
processes and their function within systems, contributing to theory. Second, precision can allow
some kinds of wise interventions to be relatively brief and low-cost. And third, in targeting
specific processes, wise interventions can provide a theoretical account of what approach will
work with whom and in what context. Such an account is far more challenging for multifaceted
reforms. When an intervention does many things at once, reformers may not know when or why
the intervention works or does not work (see Kazdin, 2007).
For instance, wise interventions will work only in contexts that give rise to the relevant

!

Wise Interventions 16
psychological process (see the first row of Table 1, which illustrates contextual factors necessary
for the effectiveness of wise interventions). People with high self-esteem generally need no
inducement to view a compliment as having a broad meaning; they do not benefit from an
intervention to bolster this confidence (Marigold et al., 2007). Interventions to mitigate the threat
that arises from negative stereotypes (social identity threat) are generally effective only for
students who face a negative stereotype in a school setting (Cohen et al., 2009; Walton & Cohen,
2011). They are also often most effective in settings in which the student’s group is
underrepresented, where identity threat arises most acutely (Hanselman, Bruch, Gamoran, &
Borman, 2014; Walton, Logel, et al., 2015). This does not mean that wise interventions cannot
have broad, population-level effects. In many cases, many people face similar psychological
circumstances and draw predictably similar meanings. In these cases, wise interventions can
cause widespread benefits (e.g., Paunesku et al., 2015; Yeager, Walton et al., 2016).
As noted, the meanings people draw are not just “in the head” but typically reasonable
inferences from the social world as it presents itself to a person. Understanding ideas and
meanings as cycling from social contexts and into and out of minds (Markus & Kitayama, 2010;
Markus & Conner, 2014) implies multiple points of entry for intervention. Thus it is possible
both to alter teacher practice to represent critical feedback as intended to support students’
growth (Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns et al., 2014 Experiments 1 and 2) and to teach students to view
critical feedback in general as motivated by an effort to promote learning (Yeager, PurdieVaughns et al., 2014 Experiment 3). The first approach alters how the world presents itself to a
student; the second alters students’ lens for making sense of an important aspect of the world.
2. Understanding Psychological Processes as One Factor in Complicated Causal
Systems

!

Wise Interventions 17
Although wise interventions target precise psychological processes, they are not myopic in this
focus. Psychological processes do not exist in a vacuum but play a part in complex systems
(Walton, 2014; Yeager & Walton, 2011). Thus in addition to theory about psychological
processes, wise interventions involve theory about how a given process contributes to behavior
or a social problem in the context of other forces (Lewin, 1947).
Most generally, for wise interventions to work there needs to be capacity for
improvement in place. In general wise interventions remove psychological barriers to help
systems function more efficiently (Lewin, 1947). In this sense, wise interventions are engine oil,
not the engine. Engine oil doesn’t make the car run—the engine does. But engines need oil to
perform optimally. Similarly, psychological interventions do not, on their own, improve
achievement, health, or relationships. They rely on existing resources in people and systems and
aim to help these function optimally to improve outcomes.
Thus wise interventions complement and do not replace the situational approaches to
social reform mentioned earlier. Indeed, changing meanings can be critical to the success of such
reforms. If students are struggling, a school may hire extra tutors, expanding students’
opportunities to learn. However, this expense may be wasted if students do not see struggle and
setbacks as opportunities to learn (Lepper, Woolverton, Mumme, & Gurtner, 1993; Rattan et al.,
2012; Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns, et al., 2014). In one illustrative study, experimentally varying the
quality of instruction caused no improvement in how much struggling college students learned—
unless they were first led to view struggles as challenges that could be overcome with effort and
good strategies (Menec et al., 1994). In another, providing access to high-quality learning
materials raised struggling elementary school students’ arithmetic performance (Bandura &
Schunk, 1981). But when students were also encouraged to adopt proximal goals (“complete at

!

Wise Interventions 18
least 6 pages of instructional items per session”)—an addition designed to help students build
self-efficacy—the improvement doubled. By the same token, structural reforms can be necessary
for wise interventions to be effective. More oil won’t help an engine with a broken piston rod run
(see Row B in Table 1).
Understanding psychological processes and structural factors as working in tandem
provides a more nuanced understanding of school quality. When students fail to achieve, we
often assume deficits in learning opportunities and aim to remedy these, such as by reducing
class size, improving curricula, improving teacher training, or overhauling the entire school (e.g.,
charter schools, Fryer, 2012). When these reforms fall short, it is easy to blame inherent
deficiencies in students, families, and/or communities such as a lack of critical cognitive
(Herrnstein & Murray, 1994) or noncognitive skills (Duckworth & Seligman, 2005) or cultural
values essential to success.
Yet an often overlooked determinant of student achievement is the psychological climate
of a school (Steele & Cohn-Vargas, 2013; Tough, 2016). Many excellent schools are excellent
precisely because they attend to students’ psychological experience (Martinez & McGrath,
2014). Conversely, when schools struggle it is important to ask if a psychological barrier
prevents better outcomes. Indeed, wise interventions to remedy feelings of non-belonging,
identity threat, or fixed mindsets about intelligence can cause large gains in achievement without
expanding available learning opportunities (Yeager & Walton, 2011). These findings suggest
that significant potential for greater learning and achievement exists in many students and many
schools but is hidden and often goes unrealized as a consequence of psychological barriers
(Coleman et al., 1966; Walton & Spencer, 2009). Remedying these barriers may be a crucial step
to creating truly high quality school environments in which all students can learn and grow.

!

Wise Interventions 19
Because wise interventions operate within the context of complex systems they are
organic to them unlike external impositions like a new program or artificial incentive scheme.
Moreover, the psychological processes targeted by wise interventions are often implicit and not
fully accessible to people (Nisbett & Wilson, 1977; Wilson, 2002). A consequence is that the
effects of wise interventions can be relatively invisible to recipients. Suppose a psychological
intervention causes lasting gains in students’ achievement. The student might attribute their
success to their own hard work and the effective teaching they received, and rightly so. But they
may not recognize how their learning was facilitated by a change in their interpretation of
schooling. Although this invisibility may frustrate an intervener who wants to claim credit for an
intervention’s success, it can allow recipients to take pride in their accomplishments rather than
cede them to an external influence (McCord, 1978), potentially increasing effectiveness (Ross &
Nisbett, 1991). Indeed, in some cases awareness of an intervention can undermine its effects
especially if people feel the intervention is imposed upon them (Sherman, Cohen, et al., 2009),
not a choice they made (Lyubomirsky et al., 2011; Perry et al., 2010; Silverman, Logel, &
Cohen, 2013; Walton, Logel, et al., 2015).
Table 1. Classes of contextual factors necessary for wise interventions to apply in a setting and
to be effective.
Contextual Factors Important for the Effectiveness of Wise Interventions
A. The targeted psychological process is present and undermines people’s functioning.
B. Capacity for improvement is in place (e.g., in school, quality learning opportunities).
C. The situation affords opportunities for a change in psychology to become embedded in the
structure of people’s lives and can thus propel benefits forward in time (e.g., in school, better
relationships that support greater success).
→ Absent such affordances, an intervention may be effective in the short-term but not cause
lasting benefits.
3. Recursive Change in People and Situations
One of the most exciting aspects of wise interventions is their potential, in conjunction
with the systems in which they are delivered, to improve the course of people’s lives long into

!

Wise Interventions 20
the future. This is because assumptions people make about themselves and social situations
readily become self-fulfilling and embedded in the structure of their lives. In altering these
assumptions, wise interventions can set in motion recursive cycles that propel gains forward in
time or even make them “snowball” (Kenthirarajah & Walton, 2015; Rosenthal & Jacobson,
1968; Storms & McCaul, 1976; Yeager & Walton, 2011). From this perspective, lasting change
does not reside only within the person, for instance in how people make sense of the world or
their “character.” Nor is it restricted to a given situation which, once people exit, may lose its
influence. Instead, change is represented as an ongoing pattern of transactions between the
person and the social environment.
For example, when a student with a growth-mindset redoubles her efforts in response to a
poor grade and improves on the next test, this may confirm in her mind the potential for growth,
cause her teacher to invest more in her, and lessen her risk of entering a remedial track
(Blackwell et al., 2007), each of which positions the student for greater future success.
Walton and Cohen’s (2007) social-belonging intervention offered students a narrative for
making sense of early adversities like feelings of isolation or struggle in college as normal
challenges that can be overcome. This change in interpretation helped socially disadvantaged
students earn higher grades through the end of college (Walton & Cohen, 2011). Moreover, 3-5
years after college—7-9-years after the intervention—African American adults who had received
the intervention in the first year of college reported greater life and career satisfaction—all the
result of a one-hour session they attended in their first year of college. These gains were
mediated not by recollections of the intervention experience but by reports of more substantive
mentor relationships students developed with faculty during and after college (Brady et al., in
prep B; see also Yeager, Walton, et al., 2016). In short, the intervention altered how students

!

Wise Interventions 21
made sense of early challenges in college. This empowered them to build positive relationships,
creating a better social circumstance that facilitated greater success in life.
An important implication is that the long-term effects of wise interventions depend not
just on the psychological process targeted by the intervention but on the affordances of the
situation (Gibson, 1977): Does the situation afford opportunities for improvement such that an
initial change in psychology can become embedded in people’s lives? Will a romantic partner
respond positively to a positive overture? Can racial-minority students form strong relationships
on campus? If not, lasting change is unlikely (see Row C in Table 1). Importantly, the degree to
which a situation affords opportunities for improvement is not identical with its current quality.
In some cases, even long-standing negative situations, such as repeated patterns of academic
underperformance, can improve in response to a change in the psychology and behavior of a
person.
Another implication is that the long-term effects of wise interventions may depend on
timing. Often recursive processes are most amenable to change at the beginning of an
experience, such as when students enter a new school when both meanings and patterns of social
interaction are in flux and yet to be established (Cook et al., 2012; Raudenbush, 1984; Walton &
Cohen, 2011; Wilson & Linville, 1982, 1985; Yeager, Walton, et al., 2016).
A third implication is that long-term effects may depend on whether people integrate a
change in meaning in their lives. A risk of externally imposed, time-bound interventions is that a
change in meaning may attenuate or even reverse when the intervention ends. In a tragic
example, Schultz (1976) aimed to bolster a sense of control among retirement-home residents by
allowing residents to control or to predict when a college student would visit them over two
months. As compared to residents who received the same visits at random or no visits, residents

!

Wise Interventions 22
in the treatment conditions showed better health and well-being at the end of this period (e.g.,
rated as having more “zest for life”). But then the visits ended. At a 42-month follow-up,
residents in the treatment conditions were rated as less healthy and were more likely to have died
in the interim than those in the comparison conditions (Schultz & Hanusa, 1978). The
intervention located a rich psychological idea—a sense of personal control—narrowly in a
temporary situation limited to the study. Providing and then removing this sense of control was
worse than not providing it at all. By contrast, another intervention aimed to bolster a sense of
control in ways that nursing home residents could incorporate in their daily routines (e.g., to take
care of a plant, when to go to a movie). This intervention appears to have caused short- and longterm benefits (although there are statistical and methodological questions about this study,
Langer & Rodin, 1976; Rodin & Langer, 1977).
4. Methodological Rigor and Process
People cannot rigorously evaluate attempts to change their own and others’ behavior in
their daily lives. A person fighting with a spouse does not have the luxury of comparing one
strategy to a “no treatment” control group to see how well the strategy worked (and it would
probably be poor form to tell your spouse that he or she is in the control group). But a scientific
approach allows us to formally evaluate wise interventions in randomized field experiments,
typically with thoughtful control conditions to remove obvious confounds.
The development of wise interventions typically starts small, often in laboratory research
with the goal to clarify key processes, their nature, consequences, and malleability. Such
research is usually inspired by qualitative work, past theory or laboratory experimentation, or
other observations of the world (e.g., Steele, 1997). It then moves to small-scale field
experiments, which aim to develop effective strategies for intervening in field settings, and to

!

Wise Interventions 23
examine how an intervention affects psychological processes and outcomes often over time.
Usually this work involves a deep appreciation for the barriers a group of people face and the
kind of change that would be most welcome. Starting small has advantages in terms of cost and
efficiency, and limits the damage of any negative effect.
Once an intervention is better understood and shown to be effective in small-scale field
trials, researchers may develop forms that can be delivered to larger numbers of people. At this
stage, a critical question involves heterogeneity—in what kinds of contexts and with what kinds
of people is the intervention effective or not and why: the robustness or generalizability of the
intervention. These intersections may inform theory about social contexts and their opportunities
and affordances as well as theory about the intervention and psychological processes (see Weiss,
Bloom, & Brock, 2013).
When an intervention is delivered in a highly scalable way to large and diverse samples,
we may generally anticipate smaller effect sizes than when it is precisely tailored for and handdelivered, so to speak, to a more homogenous population (Paunesku et al., 2015; Yeager,
Romero, et al., 2016). Yet when an intervention can be scaled at low cost (e.g., through online
modules), the critical question may be not its relative but its absolute effectiveness (e.g., Bond et
al., 2012). Low-cost exercises that benefit only some people but can reach many people can be
very valuable. Growth-mindset interventions provide a model of this process, from laboratory
studies (e.g., Mueller & Dweck, 1999) to small-scale field trials (Aronson et al., 2002; Blackwell
et al., 2007; Good et al., 2003) to large-scale field trials (Paunesku et al., 2015; Yeager, Romero,
et al., 2016) to publicly available resources (e.g., https://www.mindsetkit.org/).
The strategy of starting small and scaling up contrasts with the manner in which many
social reforms are implemented, namely widely before rigorous testing. Sadly, once programs

!

Wise Interventions 24
are tested with randomized controlled trials, many turn out to be ineffective or to cause harm
(e.g., Scared Straight programs designed to reduce teenage violence; the D.A.R.E. anti-drug
program; infant simulator programs designed to reduce teenage pregnancy by giving teens a
make-believe infant to care for; Brinkman et al., 2016; Wilson, 2005, 2011). Instead, the
systematic development and evaluation of wise interventions mimics the development of medical
interventions (e.g., new drugs). Innovation, theory development, and rigorous evaluation take
place at each step. However, the primary questions addressed at each stage differ, from the
nature of a psychological process (laboratory research), to intervention methods and effects over
time (small-scale field trials), to scaling and heterogeneity (large-scale field trials). This process
informs fundamental questions about psychological processes, methods of intervention,
intersections with social contexts, and the bases of social problems.
5. Ethical Considerations
Wise interventions address core aspects of people’s lives, including their health, wellbeing, achievement, and relationships. Yet like a powerful garden hose, psychological
interventions can go awry. They can have unpredicted effects, negative effects, or effects that
can be positive in some respects but negative in others (Schulz & Hanusa, 1978; Silverman,
Gwinn, & Van Boven, 2015). Thus it is essential from an ethical viewpoint as well as a practical
and scientific one to conduct rigorous tests of the effectiveness of an intervention and the
soundness of the theorizing that prompted it, as well as to identify any potential negative
consequences even if for a minority of recipients.
An additional important reason to take a formal, scientific approach is to make explicit
the psychological and behavioral changes prioritized by a reform and to identify any tradeoffs.
Often the changes promoted by wise interventions are endorsed by all concerned (e.g., better

!

Wise Interventions 25
health, higher achievement, greater well-being). Some cases, however, raise competing values
(e.g., Shook & Fazio, 2008). For example, broken-windows policing—which aims to instill
norms of order by cleaning up physical signs of disorder and strictly enforcing quality of life
crimes like loitering (Wilson & Kelling, 1982)—may reduce crime (Braga & Bond, 2008) but
increase the harassment of racial minorities (Department of Justice, 2016; Ridgeway, 2007). In
bringing such tradeoffs to light, a scientific approach can promote a more informed debate, such
as how to achieve benefits without incurring costs. This approach can also help identify common
practices that cause harm, such as demographic queries immediately before standardized tests,
which can exacerbate identity threat and achievement gaps (Danaher & Crandall, 2008).
Wise interventions can also raise specific concerns. First, attempts to change private
beliefs and behavior may make some people uncomfortable. Yet such attempts are ubiquitous in
social life, from marketing to personal communications to social policy. People routinely try a
new strategy to motivate a student, to address a personal conflict, or to encourage people, say, to
quit smoking. Such “everyday” efforts are inevitable as people pursue their goals. The question
is thus not whether to deliver psychological interventions but how to do it well—effectively and
responsibly.
The problem with everyday interventions is that often they are based on a poor
understanding of human nature. They rely on lay theories about psychology or “common sense.”
Common sense is not always wrong, of course, but it often leads to interventions that are
ineffective or do more harm than good (Wilson, 2011). In medicine, relying on common sense
can produce disastrous results. Fortunately, most people recognize the limits of their knowledge
about disease and heed advice from physicians and other experts. But when it comes to
“treating” psychological processes that give rise to problems of social life—that make people

!

Wise Interventions 26
unhappy or struggle in school or prolong conflicts—lay people and policymakers alike often rely
on “home remedies” that are no more effective than blood-letting is in curing disease.
Wise interventions, by contrast, leverage precise theory with good intentions to help
people flourish. They are evaluated using experiments including to identify possible harms and
to keep these good intentions and theory in check. Upon such evaluations, institutions and
society at large can choose to implement those interventions at scale if they align with commonly
agreed-upon goals and have adequate evidence. In these ways, wise interventions are more likely
to be effective than counterfactuals; they do not change too many factors at once and are
therefore less intrusive than other reforms; and they help decision-makers make more informed
decisions.
Finally, people can think that wise interventions fault people for having unproductive
ways of thinking, “blaming the victim” and reducing social problems to personal failures (see
Ikizer & Blanton, 2016). This is a misperception. As we have seen, people’s views generally
reflect reasonable inferences about the world from their perspective. People do not just choose
how to think about important aspects of the world, and cannot easily “snap out of” bad ways of
thinking. Wise interventions help people reinterpret their circumstances in ways that are often
difficult to do on their own to bring about changes in their lives consistent with their goals.
IV. Strategies and Types of Wise Interventions
How do wise interventions change how people make sense of themselves and their
circumstances? Here we review specific strategies. We then organize wise interventions into
three families, which target different motives of meaning-making.
Overview of Strategies to Encourage Change
Unlike learning a new skill (like calculus or self-control), efforts to change the meaning

!

Wise Interventions 27
people ascribe to themselves and social experiences generally do not involve practice or
repetition; more is not necessarily better. To change how people view their self-identity, make
sense of how a romantic partner regards them, or decide whether they belong in a difficult math
class, mere repetition of some mantra is unlikely to be effective (like Stuart Smiley: “I’m
Good Enough, I’m Smart Enough, and Doggone It, People Like Me!”, or Bart Simpson writing
on the blackboard: “I’ll be good. I’ll be good. I’ll be good…”). Rather, wise interventions use
strategies honed in basic research to offer people constructive new meanings and attributions in
compelling ways.
Typically wise interventions aim to be minimally directive. They offer people new
information, place them in new situations, or give them well-designed reflection exercises, and
then allow people to draw new conclusions on their own. This wisdom follows a guiding
principle of social psychology beginning with dissonance theory (Festinger & Carlsmith, 1959):
Influence attempts are most effective when they lead people to internalize or “own” the relevant
change. Indeed, direct efforts to change people’s beliefs can seem controlling, stigmatizing, or
irrelevant and if so are unlikely to be taken to heart (Brehm, 1966; see Sherman, Cohen et al.,
2009), especially among adolescents and adults (Yeager, Fong, Lee, Espelage, 2015; Yeager,
Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2013), and people in cultures that prize personal independence (Markus
& Kitayama, 1991). Thus wise interventions generally do not tell people that they “should” adopt
a new belief but allow them to adopt it on their own (see Brady et al. 2016; Silverman et al.,
2013; Walton, Logel, et al., 2015).
Four broad types of change strategies have been used successfully: (1) direct labeling, (2)
prompting new meanings, (3) increasing commitment through action, and (4) active reflection
exercises. Below we describe each at a high level. Later, in describing the three families of wise

!

Wise Interventions 28
interventions, we use specific examples to illustrate each strategy.
1. Direct Labeling. A classic study found that twice as many people cooperated when a
prisoner’s dilemma activity was labeled “the Community Game” than when it was called “the
Wall Street Game” (Liberman, Samuels, & Ross, 2004). A direct approach to intervention is to
provide people a positive label that defines an otherwise ambiguous aspect of themselves, a
social situation, or other people. This can motivate people to behave in accordance with the label
(self-labeling: Miller, Brickman, & Bolen, 1975; situation-labeling: Goldstein et al., 2008;
labeling of others: Rosenthal & Jacobson, 1968). Directly labeling an aspect of the self, however,
can be more effective with children than adults, who may have more established self-views and
may react against messages that appear coercive. Additionally, direct labels can backfire if they
imply that a personal quality is fixed, not an area in which people can grow. Thus telling children
“You’re so smart” can undermine their resilience to setbacks (Mueller & Dweck, 1998).
2. Prompting New Meanings. Many wise interventions give people a basis for drawing
a new inference but do not provide the inference itself. Doing so can prompt people to reconsider
how they think about themselves, others, or a situation—to revise their implicit “stories”—
without directly telling them what to think (Wilson, 2011). As we will see, prompting can be
accomplished by altering situations, providing new information, or asking questions that imply
new meanings (e.g., situations: Braga & Bond, 2008; Redelmeier et al., 2003; information:
Blackwell et al., 2007; Wilson & Linville, 1982; questions: Bryan, Walton, Rogers, & Dweck,
2011; Marigold et al., 2007, 2010).
3. Increasing Commitment Through Action. Other interventions use strategies
developed in research on cognitive dissonance to actively engage people in committing to a new
idea (Aronson, 1968; Festinger, 1957). When people experience tension between their behaviors

!

Wise Interventions 29
and attitudes, they are motivated to resolve this tension, and often do so by revising their
attitudes to accord with their behavior. Thus creating situations that inspire people to freely act in
line with a new belief can cement psychological change. A number of studies, for example, have
made good use of the saying-is-believing approach (Aronson, 1999). People receive new
information that supports a key idea. Often this idea is presented as intuitive and one they
already endorse. They are then asked to explain this idea to others, often in a letter of advice to
younger or less experienced people than themselves using examples from their own experience.
Compared to simply providing people with information, this (1) encourages people to think
about an idea actively rather than to just receive it passively, promoting learning; (2) treats them
as co-creators of an effort to help others, leveraging prosocial motivations (Yeager, Henderson,
et al., 2014), rather than as recipients of an intervention, a potentially stigmatizing role (Alvarez
& van Leeuwen, 2015; Yeager, Romero, et al., 2016), or as recipients of a persuasive appeal,
which could be rejected; (3) allows people to advocate for an idea, increasing its persuasive
appeal (Festinger & Carlsmith, 1959); and (4) helps people connect an idea to their own lives
and thus to personalize and take ownership of it, allowing standardized materials to speak to
people with diverse experiences. Interventions that include saying-is-believing procedures have
yielded some of the largest and longest-lasting gains observed in the literature, including some
growth-mindset interventions (Aronson et al., 2002; Paunesku et al., 2015), some attributionalretraining interventions (Wilson & Linville, 1985), social-belonging interventions (Walton &
Cohen, 2011), theory-of-personality interventions (Yeager, Johnson, et al., 2014), some wisefeedback interventions (Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns et al., 2014, Experiment 3), prosocial-purpose
interventions (Yeager, Henderson, et al., 2014), and empathic-discipline interventions
(Okonofua, Paunesku, & Walton, 2016).

!

Wise Interventions 30
Later we discuss other commitment strategies derived from dissonance theory (e.g.,
hypocrisy, counterattitudinal behavior).
4. Active Reflection Exercises. A variety of exercises help people reframe problems,
often through writing. These exercises are distinct in that recipients are not provided new
information or asked to change their behavior in any way. Rather, they are instructed to write in
an open-ended manner in ways that help them reinterpret events on their own. An example is
value-affirmation exercises, which aim to mitigate psychological threat by reconnecting people
with core personal values (Cohen et al., 2009). Others help people reexamine negative events,
which can help people find resolution or new meaning and forestall maladaptive ruminative
thoughts to improve health and well-being (e.g., Finkel et al., 2013; Kross & Ayduk, 2011;
Pennebaker, 1997; Ramirez & Beilock, 2011).
Each change strategy can help people reinterpret themselves and a social situation. There
are differences among them, though, and some are better designed to change some kinds of
meanings than others—as we will now see.
Three Families of Wise Interventions
All wise interventions capitalize on the foundational insight reviewed earlier—that how
people make sense of themselves and their situation is a primary determinant of behavior.
Interventions vary, however, in which of the three motives for meaning-making they
emphasize—the need to be accurate, the need for self-integrity, or the need to belong. While the
resulting families of intervention overlap, they also illustrate distinctive approaches to helping
people flourish. Here we outline theoretical principles relevant to each psychological process and
illustrate each family and relevant strategies for change with examples. Table 2 summarizes the
intersection between families of wise interventions and change strategies. Some cells are blank

!

Wise Interventions 31
simply because research has not (yet) shown the relevant change strategy to alter the relevant
psychological process. Extensive examples of interventions targeting each process are provided
in Supplementary Tables 1-3.1
Table 2. What to change and how to change it. Three families of psychological processes
targeted by wise interventions and a sample of strategies to change them.
Change
Family of Wise Intervention
Strategy
The Need to be
Need for Self-Integrity
Need to Belong
Accurate
Direct
•Identity labeling
• Explicit social
Labeling
normative appeals
•Labeling of other
people’s potential
• Other explicit social
information, e.g., that
represents a behavior as
an opportunity to help
others
Prompting
•Alter situation to imply
• Alter social situation to
New
new meanings
prompt new inferences
Meanings
about what is
•Provide new
normative
information to imply
new meanings
• Provide new social
information (e.g.,
•Leading questions
stories) that suggests
new norms
Increasing
•Saying-is-believing
• Saying-is-believing
• Saying-is-believing
Commitment •“Do Good, Be Good”
• Hypocrisy
Through
• Effort justification
Action
• Counter-attitudinal
behavior
• Personal commitment
1

We hope that future scholarship will extend these tables to provide a systematic up-to-date resource for the field.
Examples are culled from numerous searches, including a September 2016 PsychInfo search combining
“intervention” with diverse science and psychology journals (Child Development, Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Psychological Science, Journal of Applied
Psychology, Journal of Applied Social Psychology, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, Journal of Educational Psychology, and Science). Many references were also obtained from prior
empirical and review articles. We retained studies that (1) featured one or more psychologically precise independent
variables (i.e., interventions), which (2) addressed subjective meaning-making; (3) assessed real-world behaviors,
attitudes, or emotions of inherent importance to the person and/or society (this excluded studies that assessed only
behavioral intentions, or behavior, attitudes, or emotions in response to a stimulus presented in a laboratory context);
and (4) were evaluated in randomized controlled trials to test causal effects. This review prioritized novel
psychological processes; thus some studies that replicate and extend other interventions are included as “see also.”

!
!

Wise Interventions 32
Active
Reflection
Exercises

•Writing about negative
events
•Third person
perspective in writing
about negative events

• Value-affirmation

• Contingent valueaffirmation

Interventions that Capitalize on the Need to be Accurate
As noted earlier, even when people are trying to draw accurate inferences about
themselves and the social world, they can get stuck in maladaptive ways of thinking that become
self-reinforcing and ultimately cause profound personal harm. A college student who attributes a
bad grade to her lack of intelligence will find it difficult to study for the next test, ensuring
another poor grade and confirming her pejorative view. Many wise interventions aim to help
people reinterpret their circumstances in less pejorative ways drawing on attribution theory
(Storms & McCaul, 1976; Valins & Nisbett, 1971; Wilson, Damiani, & Shelton, 2002).
Importantly, these approaches are concerned more with helping people come up with
nonpejorative interpretations, regardless of whether these interpretations are accurate in some
objective sense (Abramson, Seligman, & Teasdale, 1978). But they do so by capitalizing on
people’s desire to form accurate views, by assuming that people are motivated to see the world
as it is and are thus open to information that suggests new views.
Direct Labeling. The most direct approach is to tell people about themselves or others.
For instance, 5th graders told they were “litter-conscious” littered less than students given
persuasive appeals not to litter, as long as 7 weeks later (Miller et al., 1975). Telling teachers that
certain students are likely to “bloom” can facilitate teaching that gives rise to greater academic
growth in students (Rosenthal & Jacobson, 1968; see also Raudenbush, 1984).
Prompting New Meanings. Many interventions prompt new meanings indirectly, by
leading people to a new inference.

!

Wise Interventions 33
Altering situations. Changing situations can be a powerful way to prompt new meanings.
One example involves a heuristic people use to evaluate past experiences: People tend to place
disproportionate weight on how the experience ended. Thus improving the end of an experience
can improve later assessments of it (Kahneman, Fredrickson, Schreiber, & Redelmeier, 1993).
Leveraging this insight, one intervention prolonged colonoscopies by leaving the colonscope
inside patients’ rectums at the end of the procedure and then withdrawing it slowly. Although
people experienced pain for longer and more pain in total, this reduced the pain they experienced
at the end. In turn, patients recalled the experience as less painful as a whole, and were 41%
more likely to agree to another colonoscopy an average of 5 years later if needed (Redelmeier et
al., 2003).
Changing situational cues can be especially important when people’s processing capacity
is limited. Alcohol is commonly believed to make people more risk-seeking but, in fact, it
narrows people’s attention to the immediate situation and thus makes proximal cues more
impactful (Steele & Josephs, 1990). Drinkers can thus be risk-seeking in settings that encourage
risky behavior but especially risk-averse when cues discourage risk. Taking advantage of this
process, one study had undergraduates view a safe-sex video and, in one condition, also gave
them a bracelet and asked them to remember the dangers of unsafe sex whenever they looked at
it (Dal Cin, MacDonald, Fong, Zanna, & Elton-Marshall, 2006). Five to seven weeks later,
undergraduates reported on their last sexual experience. Among those who had not been drinking
when they had sex, 46% given the bracelet reported having used a condom, as compared to 25%
who just saw the safe-sex video. Among those who had been drinking, however, the benefit was
even larger: 71% in the bracelet condition used a condom, versus 36% who just saw the video. A
third group that saw no video and received no bracelet was indistinguishable from students in the

!

Wise Interventions 34
safe-sex video condition. Thus reminding students of the dangers of unsafe sex had no effect—
unless they carried a token of this reminder with them into situations in which they might have
unprotected sex, which could change the meaning of this act and relevant behavior.
Providing information. Many interventions provide information that leads people to a
new inference. In school, students can risk inferring that struggles reflect internal deficiencies, a
self-defeating attribution, rather than factors they can control or that improve with time.
Although there has been some success with direct attempts to change students’ attributions
(Perry & Hamm, in press), most interventions prompt adaptive attributions indirectly, such as by
sharing stories of challenges older students experienced and how these improved with time (e.g.,
Stephens et al., 2014; Wilson et al., 2002; Wilson & Linville, 1982) or by providing information
about how intelligence is not fixed but can grow with effort and good strategies (Blackwell et al.,
2007).
Leading Questions. Another approach is to ask questions that imply a new inference. We
have already seen several such interventions, for instance to help people interpret a compliment
from a relationship partner as having a global meaning (Marigold et al., 2007, 2010) or to
interpret difficulties with a baby as not evidence that the child is “a bad baby” but as a normal
problem to be solved (Bugental et al., 2002). Another leading-question intervention raised grades
in high school science. Students were asked to write several times over a semester about how
course material might be relevant or useful to them or someone they knew (Hulleman &
Harackiewicz, 2010). Importantly, the question assumed this relevance, and prompted students to
justify and expound upon this. Notably, just telling students that academic material is useful may
not produce the same benefits, especially if the reasons given are less relevant to a person or if
doing so increases pressure and reduces confidence (Canning & Harackiewicz, 2015).

!

Wise Interventions 35
Another study used leading questions to tie voting to the self-concept (Bryan et al.,
2011). The day before two major elections, people were asked survey questions about voting
(e.g., “How important is it to you to vote in tomorrow’s election”) or about being a voter (e.g.,
“How important is it to you to be a voter in tomorrow’s election”) (italics added). The latter
wording, which encouraged people to see voting as having stakes for their identity, produced one
of the largest increases in voter turnout ever observed.
Leading questions can also prompt people to plan how to organize their behavior to
accomplish their goals, termed implementation intentions (Gollwitzer, 1999). In a classic study, a
fearful message about tetanus had no effect on the likelihood that college seniors went to a clinic
to get a tetanus shot (Leventhal, Singer, & Jones, 1965). But asking students to review their
schedule to find a convenient time raised the percentage of students who got the shot from 3% to
28%. Students did not need more motivation to get the shot. They needed to turn this goal into a
plan. Another study randomized a mailer sent to more than three thousand employees
announcing free flu shot clinics (Milkman, Beshears, Choi, Laibson, & Madrian, 2011). When
the flier asked people to “make a plan” and what day and time they would come, vaccination
rates rose from 33% to 37%.
Increasing Commitment Through Action. An effective way to change people’s beliefs
is to change their behavior first. As long as people view their behavior as freely chosen and not
coerced, they may infer that their beliefs are in accord with their actions (Bem, 1972). In a
program called Teen Outreach, for example, high school students are asked to perform volunteer
work in a community agency of their choice over the school year. Students randomly assigned to
this program, versus those who do not take part, do better in school and are less likely to become
pregnant or get someone pregnant (Allen, Philliber, Herrling, & Kuperminc, 1997). One way the

!

Wise Interventions 36
program works is by increasing teens’ sense of autonomy and their connection with their
community. That is, students’ self-views change to be consistent their actions (volunteering).
Many interventions combine new information with saying-is-believing, to encourage
people to commit to a new idea and to help them connect it to their own lives. Aronson and
colleagues (2002), for instance, delivered a growth-mindset of intelligence intervention by
asking college students to write letters of advice to struggling middle school students describing
the value of a growth mindset. This raised the college students’ semester grades (see also
Okonofua et al., 2016; Paunesku et al., 2015; Walton & Cohen, 2011; Wilson & Linville, 1985).
Illustrating the benefits of this approach, one growth-mindset intervention was more effective
when 9th grade students were told that the exercise was designed to solicit their expertise to help
future students than when told it was designed to help them (Yeager, Romero, et al., 2016).
Active Reflection Exercises. Written reflection exercises can help people reconstrue
negative events. In a seminal study, Pennebaker (1997) showed that having students write
concretely about troubling and even traumatic experiences improved health (e.g., fewer visits to
the medical center) and well-being. Writing may help clarify the nature and limits of a negative
experience, bringing unproductive ruminative thoughts to a close. Subsequent investigators have
used more directive exercises to maximize benefits (see Ramirez & Beilock, 2011). For example,
Kross and colleagues (2014) asked people to write about a negative event from a third-person
perspective, as if they were a fly on the wall observing it, and to explain why the event occurred
the way it did. Compared to people who wrote about the event from a first-person perspective
(e.g., “I failed a test”), those who adopted the third-person perspective (“Greg failed a test”) were
more likely to interpret the event in a non-pejorative way, to stop ruminating on it, and to
experience less psychological distress (see also Kross & Ayduk, 2011; Kross et al., 2005; Park,

!

Wise Interventions 37
Ayduk, & Kross, 2015). As described earlier, Finkel and colleagues (2013) asked married
couples in three 7-minute writing exercises over a year to consider how “a neutral third party
who wants the best for all” would think about a conflict in their marriage, barriers to them taking
this perspective, and how they could overcome these barriers to take this perspective in future
conflict situations. This halted the typical decline in marital satisfaction over a year.
Some implementation-intention interventions also use writing exercises. For example, in
mental contrasting with implementation intentions, people write about a goal they want to
achieve, obstacles that might prevent them from achieving this goal, and how they can overcome
these obstacles. This can increase the likelihood that students succeed academically and in other
domains (Duckworth, Kirby, Gollwitzer, & Oettingen, 2013; see also Morisano, Hirsh, Peterson,
Pihl, & Shore, 2010; Oettingen, 2012).
Summary. These strategies capitalize on people’s motivation to make sense of
themselves or their circumstances in accurate ways. In some cases recipients are relatively
passive, such as when they receive subtle prompts that imply a new way of viewing a situation.
Others require active engagement, such as saying-is-believing and active reflection exercises, but
this may make them more engaging and increase the likelihood people will personalize the idea
conveyed.
Interventions that Capitalize on the Need for Self-Integrity
As noted earlier, people have a strong desire to see themselves as adequate, moral, and
competent. Experiences that threaten this sense of self-integrity can give rise to a range of
personal and social problems (Aronson, 1968; Sherman & Cohen, 2006; Steele, 1988). To
address these problems, many interventions aim to reduce psychological threats. Others create
circumstances in which people will feel inconsistent or hypocritical if they do not behave

!

Wise Interventions 38
positively, effectively leveraging motivations for self-integrity to instigate positive behavior (see
Table 4).
Remedying Threats to Self-Integrity Through Value-Affirmation Writing Exercises.
People routinely experience psychological threats, from information that a habit (e.g., smoking)
imperils one’s health; to an upcoming test one might fail; to a stereotype that casts one in a
negative light; to a personal conflict. In addition to challenging a specific aspect of the self, such
as the perception of oneself as healthy, events like these can undermine a person’s desired view
of themselves as good, moral, and competent in general (Sherman & Cohen, 2006; Steele, 1988).
This broad threat to self-integrity can increase stress, undermine well-being, and lead people to
act in maladaptive or self-destructive ways, such as to deny the validity of health risk
information (Sherman et al., 2000).
To help people function more effectively, value-affirmation interventions provide people
a way to reflect on enduring positive aspects of themselves so as to bolster their global sense of
self-integrity (Sherman & Cohen, 2006; Steele 1988). In a classic exercise, people review a list
of values (e.g., relationships with friends and family, artistic ability), identify a value that is most
important to them, and then describe why. This is not hollow self-esteem boosting. Value
affirmations do not build people up with false praise or facilitate exaggerated self-views. Rather,
reflecting on personal values of enduring importance helps focus people on ways they are
worthy, competent people in important areas of their lives beyond that which is threatened. In so
doing, value affirmations “lower the heat,” place a specific threat in a broader context, reduce
stress, and help people respond in more effective, less defensive ways (Cohen & Sherman, 2014;
Critcher & Dunning, 2015; Sherman & Cohen, 2006; Sherman & Hartson, 2011; Walton,
Paunesku, & Dweck, 2012). Moreover, because threat and suboptimal responses often become

!

Wise Interventions 39
self-reinforcing—threat undermines functioning, further increasing threat—a greater sense of
psychological safety can cause enduring benefits (Cohen et al., 2009).
Some of the most powerful benefits of value-affirmation interventions involve its effects
in reducing social identity threat, mitigating educational inequality. The worry that one could be
viewed through the lens of a negative stereotype can heighten anxiety and distraction and,
ironically, make it harder to perform well (Steele, 1997, 2010; Steele, Spencer, & Aronson,
2002; Schmader, Johns, & Forbes, 2008; Walton & Spencer, 2009). Following basic laboratory
research (Martens, Johns, Greenberg, & Schimel, 2006), seminal field experiments found that
African American adolescents who completed value affirmations as in-class writing exercises at
the beginning of 7th grade earned higher course grades that semester, reducing race differences
by 40%, as well as reduced accessibility of negative stereotypes (Cohen et al., 2006). These
academic benefits persisted through 8th grade, with the greatest benefits for initially lowperforming African American students who may otherwise experience the most severe cycle of
threat and poor performance (Cohen et al., 2009). The long-term gains seem to arise in part
because students who feel psychologically safe in school are better able to develop a secure
sense of belonging (Cook et al., 2012; see also Brady et al., 2016; Layous et al., 2016; Sherman
et al., 2013). Six years after the original intervention, African American students who had
completed the affirmation exercises were more likely to enroll in college (92% versus 78%;
Goyer, Garcia et al., under review; for scaling studies, see Borman, Grigg, & Hanselman, 2016;
Dee, 2015; Hanselman et al., 2014).
In college samples, affirmation interventions have raised women’s performance in maledominated science and engineering fields, eliminating gender differences (Miyake et al., 2010;
Walton, Logel et al., 2015); raised biology grades among first-generation college students,

!

Wise Interventions 40
eliminating social-class differences (Harackiewicz et al., 2014; Tibbetts et al., 2016); and raised
GPA among Latino American students over two years (Brady et al., 2016). In each case, students
who faced identity threat in the context benefited most.
Value affirmation can also reduce threats that arise from sources beyond negative
stereotypes, including to increase acceptance of the health risks of smoking (Harris et al., 2007)
and excess drinking (Armitage, Harris, & Arden, 2011) and reduce drinking (Armitage et al.,
2011); to reduce physiological stress as a major exam approaches (Sherman, Bunyan, Creswell,
& Jaremka, 2009); to increase the ability to self-regulate to accomplish goals on laboratory tasks
(Schmeichel & Vohs, 2009) and, in field settings, to promote weight loss over several months
(Logel & Cohen, 2012); and to improve interpersonal behavior and relationships over periods up
to several months among narcissistic adolescents (Thomaes, Bushman, Orobio de Castro, Cohen,
& Denissen, 2009), antisocial adolescents (Thomaes, Bushman, Orobio de Castro, & Reijntjes,
2012) and socially insecure college students (Stinson, Logel, Shepherd, & Zanna, 2011).
Leveraging Motivations for Self-Integrity: Increasing Commitment Through
Action. Whereas value affirmations aim to remedy threats to self-integrity, other interventions
leverage motivations for self-integrity to promote positive behavior (Table 4). Typically they
create circumstances that lead people to view positive attitudes or behavior as important to being
a good and coherent person.
Table 4. Two ways to address needs for self-integrity and to belong to produce positive change.
Motivational System
Strategy
The Need for Self-Integrity
The Need to Belong
Remedy
• Value-affirmation interventions
• Facilitate a sense of social
Threat that
connection when this connection is
Undermines
lacking
Functioning
• Challenge salient negative social
norms
• Represent social adversities as
temporary and improveable
!

Wise Interventions 41

Leverage
Motivation
to Promote
Positive
Behavior
Change

• Increasing commitment through
action, including through including
commitment devices, hypocrisy,
effort justification, and counterattitudinal behavior

• Facilitate a sense of unconditional
regard
• Create or facilitate connections to
individuals or groups linked to
positive behaviors
• Represent existing social groups or
communities in ways that highlight
positive social norms
• Represent positive behavior change
as a way to help others

Hypocrisy. One approach is to create circumstances in which positive behavior helps
people resolve a sense of personal hypocrisy. In a variation of the “saying-is-believing”
technique, college students were asked to advocate for safe-sex practices to high school students
and, in addition, and were made to feel hypocritical by recalling times they did not practice safe
sex themselves. As compared to either students who only advocated for safe sex (who can see
themselves as exemplary) or who only recalled their own inconsistent past practice (who can see
unsafe sex as not a big deal) but did not do both, those in the hypocrisy condition subsequently
purchased more condoms (Stone, Aronson, Crain, Winslow, & Fried, 1994).
Another study used hypocrisy to promote positive intergroup attitudes during the Civil
Rights movement. Undergraduates were asked to rank-order personal values, and learned that
peers tended to rank “freedom” more highly than “equality” (Rokeach, 1971). The researcher
suggested that this meant “students, in general, are much more interested in their own freedom
than…in the freedom for other people” (p. 454). Students were then asked about their support for
and participation in civil rights demonstrations. The researcher suggested that both students who
opposed civil rights and students who said they supported civil rights but had not demonstrated
“care a great deal about their own freedom but are indifferent to other people’s freedom.” As
long as 15-17 months later, this induction of hypocrisy led students to value “equality” more
highly and to endorse civil rights more strongly. Moreover, treated students were more likely in
!

Wise Interventions 42
the interim to respond to a solicitation from a civil rights organization, the NAACP (26% versus
11% in the control condition) and to enroll in an academic program in intergroup relations (42%
versus 22%), suggesting both the behavioral consequences of the intervention and the recursive
processes that may sustain its effects.
Counter-attitudinal behavior. Another strategy is to create a circumstance that motivates
people to freely act in ways that contradict a problematic attitude; this can motivate people to
revise the attitude (Festinger & Carlsmith, 1959). One study led Asian and White students to feel
socially connected to a Mexican-American peer, disposing them to share her interests including
her cultural interests, and also invited students to work with this peer on a Mexican cultural
activity, designing a music video for a Mexican band she liked (Brannon & Walton, 2013). After
doing so, students showed lower levels of implicit prejudice against Latinos and, six months
later, reported greater interest in talking with Mexican American peers and more positive
attitudes toward undocumented Mexican immigrants. These gains were found relative to students
who worked with the peer to design a video for a non-Mexican band and students required to
design the video for the Mexican band—neither group freely took part in a Mexican cultural
activity, which could seem inconsistent with prejudice against Latinos. They were also found
relative to students not led to feel socially connected to the Mexican-American peer, who did not
engage as enthusiastically with the cultural task.
Commitment. A third strategy is to create a context that encourages people to freely
commit to a future behavior, increasing the odds people will follow through because not doing so
would appear inconsistent. In a classic demonstration, 94% of beach-goers asked to watch
another person’s belongings chased down an accomplice who attempted to steal a radio, as
compared to 20% not asked (Moriatry, 1975). A classic intervention used small group

!

Wise Interventions 43
discussions to encourage housewives to serve cheap organ meats to their families during the
meat shortages of World War II (Lewin, 1947). Although the intervention included multiple wise
elements, an important feature was that the facilitator asked women at the end of the discussion
to indicate by a show of hands who would serve organ meats to their families over the next
week. This increased the percentage who did from 3% to 32%. A recent application found that
placing the signature line at the top rather than the bottom of a car insurance form—thus making
people commit to truth-telling before completing the form—led motorists to disclose having
driven 10% more miles (26,098 vs. 23,671), increasing payments and promoting fairness (Shu et
al., 2012; for a qualification, see Gollwitzer, Sheeran, Michalski, & Seifert, 2009).
Backfires. The fact that it is possible to both reduce threat to self-integrity to improve
functioning and to leverage motivations for self-integrity to promote positive behavior means
that interventions in this space can backfire. Attempting to reduce threat when threat is what
motivates positive behavior, or to leverage motivations for self-integrity when self-integrity is
already under threat, may be counterproductive. Indeed, when people are failing, valueaffirmation can lead people to disengage from goals, in part by allowing them to accept that they
are bad at a task (Vohs, Park, & Schmeichel, 2012). If one reason students stay in a remedial
college math program despite struggles is because inferring that they are bad at school would
undermine their sense of being a good person, exercises that satisfy this need could undermine
persistence.
Thus interventions that contend with the need for self-integrity should, in particular,
proceed with care and rigorous evaluation. In general, it may be helpful to leverage motivations
for self-integrity when people do not place adequate value on a behavior, increasing its
importance by linking it to core concerns of the self. However, when people already value

!

Wise Interventions 44
relevant goals, as is often the case, it is important to ask whether progress toward these goals is
stymied by chronic threats to self-integrity.
Interventions that Capitalize on the Need to Belong
Like interventions that address the need for self-integrity, interventions that address
belonging can either remedy threats that undermine functioning or leverage this motivation to
instigate positive behavior (Table 4).
Remedying Threats to Belonging. Several interventions aim to foster or protect a sense
of social connectedness among people for whom social relationships are otherwise at risk.
Prompting new meanings. Receiving periodic caring notes from a hospital following a
suicidal or depressive incident can reduce suicide rates over several years (Motto & Bostrom,
2001; see also Carter et al., 2013). Illustrating the meaning these notes can have for people, one
former patient replied, “You will never know what your little notes mean to me. I always think
someone cares about what happens to me, even if my family did kick me out. I am really
grateful” (Motto & Bostrom, 2001, p. 832).
In other cases, worries about belonging can lead people to behave in maladaptive ways;
this can be remedied with new social information. One cause of excess college drinking is that
students overestimate the prevalence of and comfort with drinking among peers, which can
motivate them to drink more to fit in (Prentice & Miller, 1993). When students’ misperceptions
are corrected, students who are less comfortable with drinking and more sensitive to others’
disapproval drink less (Schroeder & Prentice, 1998; see also DeJong et al., 2006, 2009; Perkins,
2003). In this process, students are not conforming to a new norm but freed to act in violation of
prevalent drinking norms.
Increasing commitment through action: Saying-is-believing. Other studies use saying-

!

Wise Interventions 45
is-believing procedures to drive home social information aimed at mitigating threats to
belonging. Walton and Cohen (2011) bolstered their social-belonging intervention by asking
students to videotape a speech explaining why worries about belonging are normal in the
transition to college and improve with time using examples from their own lives. These videos,
students were told, could be shown to future students to aid in their transition. Saying-isbelieving procedures are also used in theory-of-personality interventions, which describe how
people can change—and thus that bullies are not always bullies, and victims are not always
victims—to reduce stress and aggression in response to peer bullying among adolescents
(Yeager, Johnson, et al., 2014).
Active reflection exercises. Although active reflection exercises have not often been used
to remedy threats to belonging, one study found that asking adolescents to reflect on times they
experienced unconditional regard from peers reduced feelings of shame several weeks later when
students received poor grades (Brummelman et al., 2014).
Leveraging Belonging Motivations. Other interventions leverage people’s motivations
to form and maintain social relationships, to be appropriate members of their social community,
and to contribute positively to others to promote positive behavior. Many interventions change
representations of social norms—of what is normative of people “like me” (Hallsworth, List,
Metcalfe, & Vlaev, 2014; Lewin, 1947; Paluck, 2009), of attractive or desirable people (Paluck
& Shepherd, 2012), of a setting (Braga & Bond, 2008; Goldstein et al., 2008), or of what should
be done (Schultz, Nolan, Cialdini, Goldstein, & Griskevicius, 2007). Each approach can motivate
conformity.
Direct labeling. Many interventions provide people direct information that defines what
is typical or valued in their social community. In one trial of more than 100,000 delinquent

!

Wise Interventions 46
taxpayers, the most effective communication to encourage payment provided the strongest social
norm statement (“Nine out of ten people in the UK pay their taxes on time. You are currently in
the very small minority of people who have not paid us yet”) (Hallsworth et al., 2014). Among
16,515 citizens, it produced an additional £1.9 million (≈$2.73 million) in tax revenue over 23
days. Social-norm information embedded in utility bills can similarly reduce home energy
consumption, in both small-scale trials (Schultz et al., 2007) and large-scale trials, especially
among high users (Allcott, 2011).
A greater focus on belonging can increase the effectiveness of social-norm appeals. One
study used normative information to increase the rate at which hotel guests reused towels
(Goldstein et al., 2008). Although this study is best known for the specificity of the normative
information—the greatest effects were observed when the norm referenced the very room the
guest was staying in—an underappreciated aspect of the study is that all of the key conditions
combined normative information (“Almost 75% of guests…[reuse] their towels more than
once”) with an appeal to join a social community: “JOIN YOUR FELLOW GUESTS IN
HELPING TO SAVE THE ENVIRONMENT” (capitalized in the original). Experimentally
distinguishing these elements, one study found that normative information alone (“65% of
people…have reduced their paper towel use”) caused no reduction in paper towel use in public
restrooms. But when this information was supplemented with an invitation to “join in” and “do it
together,” usage dropped by 14% (Howe, Carr, & Walton, in prep). Further studies suggest that
normative information alone can make people feel pressured to change undermining
effectiveness and may not generate a feeling of working together toward a common goal, an
important source of motivation (Carr & Walton, 2014).
In the previous examples, people received information indicating that positive behaviors

!

Wise Interventions 47
were normative. What about when the norm is negative? In this case, making salient
improvement can motivate positive change. For instance, the consumption of large quantities of
meat is a negative and highly visible norm yet one that is declining. In one study, informing
lunch goers that the number of people who make an effort to limit their meat consumption is
rising (a “dynamic norm”) doubled the number who ordered lunch without meat (34%), as
compared to both a static-norm condition (17%) and a neutral control condition (21%)
(Sparkman & Walton, under review). The effects arose in part because people conformed to an
anticipated future norm of reduced meat eating and because they saw change in others as
effortful and thus as reflecting the importance to others, motivating personal change.
Prompting new meanings. Rather than providing normative information, other
interventions change situations or tell stories that prompt new inferences about what is typical or
valued. Braga and Bond (2008) randomized 34 crime hotspots to “broken-windows” policing—
cleaning up graffiti and other signs of disorder to signal that rule-breaking was unacceptable.
This reduced citizen 911 calls by 20% over 6 months relative to matched hotspots that received
standard policing (see also Keizer, Linenberg, & Steg, 2008). Stories can also prompt new
inferences. In one study, a radio soap opera featuring stories of positive intergroup relationships
improved intergroup attitudes in post-genocidal Rwanda (Paluck, 2009).
Social information can also represent a behavior as an opportunity to help others,
leveraging prosocial motivations. Grant and Hofmann (2011) manipulated whether a sign on
hospital soap dispensers urged medical professionals to wash their hands to protect their own
health or their patients’. The patient-focused sign raised the rate of proper hand washing from
81% to 89% over a 2-week period with no change for the self-focused signs. Change in a single
word—but one that tied the behavior to a core social motivation—improved health practice.

!

Wise Interventions 48
Increasing commitment through action: Saying-is-believing. Other interventions
connect foundational but tedious learning tasks to students’ desire to help others and make a
difference (Yeager, Henderson, et al., 2014; see also Paunesku et al., 2015). In the pro-social
purpose intervention, students identify a social problem important to them, review stories from
other students about how a desire to make a difference motivated them to work harder and learn
in school, and then write about their own their purpose for learning for future students. This can
raise GPA in math and science, with the greatest effects for initially low-performing students, as
well as promote sustained effort on boring foundational learning tasks.
Active reflection exercise: Contingent value-affirmation. In a novel approach, Fotuhi,
Logel, Spencer, Fong, and Zanna (2014) asked smokers to reflect on a personally important
value they shared with a close friend or family member who supported their intention to quit.
This simultaneously allays a threat to self-integrity posed by the health risks of smoking and
leverages belonging needs to motivate behavior change. At a 6-month follow-up, this increased
the percentage of smokers who had quit (36%), as compared to both a control condition (1%)
and a standard values-affirmation (16%).
Summary
Although many interventions squarely address one motivation for meaning-making or
another, others overlap. For example, people almost always want to arrive at an accurate
interpretation of their standing in the social world, yet that interpretation may be colored by selfintegrity and/or belonging issues. In Walton and Cohen’s (2011) intervention, the root of African
American students’ difficulties in the transition to college involved worries about belonging.
Thus the intervention addressed the need to belong. Yet students were also surely motivated to
form fact-based interpretations of their college experience, and thus drew reasonable inferences

!

Wise Interventions 49
from information about other students’ experiences. The intervention also took advantage of
students’ motivation for self-integrity, by asking them to volunteer to make speeches for future
students that described early worries about belonging as temporary. It may be that the most
effective interventions take this eclectic approach, leveraging multiple motivations and change
strategies. Before designing an intervention, however, researchers should be clear about which
motivations are at play and which change strategies will be most effective at addressing those
motivations to encourage adaptive changes in meaning.
V. Comparison to More Traditional Approaches to Social Intervention
Wise interventions conceptualize the person and the situation together, particularly the
situation as viewed through the eyes of the actor. However, as noted earlier, many reforms
separate the two and prioritize objective change in either situations or persons. To illustrate the
distinctive contribution of wise interventions and how these approaches can complement one
another, it is helpful to compare them.
The primary distinction between situation- and person-centric approaches is in the causal
theory underlying the intervention. The former posits that the nature of objective situations is
critical to success, and that optimizing situations can promote success (e.g., Hanks, Just, Smith,
& Wansink, 2012). The latter emphasizes people’s traits, abilities, and habits of thought and
interventions to alter them (e.g., Jaeggi et al., 2008). The idea is that people carry within them
tools critical to success (e.g., intelligence), and that it is fruitful to improve the tools people have
in their mental toolbox. Each approach is clearly important but each is enhanced by a
consideration of subjective meaning-making. Because people are pervasive meaning-makers,
every event—from a change in a situation to an effort to build personal skills—is subject to
meaning-making, and this can alter the effectiveness of a reform. After reviewing situation- and

!

Wise Interventions 50
person-centric approaches separately, we discuss how these approaches can be combined.
Changing Situations
Adding Resources. Often we try to remedy problems by adding resources. As we have
shown, however, the effectiveness of a new resource can be constrained by how people make
sense of it, including new learning materials (Bandura & Schunk, 1981), constructive critical
feedback (Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns, et al., 2014), as well as opportunities for intergroup contact
(Aronson & Osherow, 1980; Brannon & Walton, 2013; Mallett & Wilson, 2010; see also
Allport, 1954; Pettigrew & Tropp, 2006). Extra or overt help can lead people to infer that they
lack ability and cannot succeed without assistance (Graham & Barker, 1990; see discussion of
McCord, 1978 in Ross & Nisbett, 1991). Health risk information too can be ineffective if people
find it threatening and reject it (Ehret & Sherman, 2014) or fail to apply it in situations that
matter (Dal Cin et al., 2006). Pharmacological drugs can be less effective if their administration
is invisible to patients, undermining placebo effects (Benedetti et al., 2003). In each case an
understanding of meaning making can inform how best to present a new resource or opportunity.
Some major societal problems like poverty are defined by a lack of resources. Yet even in
this case one pathway to poor outcomes involves beliefs, meanings, and inferences (Coleman et
al., 1966; Destin & Oyserman, 2009). In one study of all 10th graders in Chile (N=168,552),
students from lower income families were more likely to endorse a fixed mindset about
intelligence, a perceived limitation that may predictably arise from a childhood without adequate
resources (Claro, Paunesku, & Dweck, 2016). Moreover, mindsets about intelligence were as
predictive of achievement test scores as family income, and were predictive at every income
level. The results suggest that one mechanism by which poverty undermines school achievement
is by inspiring toxic inferences. As Claro and colleagues write (p. 8667):

!

Wise Interventions 51
[W]e are not suggesting that… that teaching students a growth mindset is a
substitute for systemic efforts to alleviate poverty and economic inequality…
Rather, we are suggesting that structural inequalities can give rise to
psychological inequalities and that those psychological inequalities can reinforce
the impact of structural inequalities…[R]esearch on psychological factors can
help illuminate one set of processes through which economic disadvantage leads
to academic underachievement and reveal ways to more effectively support
students who face additional challenges because of their socioeconomic
circumstances.
In another study, students in elementary schools with larger representations of racialminority and low-income students showed lower rates of learning than students in other
schools; yet this inequality was fully mediated by lower levels of trust reported by
teachers in schools with more minority and low-income students (Goddard, Salloum, &
Berebitsky, 2016). In these cases, addressing psychological processes directly may
mitigate one pathway through which structural inequalities reproduce (e.g., Yeager,
Walton, et al., 2016).
Changing Incentives. Incentives can change people’s behavior, such as motivating
children to engage in otherwise boring tasks. But like resources, incentives are subject to
meaning-making and this can lead to ironic consequences. For example, incentives can backfire
if they cause students to see an otherwise enjoyable activity as drudgery undertaken just to earn a
prize (Lepper, Greene, & Nisbett, 1971). This is especially problematic if at some point the
incentive will become unavailable. Then people may be even less motivated to do the activity
than they would have been had the incentive never been introduced.

!

Wise Interventions 52
Disincentives too can inspire undesirable inferences. In a classic example, a fine imposed
on parents who picked up their children late at a day care increased late pick-ups—presumably
because it came to be regarded as a fee for services and the motivation to fulfill one’s obligation
to the school ceased to govern behavior (Gneezy & Rustichini, 2000; see discussion in Miller &
Prentice, 2012). Additionally, “zero-tolerance” policies and other punitive responses to
misbehavior in school can foster feelings of disrespect in students and ironically incite
misbehavior. One intervention that encouraged teachers to adapt an empathic rather than a
punitive mindset about misbehavior cut suspension rates among adolescents in half over a school
year (Okonofua et al., 2016).
A key to understanding incentives, then, is how people interpret them. Consider a study
that randomized poor, rural families in Morocco to receive (a) cash transfers conditional on
children’s school attendance, (b) cash transfers labeled as educational supports but not
contingent on school attendance, or (c) no transfers (Benhassine, Devoto, Duflo, Dupas, &
Pouliquen, 2015). Both cash transfer conditions increased school attendance and learning but the
benefits were largest when the transfers were merely labeled educational supports. Making the
cash conditional on school attendance—making it an incentive—caused no added benefit.
Instead, the government endorsement of education, conveyed through cash transfers, led parents
to see education as important for their children’s future and increased confidence in the quality
of local schools. Thus with incentives as with resources it is essential to take into account
meaning.
Finally, incentive schemes fundamentally proceed from the assumption that people are
inadequately motivated to engage in the behavior being incentivized. This is sometimes the case.
But often people have a basic motivation to behave in positive ways. This may be one reason

!

Wise Interventions 53
why teacher incentives, for instance, can be ineffective in improving student learning (Fryer,
2011). Teachers may not need more motivation but better strategies for how to help children
succeed, such as how to instill productive mindsets in children and build trust that promotes
learning (e.g., Gehlbach et al., 2016; Lepper et al., 1993; Okonofua et al., 2016; Yeager, PurdieVaughns et al. 2014).
Behavioral Nudges. An important innovation in recent years is the advent of “nudges.”
Although the term is used in various ways, we define nudges as changes to the structure of
situations to make specific positive behaviors or decisions more likely or negative ones less
likely (Sunstein, 2016; Thaler & Sunstein, 2008). A classic example is what happens if one does
nothing and accepts the status quo, such as having to sign up to become a potential organ donor
versus having to indicate an unwillingness to do so. Changing the default can have large impacts
on human behavior, including increasing membership on organ donation lists (Johnson &
Goldstein, 2003) and participation in retirement saving plans (Beshears, Choi, Laibson, &
Madrian, 2008). Nudges have proven to be an innovative way of changing behavior on a large
scale. Both the British and United States governments have established “nudge units” in which
psychologists and behavioral economists find more effective ways of delivering policies and
social services by making small changes to social situations (e.g., Service et al., 2014).
Nudges are similar to wise interventions in some ways, including the idea that seemingly
small changes to situations can bring about large changes in behavior. There are, however,
important differences. First, nudges vary in the extent to which they draw on psychological
theory, sometimes deliberately so (Sunstein, 2016). Often nudges are more problem-driven,
seeing what sorts of changes will be effective in a particular situation. We believe that the more
people’s responses to situations are understood in terms of psychological theory, especially

!

Wise Interventions 54
meaning-making processes, the better understood and the more effective these changes will be
(e.g., Hallsworth et al., 2014; Redelmeier et al., 2003).
For example, why does setting the default for people to be organ donors increase
donation rates? It is easy to think that this simply make becoming a donor more convenient
(Johnson & Goldstein, 2003). But studies show that defaults convey implicit norms. When the
default is not to donate, people think of organ donation as equivalent to giving away half their
wealth to charity when they die. But when the default is to donate, people think it is more like
letting other people go ahead in line (Davidai, Gilovich, & Ross, 2012), an easier bar to clear. A
key is the meaning people attach to defaults and not simply how convenient an action is.
A deeper understanding of people’s interpretations and motives allows for predictions
about what type of changes will change behavior. To encourage people to get a vaccine, is it
better to scare people with images of a gruesome disease or to ask them to check their schedules?
Does it matter whether people sign at the top or at the bottom of a car insurance form? Will it be
more effective to ask health care workers to wash their hands to protect their own health or their
patients’ health? Should a hotel emphasize environmental benefits to encourage guests to reuse
towels or local norms?
Psychological theory allows one to form testable hypotheses to answer these questions.
Thus, to encourage a preventative shot, a map and schedule is better than fear (Leventhal et al.,
1965; Milkman et al., 2011), an implication of research on goal pursuit (Gollwitzer, 1999). To
encourage truth-telling, the signature line should be at the top (Shu et al., 2012), an implication
of consistency motivations outlined in dissonance theory (Festinger & Carlsmith, 1959). To
encourage soap use, an emphasis on helping patients is more effective (Grant & Hofmann, 2011)
and to promote towel reuse social norms are more effective (Goldstein et al., 2008), implications

!

Wise Interventions 55
of the need to belong (Baumeister & Leary, 1995).
Psychological theory also informs how to make change lasting—how to truly change
lives. Changing a situation can elicit different behavior within that situation—making healthier
options more convenient can increase healthy eating in a cafeteria (Hanks et al., 2012). However,
when people exit this situation, what can change their future behavior? Certain change within a
situation can help people clear important thresholds. Simplifying the financial aid application
process can unlock resources that help students pursue college (Bettinger, Long, Oreopoulos, &
Sanbonmatsu, 2012; see also Hoxby & Turner, 2014). However, many of the most important
problems people face—from improving marriages, to raising achievement, to living in healthier
ways—require sustained change in many behaviors over time and situations. To alter this
requires a theory of self—including, especially, of how people make sense of themselves,
situations, and classes of situations. By changing meanings—meanings that can become selfreinforcing—wise interventions can change persons as well as situations, and thus improve the
course of people’s lives (e.g., Finkel et al., 2013; Cohen et al., 2009; Walton & Cohen, 2011).
Lastly, psychological theory can give rise to interventions that are counterintuitive and
never would have occurred to someone relying on common sense, such as the idea that
prolonging a painful medical procedure can improve patients’ well-being (Redelmeier et al.,
2003). In short, a common sense approach can lead to effective ways to change behavior in one
situation, but psychological theory that describes how people make sense of themselves and
situations can provide deeper insights and more powerful and long-lasting improvements.
Changing People
A second approach focuses on the traits, skill, and habits of thought of the individual.
Some people are smarter than others, better able to assimilate new information and put it to use.

!

Wise Interventions 56
Some are more self-controlled or grittier or have more adaptive habits of thought. These qualities
predict major life outcomes. For instance, self-control measured in childhood predicts greater
earnings, better health, and less criminality in adulthood above and beyond childhood IQ and
socioeconomic status (Moffitt, et al., 2011; see also Duckworth & Seligman, 2005; Duckworth,
Peterson, Matthews, & Kelly, 2007; Mischel et al., 1989). Such personal skills and habits are
relatively enduring qualities of the person thought to facilitate effective behavior across
situations. In contrast, wise interventions address “meta” inferences, people’s beliefs and
inferences about themselves and social situations (Dweck, 2008). To predict how a student will
do on a test, a person approach would focus on her basic level of intelligence, self-control, or
grit. Wise interventions focus on the student’s beliefs about her abilities and the situation—like
how capable she thinks she is.
Person-centric interventions thus aim to enhance capacities or remedy deficiencies in
skills or habits of thoughts. An advantage is that, in theory, the person acquires new capacities
they can use to their benefit across a wide range of situations.
Personal Skills. The most ambitious person-centric interventions seek to enhance general
intellectual and psychological skills that serve the individual over the life course. Education itself
is of course such an intervention. Schooling promotes the development of intelligence (Brinch &
Galloway, 2011; Duyme, Dumaret, & Tomkiewicz, 1999; see Nisbett et al., 2012). And highquality preschool programs can improve children’s readiness for school (e.g., Campbell,
Pungello, Miller-Johnson, Burchinal, & Ramey, 2001; Woodhead, 1988). Social competencies
can also be built through long-term interventions (Gertler et al., 2014). For example, Fast Track,
a multidimensional 10-year program to promote social competencies in young children with
conduct problems, reduced antisocial behavior in adolescence (Dodge et al., 2013) and, at age

!

Wise Interventions 57
25, reduced the percentage of participants with a psychiatric problem from 69% to 59%,
increased reported happiness, and reduced convictions for substance abuse and violent crimes
(Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group, 2015).
Other person-centric interventions aim to build specific skills theorized to be of general
importance. For instance, some research finds that training adults in tasks that tax and thus
expand working-memory capacity can raise fluid intelligence scores (Jaeggi et al., 2008; see also
Schmiedek et al., 2010). A preschool curriculum using structured dramatic play among other
techniques enhanced executive function in children (Diamond et al., 2007; for research with
adults, see Baumeister et al., 2006; Finkel et al., 2009; Inzlicht & Berkman, 2015; Job, Friese, &
Bernecker, 2015). Encouraging mothers to talk more with their infants and toddlers increased
children’s vocabulary and language production a year later, an important element of school
readiness (Weber, Fernald, & Diop, in press). An intervention that taught mothers how to be
more responsive to their irritable 6 to 9-month-old babies raised the percentage of babies who
were securely attached at 12 months, an important predictor of social and behavioral functioning
(van den Boom, 1994).
These studies suggest the value of theory-based interventions to enhance capacities; yet
caution is in order. Although correlational evidence linking various capacities to life outcomes is
strong, evidence that precise interventions to enhance these capacities cause improvement in life
outcomes is notably lacking. Proxy measures like intelligence test scores (Jaeggi et al., 2008),
executive-function test scores (Diamond et al., 2007), and language production (Weber et al.,
2016) may, in some cases, be increased by well-designed interventions. But these measures are
not outcomes of importance unto themselves (Sternberg, 2008). For example, there is
controversy about whether specific cognitive-training programs (e.g., working-memory training)

!

Wise Interventions 58
enhance broad capacities or produce narrow improvement in the ability to perform well on a
specific test or task (see Inzlicht & Berkman, 2015; Melby-Lervåg Hulme, 2013; Miles et al.,
2016; Shipstead, Redick, & Engle, 2012; Simons et al., 2016). In general, there is surprisingly
little evidence that precisely targeted capacity-training interventions improve functioning outside
testing environments, such as better school achievement, work performance, competence in
everyday cognitive tasks, health, relationships, or well-being, although more comprehensive
reforms can (Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group, 2015; Gertler et al., 2014).
Moreover, in some cases where precise capacity-training interventions have improved
life outcomes, these gains have been mediated by a change in meaning-making. One self-control
training intervention—effortfully squeezing a handgrip twice a day for 2 weeks—increased
students’ end-of-year GPA seven months later, but there was no evidence of improvement in
core self-control skills (Job, Friese, & Bernecker, 2015). Instead, the gains were mediated by a
reduction in students’ reports of the extent to which they avoided putting forth effort in their
studies.
Habits of Thought. Other interventions aim to remedy negative habits of thought or to
instill good habits through the principles of conditioning (Watson, 1913). These learned
associations can then shape inferences and behavior in meaningful ways (see Gawronski &
Bodenhausen, 2006).
In exposure therapy, people are exposed to successively closer images or experiences
relevant to a source of anxiety in a safe context (e.g., thinking about an airplane, viewing an
airplane, boarding an airplane). Doing so mitigates the threatening association and improves
clinical outcomes (McNally, 2007). Facilitating a helpful negative association, the introduction
of graphic cigarette warning labels appears to increase smokers’ motivation to quit, presumably

!

Wise Interventions 59
by repeatedly pairing smoking with threat and illness (Hammond, 2011; Hammond et al., 2003).
Understanding learning principles can also prevent the formation of deleterious associations. In
one study, pediatric cancer patients given novel candies before undergoing chemotherapy were
less likely to later develop food aversions, presumably because they associated nausea with the
novel candy not normal food (Broberg & Bernstein, 1987).
Other interventions modify approach/avoidance associations. In an impressive finding,
alcoholic inpatients taught to provide an avoidance response to alcohol by repeatedly pushing a
joystick away from images of alcohol began to automatically associate alcohol with avoidance
and, a year later, were less likely to have relapsed (46% vs. 59%) (Eberl et al., 2013; Wiers,
Ebert, Rinck, Becker, & Lindenmeyer, 2011). There is also evidence that repeatedly pulling a
joystick toward the self in response to images of racial minorities can facilitate automatic
associations between the self and minorities and reduce measures of implicit prejudice (Phills,
Kawakami, Tabi, Nadolny, & Inzlicht, 2011; see also Forbes & Schmader, 2010; Kawakami,
Steele, Cifa, Phills, & Dovidio, 2008; see also Levy, Pilver, Chung, & Slade, 2014).
A challenge for exercises to change associations is that they may be diluted and fail in the
long-term if reality provides a robust contrary association—which may be why a maladaptive
association exists in the first place (see Lai et al., 2016). However, changing how people make
sense of real-world experiences may set up new patterns of behavior (e.g., Cohen et al., 2009;
Marigold et al., 2007; Walton & Cohen, 2011). Consistent with this view, one intervention
designed to remedy implicit bias among math, science, and engineering faculty had no such
effect. Nonetheless, three months later the intervention raised awareness of gender bias and the
motivation to be non-biased, improved the department climate (e.g., reports of how much faculty
felt they fit in and valued), and, when more than a quarter of department faculty took part,

!

Wise Interventions 60
increased reported action to promote gender equity (Carnes et al., 2015). Another study found no
lasting reduction in implicit racial prejudice but increased concern about prejudice over two
weeks and, in a subsample recruited two years later, greater likelihood of objecting in an online
forum to an essay endorsing racial stereotyping (79% vs. 48%) (Forscher, Mitamura, Dix, Cox,
& Devine, under review).
Discussion. To build skills and/or change associations, person-centric interventions
typically involve practice and/or repetition. As Diamond and Lee (2011) write of interventions to
promote self-control skills, “All successful programs involve repeated practice and progressively
increase the challenge to executive functions” (p. 959). In some cases, this practice occurs in a
module outside people’s normal lives (e.g., an online task; Jaeggi et al., 2008), and as such may
require significant motivation. In other cases, it may be embedded in normal life (e.g., a
preschool curriculum, Diamond et al., 2007). A consequence of this “practice-makes-perfect”
model is that person-centric interventions typically have a dose-response relationship with
outcomes (e.g., Jaeggi et al., 2008). In contrast, as we have seen, interventions to change
meanings can involve a single dose that, by altering a recursive process, causes lasting change
(e.g., Walton & Cohen, 2011). Thus timing, not dosage, may be more important for wise
interventions (Cook et al., 2012; Raudenbush, 1984). Because effective person-centric
interventions are relatively intensive, they may also be more costly. One training program aimed
at staving off some of the cognitive declines associated with aging compensated participants for
completing exercises with as much as €1,950 (≈$2,200; Schmiedek et al., 2010). Such costs may
be justified by a program’s effectiveness. However, they also suggest the value of finding ways
to embed effective training activities in daily life (Diamond & Lee, 2011). A promising approach
involves what Robinson (2011) calls “stealth interventions”—fun daily activities that cause

!

Wise Interventions 61
benefits even without recipients’ awareness, such as ethnic dance groups, which promote
exercise and weight loss among adolescents.
There is also a risk in focusing heavily on the qualities of people. Psychologists have long
identified a general error termed the dispositionist bias or the fundamental attribution error, in
which people place excessive weight on internal, personal factors to explain behavior as
compared to external, situational factors (Ross & Nisbett, 1991). A focus on internal limitations
may obscure people’s existing capacities and strengths (Seligman et al., 2005) and detract
attention from other factors that constrain outcomes. It is thus helpful to consider whether
negative outcomes might reflect situational factors or beliefs and inferences as well as or instead
of personal limitations (e.g., Rogge, Cobb, Lawrence, Johnson, & Bradbury, 2013).
Consider self-control, which is commonly understood as an ability (Mischel et al., 1989).
Yet self-control is not just a skill. It also involves beliefs and meanings. For instance, a
reluctance to wait in the classic delay-of-gratification paradigm may reflect a child’s belief that
the experimenter’s return with the promised larger reward is less than certain (Kidd, Palmeri, &
Aslin, 2013): “a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush.” If people think that everyday life
settings cannot be counted on to reward greater effort they may choose not to self-regulate even
when they could do so (Coleman et al., 1966). Willingness to delay gratification can also be
increased simply by changing meanings. In one line of research, children exposed to a storybook
character who learns that waiting can be energizing not depleting adopted more effective waiting
strategies and waited longer (Haimovitz, Dweck, & Walton, under review). Knowing that
waiting longer was possible, children figured out how to do so (see also Karniol et al., 2011).
Another study found that teaching college students that people can choose what to believe about
willpower, encouraging a view of willpower as energizing not depleting, improved academic

!

Wise Interventions 62
regulation a month later and semester grades among students who faced high self-control
demands (Job, Flueckiger, Bernecker, Lieb, & Mata, 2016; see also Job, Dweck, & Walton,
2010; Job, Walton, Bernecker, & Dweck, 2015). In short, promoting a view of environments as
reliable and of self-regulation as energizing not depleting may promote self-control. Thus it is
important to identify when limitations in personal skills constrain outcomes and when belief
systems do, and to use person-centric and wise interventions accordingly.
VI. Combining Approaches
Society will never solve social problems without creating situations that help people
succeed (situation-centric reforms); without building important skills and habits in people
(person-centric reforms); and without addressing the critical role of subjective meaning and the
barriers to effective behavior it creates (wise interventions). How can these approaches be
brought together and, where appropriate, combined?
We have emphasized, for example, that the opportunities afforded by the context in
which wise interventions take place are essential, such as opportunities to learn created by school
systems and educators (see Table 1; Yeager & Walton, 2011). Efforts to expand opportunities
and to help people take advantage of these are thus complementary (e.g., Bandura & Schunk,
1981). It is thus imperative to systematically examine how wise interventions intersect with
diverse contexts; doing so can begin to map what barriers to better outcomes exist where. For
instance, a growth-mindset of intelligence intervention may be less effective in schools that are
chaotic or under-resourced and thus do not provide students high-quality learning opportunities;
such a finding would diagnosis structural impediments and imply structural reforms. Such efforts
are already underway. The National Growth Mindset Study and the College Transition
Collaborative are each testing mindset interventions with large samples of students entering

!

Wise Interventions 63
diverse high schools and colleges. At a high level, exploring the intersection of psychology and
social contexts will help show what capacities for improvement are available but undermined by
psychological processes and where psychological processes are not the relevant constraint, for
instance if capacity itself is inadequate.
Specific reforms can also be complementary. In the transition to college, a situationcentric approach might be to simplify forms, transmit systematic reminders of deadlines to
students, increase financial aid, or provide low-income students information about graduation
rates, net costs, and selective colleges they might be a good fit for (see respectively: Bettinger et
al., 2012; Castleman, Owen, & Page, 2015; Goldrick-Rabb et al., 2012; Hoxby & Turner, 2014).
These strategies address important barriers just not social-psychological challenges like feelings
of inadequacy and nonbelonging. Addressing these, as we have seen, can transform effects on
college students’ success (Aronson et al., 2002; Harackiewicz et al., 2014, 2016; Miyake et al.,
2010; Stephens et al., 2012; Walton & Cohen, 2011; Wilson & Linville, 1982, 1985; Yeager,
Walton, et al., 2016). Because these approaches address different barriers to a successful college
transition, combining them may be fruitful.
In some cases, a single reform can serve multiple functions. Setting defaults thoughtfully
no doubt makes a personally and socially positive choice easier (Johnson & Goldstein, 2003)
even as it also signals what is normative (Davidai et al., 2012). Providing cash to poor families
expands opportunities even as it conveys the importance of education (Benhassine et al., 2015).
Multi-component interventions can also accomplish multiple aims. Earlier we described the van
den Boom (1994) intervention, which taught mothers to be responsive to irritable babies,
promoting secure attachment. This intervention aimed to build mothers’ skills in interpreting
babies’ signals accurately, a person-centric approach in the service of meaning-making.

!

Wise Interventions 64
Similarly, Fast Track, the 10-year program to promote social competencies (Conduct Problems
Prevention Research Group, 2015), included multiple components including social-skills
training, parent groups, curricula, etc., but had as a primary goal discouraging children from
drawing global interpretations for hostile events (see Hudley & Graham, 1993). Indeed, the
intervention’s effect in reducing adolescent antisocial behavior was mediated in part by a
reduction in children’s tendency to see peers who ambiguously inflict harm as intentionally
hostile (Dodge et al., 2013; see also Heller et al., 2015). Likewise, interventions that teach
specific meditation or mindfulness practices help people cultivate emotion-regulation skills, but
what these skills do is help a person reflect on experiences, feelings, and thoughts in more
productive ways—a change in meaning, which can improve health, well-being, and personal
relationships (Creswell et al., 2016; Fredrickson et al., 2008).
It is also important to consider how wise interventions interact. Although it is tempting to
assume that combining two effective interventions will increase their impact, this is not always
the case (e.g., Good et al., 2003; Paunesku et al., 2015; Yeager, Walton et al., 2016 Experiment
2). Since the combined messages will be understood together, the meanings they inspire must
function well together (e.g., Fotuhi et al., 2014). In some goal-setting interventions, for instance,
people both identify goals and how they will implement them (Duckworth et al., 2013; Morisano
et al., 2010; see also Eskreis-Winkler et al., 2016). In other cases, even distinct interventions may
overlap, and may be best understood as different avenues into a single psychological system. For
instance, value-affirmation and social-belonging interventions both aim to remedy identity threat,
although they do so in different ways (Garcia & Cohen, 2012). It is unclear whether combining
them would increase their impact. Interventions may also compete with one another (Jessop,
Sparks, Buckland, Harris, & Churchill, 2014; see also Harris et al., 2014). One study found that

!

Wise Interventions 65
both a social-belonging intervention and a novel affirmation-training intervention, which
encouraged students to see their daily activities as expressions of their values and ways to stay
balanced, raised women’s grades in male-dominated engineering fields (Walton, Logel, et al.,
2015). However, whereas the former increased women’s friendships with men in engineering the
latter increased women’s gender identification and friendships with women. It is interesting to
speculate what would have happened had women received both messages. Although it is possible
to develop more friendships with both male peers and women, receiving both messages at once
could also be counterproductive.
VII. Implications and High Priority Directions for Future Research
Our review highlights several important high-level directions for future research.
Mechanisms of Long-Term Change
Wise interventions cause their most powerful and wide-ranging benefits when they
change people’s ongoing behavior in diverse circumstances over time. It is essential to better
understand how this broad and lasting change occurs. In general terms, we have argued that
interventions that change meanings can alter recursive cycles of psychology, behavior, and
situations. An fundamental question involves the relative roles of the person and situation aspects
of this cycle. Suppose a growth-mindset of intelligence intervention changes a student’s belief
about the malleability of intelligence and, in turn, promotes learning-oriented behaviors in school
(e.g., greater effort, seeking out effective learning strategies). Perhaps initial improved outcomes
confirm the student’s belief in the malleability of intelligence and this belief system drives longterm gains. Consistent with this process, research shows that, because people recruit reasons to
support new beliefs, new beliefs readily persevere (e.g., even when their original basis has been
discredited; Ross, Lepper, & Hubbard, 1975). Alternately, perhaps the initial change in the

!

Wise Interventions 66
student’s behavior is recognized by the teacher (Blackwell et al., 2007), who then treats the
student in more positive, growth-oriented ways (Rosenthal & Jacobson, 1968). Perhaps this
mentorship facilitates lasting gains (Brady et al. in prep B), or perhaps the teacher places the
student in a high-performance track or removes them from a remedial program, exposing them to
higher achieving peers (see Cohen et al., 2009). In an extreme case, perhaps these changes in
situation drive lasting improvement even with no lasting psychological change in the student
(e.g., in beliefs about the malleability of intelligence).
To what extent do lasting benefits arise from enduring change in how people make sense
of situations (if/then beliefs like, “If I do poorly, it means I need to work harder”; Dweck, 2008;
Mischel & Shoda, 1995) versus from change in the situations people enter as a consequence of
an initial change in meaning-making? Typically, these processes will work in tandem and
contribute to the robustness and longevity of intervention effects. But distinguishing them will
inform basic theory and predictions about when lasting change will be more or less likely.
Adaptation, Scaling, and Social Change
As we have seen, wise interventions deliberately start small, testing theory-driven
hypotheses in specific populations in specific contexts. An essential question involves how to
scale up these interventions to new populations and contexts (Yeager & Walton, 2011). Meeting
this challenge requires: (1) deep expertise in the psychological process targeted by the
intervention and tools to alter it; (2) deep expertise in the setting and population at hand, and the
nature of the psychological process in this context; and (3) effective and reliable means of largescale intervention delivery.
1. Psychological Expertise. Psychological ideas and interventions often involve nuances
that, absent a deep appreciation of psychological theory, may seem trivial yet are essential. For

!

Wise Interventions 67
example, growth-mindset interventions convey that intelligence can grow with hard work,
effective strategies, and help from others. Partial and inaccurate understandings of growth
mindset—what Dweck (2016) calls “false growth mindset”—can inspire practices that do not
substantively engage students in learning, such as praising students for effort alone, even
ineffective effort, or telling students they “can do anything” without providing learning strategies
that help students get there (see also Yeager, Romero, et al., 2016).
Marigold and colleagues’ (2007) intervention to improve relationships for people with
low self-esteem assumed that a compliment from their romantic partner had a general meaning
(“Explain why your partner admired you. Describe what it meant to you and its significance for
your relationship.”). When people were asked instead if the compliment had a general meaning
(“Explain whether you think what your partner said indicated that he/she admired you…”) there
were no benefits. Basic research shows why this detail matters: People with low self-esteem are
not unaware that a partner could truly love them. They crave this possibility but fear rejection
and so tend to doubt it (Murray et al., 2006). Thus it is not helpful to ask people to consider a
broader meaning—they already have. It is essential to assume this meaning and to encourage
people to elaborate upon it. Yet it is easy to imagine how a shallow understanding of this
psychological process could lead a well-intended person to mistake one for the other.
One of the largest effects on voter turnout ever observed was obtained by asking citizens
the day before two major statewide elections a series of questions about “being a voter” (e.g.,
“How important is it to you to be a voter in tomorrow’s election?” versus “How important is it to
you to vote…”; Bryan et al., 2011). This language represents voting as an opportunity to become
a kind of person. Its effectiveness, however, hinges on whether being “a voter” in the upcoming
election is a valued identity people aspire to. Absent this understanding, one might imagine that

!

Wise Interventions 68
the intervention should work in any election, including in low-turnout, low-profile,
uncompetitive ones (Gerber, Huber, Biggers, & Hendry, 2016). Yet in this context being “a
voter” does not carry significant identity stakes (Bryan, Walton, & Dweck, 2016).
Wise interventions are not simple. They are predicated on a deep understanding of
psychological processes built from basic research and an appreciation of the context. It is thus
essential for researchers to communicate clearly about psychological processes and to make their
assumptions explicit.
2. Expertise in the Setting and Population. It is also necessary to understand the social
context and how the targeted psychological process arises, matters, and may be modified there
(Yeager & Walton, 2011). If a psychological exercise does not speak to people’s experience in a
setting, it does nothing at all. Thus it may be necessary to revise an intervention to work
effectively in a new context (see Yeager, Walton et al., 2016 Experiment 1).
For instance, to customize a previously effective growth-mindset of intelligence
intervention for students in the transition to high school (Paunesku et al., 2015), Yeager,
Romero, and colleagues (2016) used focus groups, interviews, and rapid, iterative A/B
experiments to address such design questions as: (1) Is it better to simplify text using bullet
points than paragraphs? Yes. (2) Is it more effective to tell recipients that the exercise is designed
to help them or that it is a way to help future 9th graders? The latter. (3) Is it helpful to include
quotes from admired adults and celebrities? Yes. In one large trial, the revised intervention
outperformed the original intervention in increasing challenge seeking and shifting attributions
for difficulty from the person (e.g., low ability) to processes (e.g., ineffective strategies)—
mechanisms of greater learning that follow from a growth-mindset. In another, the revised
intervention significantly raised grades among poorly performing students relative to a control

!

Wise Interventions 69
condition, replicating prior research.
3. Standardized Means of Intervention Delivery. No matter how well-designed an
intervention is, it will be ineffective if it does not impart the key psychological message
effectively. Errors can arise when a complex idea is translated through intermediaries (e.g., from
researchers to administrators to teachers to students), the “operator” problem. Thus standardized
means to reach recipients directly are valuable. One such means is carefully designed online
reading-and-writing modules. Such modules can be accessed by people anywhere with an
Internet connection; can impart complex psychological ideas using standardized materials; and
can incorporate interactive features that enhance engagement and personalization, such as
saying-is-believing exercises. They have been used effectively to reach thousands of students
with growth-mindset, social-belonging, and related interventions (Paunesku et al., 2015; Yeager,
Romero et al., 2016; Yeager, Walton, et al., 2016). Moreover, once evaluated in a setting, online
interventions can be provided on an ongoing basis to more people at low cost.
Second, wise interventions can be embedded in direct ongoing communications. A
company, Opower, partners with utilities to embed social-norm information in bills received by
millions of residential customers. In one evaluation of nearly 600,000 households, this reduced
home energy use by 2%, with the greatest reductions among high-users (Allcott, 2011), an effect
estimated to be equivalent to what would arise from a short-term price increase of 11-20%.
Nickerson and Rogers (2010) embedded an implementation-intention intervention in phone
scripts used to encourage more than 280,000 citizens to vote, raising turnout by 4 percentage
points. Brady and colleagues (in prep B) revised a form letter a university sent to students to
place them on academic probation to reduce stigma (e.g., emphasizing valid reasons students
experience difficulties in college and stories of growth from prior probationary students); this cut

!

Wise Interventions 70
the percentage of students who were suspended or had dropped out a year later from 52% to
21%. Harackiewicz and colleagues (2012) mailed brochures to parents and created a website
highlighting how to talk with adolescents about the usefulness of math and science courses; this
increased students’ math and science enrollment. Finkel and colleagues (2013) piggybacked on
an ongoing longitudinal survey of married couples to embed a randomized intervention on how
to handle conflicts; this improved marital quality over a year. Standardized messages can also be
incorporated in social media. One social-norm message seen by 61 million people on Facebook
raised turnout in US Congressional elections by an estimated 340,000 (Bond et al. 2012; for
other examples, see Goldstein et al., 2008; Grant & Hofmann, 2011; Hallsworth et al., 2014;
Hammond et al., 2003, 2004; Milkman et al., 2011; Shu et al., 2012).
Another approach is to intervene with one person so as to alter how this person perceives
or behaves toward other people. This can improve the quality of important relationships
(romantic relationships; Marigold et al., 2007, 2010; parent-child relationships, van den Boom,
1994; teacher-student relationships, Gehlbach et al., 2016) and outcomes that arise from these
relationships (Bugental et al., 2002; Harackiewicz et al., 2012; Weber et al., 2016), such as
increased learning in school (Gehlbach et al., 2016; Rosenthal & Jacobson, 1968). Moreover,
when one person interacts with many other people, altering this person’s mindset and behavior
can have broad consequences. Okonofua and colleagues (2016) randomized 31 middle-school
teachers to an intervention aimed at encouraging an empathic rather than punitive mindsets about
student misbehavior; this cut suspension rates among the 1,682 students they taught by half.
Paluck and colleagues (2016) randomized 56 middle schools to an intervention in which 15% of
students at each treated school were randomized to receive an anti-conflict norm intervention or
not. A total of 728 students received the intervention. This reduced disciplinary problems among

!

Wise Interventions 71
the 11,938 students in the treated schools over a year by 30%. The greatest effects were observed
in schools in which more of the participating students were influential within the school peer
network and thus positioned to alter school norms (see also Powers et al., 2016). In these ways,
wise interventions can leverage social structures and relationships to instigate large-scale change.
VIII. Conclusion
Social-psychological processes play a central role in many social and personal problems.
It is possible to understand these processes in basic research; to transform this understanding into
interventions that effectively alter them and improve outcomes in field settings; to join this with
expertise in settings and populations to adapt interventions for new contexts; and to deliver
psychological interventions to remedy problems on a socially meaningful scale.
Psychological processes are not “small” in comparison to “big” problems like poor
achievement or inequality, as people sometimes think. Although structural reforms are often also
essential, from the perspective of a person deciding how to act there is nothing more important
than how that person makes sense of him- or herself and the social situation. As Yeager and
Walton (2011, pp. 283-284) wrote:
From the perspective of a researcher or teacher, an implicit theories workshop or
a value-affirmation writing exercise is just one of many classroom experiences
given to students. But to a student sitting at a desk in the third row worrying
about whether a poor test score means she is stupid or whether others will reduce
her to a negative stereotype, an experience like learning that the brain can grow
and form new connections when challenged or being invited to describe
personally important values may feel quite “large.”
Further, psychology can be understood systemically. People can think that psychological

!

Wise Interventions 72
processes matter but are idiosyncratic, as though everyone’s internal psychological life is unique,
and thus not relevant on a collective level that could contribute to social problems. If this were
the case, one-on-one therapy might be effective but not social-psychological interventions. Yet
there are many predictable psychological patterns common across people and contexts. The
better we understand these patterns—the more sophisticated our theories of psychology—the
better equipped we will be to change those that are maladaptive.
Finally, psychological processes can be changed. Even when people think that these
processes matter and can be systematic, they may throw up their hands at the possibility of
changing them, especially for large numbers of people and over meaningful periods of time.
Certainly psychological change can be challenging. Yet understanding times and contexts in
which change is more possible than others (e.g., during transitions), using effective strategies to
instigate change (e.g., saying-is-believing), and doing so in settings in which recursive processes
can transmit an initial change in psychology forward in time can cause lasting improvement in
the lives of many people. The social-psychological approach, conceptualizing the person and the
situation together, as viewed through the eyes of the actor, is thus an efficient, often
counterintuitive, and yet powerful way to help people succeed in their lives.

!

Wise Interventions 73
References
Abramson, L. Y., Seligman, M. E. P., & Teasdale, J.D. (1978). Learned helplessness in humans:
Critique and reformulation. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 87, 49-74.
Allcott, H. (2011). Social norms and energy conservation. Journal of Public Economics, 95,
1082-1095.
Allen, J. P., Philliber, S., Herrling, S., & Kuperminc, G. P. (1997). Preventing teen pregnancy
and academic failure: Experimental evaluation of a developmentally based approach.
Child Development, 64, 729-742.
Allport, G. W. (1954). The nature of prejudice. Cambridge, MA: Perseus Books
Alvarez K. & van Leeuwen, E. V. (2015). Paying it forward: How helping others can reduce the
psychological threat of receiving help. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 45, 1-9.
Armitage, C. J., Harris, P. R., & Arden, M. A. (2011). Evidence that self-affirmation reduces
alcohol consumption: Randomized exploratory trial with a new, brief means of selfaffirming. Health Psychology, 30, 633-641.
Aronson, E. (1968). Dissonance theory: Progress and problems. In R. Abelson, E. Aronson, W.
McGuire, T. Newcomb, M. Rosenberg, & P. Tannenbaum (Eds.), Theories of cognitive
consistency: A sourcebook (pp. 5-27). Chicago: McNally.
Aronson, E. (1999). The power of self-persuasion. American Psychologist, 54, 875-884.
Aronson, E. & Osherow, N. (1980) Cooperation, prosocial behaviour, and academic
performance: Experiments in the desegregated classroom. In L, Bickerman (Ed.) Applied
Social Psychology Annual, Beverley Hills: Sage.
Aronson, J., Fried, C. B., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the effect of stereotype threat on African
American college students by shaping theories of intelligence. Journal of Experimental

!

Wise Interventions 74
Social Psychology, 38, 113-125.
Asch, S.E. (1952). Social psychology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Bandura, A., & Schunk, D. H. (1981). Cultivating competence, self-efficacy, and intrinsic
interest through proximal self-motivation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
41, 586-598.
Baumeister, R. F., & Leary, M. R. (1995). The need to belong: Desire for interpersonal
attachments as a fundamental human motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 117(3), 497529.
Baumeister, R. F., Gailliot, M., DeWall, C. N., & Oaten, M. (2006). Self-regulation and
personality: How interventions increase regulatory success, and how depletion moderates
the effects of traits on behavior. Journal of Personality, 74, 1773-1801.
Bem, D. J. (1972). Self-Perception Theory. In Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, vol.
6, ed. Leonard Berkowitz, 1–63. New York: Academic Press.
Benhassine, N., Devoto, F., Duflo, E., Dupas, P., & Pouliquen V. (2015). Turning a shove into a
nudge? A ‘labeled cash transfer’ for education.” American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy, 7(3), 1–48.
Benedetti, F., Maggi, G., Lopiano, L. Lanotte, M., Rainero, I., Vighetti, S., Pollo, A. (2003).
Open versus hidden medical treatments: The patient’s knowledge about a therapy affects
the therapy outcome. Prevention & Treatment, Vol 6(1), No Pagination Specified Article
1a.
Beshears, J., Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., & Madrian, B. C. (2008). The importance of default options
for retirement saving outcomes: Evidence from the United States. In S. J. Kay & T. Sinha
(Eds.) Lessons from Pension Reform in the Americas, 59–87. Oxford: Oxford University

!

Wise Interventions 75
Press.
Bettinger, E., Long, B., Oreopoulos, P., and Sanbonmatsu, L. (2012). Helping complete college
financial aid applications: Evidence from a randomized trial with H&R Block. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 127, 1205-1242.
Blackwell, L. A., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Theories of intelligence and
achievement across the junior high school transition: A longitudinal study and an
intervention. Child Development, 78, 246-263.
Bond, R. M., Fariss, C. J., Jones, J. J., Kramer, A. D. I., Marlow, C., Settle, J. E., & Fowler, J. H.
(2012). A 61-million-person experiment in social influence and political mobilization.
Nature, 489, 295-298.
Borman, G. D., Grigg, J., & Hanselman, P. (2016). An effort to close achievement gaps at scale
through self-affirmation. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 38, 21-42.
Bowlby, J. (1988). A Secure Base: Clinical Applications of Attachment Theory. London:
Routledge.
Brady, S. T., Reeves, S L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Cook, J., Taborsky-Barba, S.,
Tomasetti, S., Davis, E., & Cohen, G. L. (2016). The psychology of the affirmed learner:
Spontaneous self-affirmation in the face of stress. Journal of Educational Psychology,
108, 353-373.
Brady, S. T., Walton, G. M., Cohen, G. L., Fotuhi, O, Gomez, E., & Urstein, R. [in prep A].
Revising the scarlet letter of academic probation: Reframing institutional messages to
increase student success and reduce shame and stigma
Brady, S. T., Walton, G. M., Cohen, G. L., Jarvis, S. [in prep B]. Downstream consequences of a
social-belonging intervention in the transition to college.

!

Wise Interventions 76
Braga, A. A. & Bond, B. J. (2008). Policing crime and disorder hot spots: A randomized
controlled trial. Criminology, 46, 577-607
Brannon, T. N. & Walton, G. M. (2013). Enacting cultural interests: How intergroup contact
reduces prejudice by sparking interest in an outgroup’s culture. Psychological Science,
24, 1947-1957.
Brehm, J. W. (1966). A theory of psychological reactance. Academic Press.
Brinch, C. N. & Galloway, T. A. Galloway (2012). Schooling in adolescence raises IQ.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109, 425-430.
Brinkman, S. A., Johnson, S. E., Codde, J. P., Hart, M. B., Straton, J. A., Mittinty, M. N, &
Silburn, S. R. (2016). Effect of infant simulator programmes to prevent teenage
pregnancy: A school-based cluster randomized controlled trial in Western Australia. The
Lancet.
Brummelman, E., Thomaes, S., Walton, G. M., Poorthuis, A. M. G., Overbeek, G., Castro, B. O.,
Bushman, B. J. (2014). Unconditional regard buffers children’s negative self-feelings.
Pediatrics, 134, 1119-1126.
Bryan, C. J., Walton, G. M., & Dweck, C. S. (2016). Psychologically authentic versus
inauthentic replication attempts. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America.
Bryan, C. J., Walton, G. M., Rogers, T. & Dweck, C. S. (2011). Motivating voter turnout by
invoking the self. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America, 108, 12653-12656.
Bugental, D. B., Ellerson, P. C., Lin, E. K., Rainey, B., Kokotovic, A., & O’Hara, N. (2002). A
cognitive approach to child abuse prevention. Journal of Family Psychology, 16, 243-

!

Wise Interventions 77
258.
Bugental, D. B., Schwartz, A., & Lynch, C. (2010). Effects of an early family intervention on
children’s memory: The mediating role effects of cortisol levels. Mind, Brain, and
Education, 4, 159-170.
Campbell, F. A., Pungello, E. P., Miller-Johnson, S., Burchinal, M., & Ramey, C. T. (2001). The
development of cognitive and academic abilities: Growth curves from an early childhood
educational experiment. Developmental Psychology, 37, 231-242.
Canning, E.A. & Harackiewicz, J.M. (2015). Teach it, don’t preach it: The differential effects of
directly-communicated and self-generated utility value information. Motivation Science,
1, 47-71.
Carnes, M. L., Devine, P. G., Manwell, L. B., Byars-Winston, A., Fine, E., Ford, C. E., Forscher,
P. S., Iaasc, C., Kaatz, A, Magua, W., Palta, M, & Sherridan, J. (2015). Effect of an
intervention to break the gender bias habit: A cluster randomized, controlled trial.
Academic Medicine, 90, 221-230.
Carr, P. B. & Walton, G. M. (2014). Cues of working together fuel intrinsic motivation. Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology, 53, 169-184.
Carter, G. L., Clover, K., Whyte, I. M., Dawson, A. H., D’Este, C. (2013). Postcards from the
EDge: 5-year outcomes of a randomised controlled trial for hospital-treated selfpoisoning. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 202, 372-380.
Castleman B.L., Owen L., Page L.C. (2015). Stay late or start early? Experimental evidence on
the benefits of college matriculation support from high schools versus colleges.
Economics of Education Review, 47, 168–179
Clark, K. B. & Clark, M. P. (1947). Racial identification and preference among negro

!

Wise Interventions 78
children. In E. L. Hartley (Ed.) Readings in Social Psychology. New York: Holt,
Rinehart, and Winston.
Claro, S., Paunesku, D., & Dweck, C. S. (2016). Growth mindset tempers the effects of poverty
on academic achievement. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113, 86648668.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., & Master, A. (2006). Reducing the racial achievement gap: A
social-psychological intervention. Science, 313, 1307-1310.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaugns, V., Apfel, N., & Brzustoski, P. (2009). Recursive
processes in self-affirmation: Intervening to close the minority achievement gap. Science,
324, 400-403.
Cohen, G. L., & Sherman, D. K. (2014). The psychology of change: Self-affirmation and social
psychological intervention. Annual Review of Psychology, 65, 333-371.
Cohen, G. L., Steele, C. M., & Ross, L. D. (1999). The mentor’s dilemma: Providing critical
feedback across the racial divide. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 1302–
1318.
Coleman, J. S., Campbell, E. Q., Hobson, C. J., McPartland, J., Mood, A. M., Weinfeld, F. D., &
York, R. L. (1966). Equality of educational opportunity. Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group. (2015). Impact of early intervention on
psychopathology, crime, and well-being at age 25. American Journal of Psychiatry, 172,
59-70.
Cook, J. E., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (2012). Chronic threat and
contingent belonging: Protective benefits of values affirmation on identity development.

!

Wise Interventions 79
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102, 479-496.
Creswell, J. D. (in press). Mindfulness interventions. Annual Review of Psychology.
Critcher, C. R., & Dunning, D. (2015). Self-affirmations provide a broader perspective on selfthreat. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 41, 3-18.
Dal Cin, S., MacDonald, T. K., Fong, G. T., Zanna, M. P., & Elton-Marshall, T. E. (2006).
Remembering the message: Using a reminder cue to increase condom use following a
safer sex intervention. Health Psychology, 25, 438-443.
Danaher, K. & Crandall, C. S. (2008). Stereotype threat in applied settings re-examined. Journal
of Applied Social Psychology, 38, 1639-1655.
Davidai, S., Gilovich, T., & Ross, L.D. (2012). The meaning of defaults for potential organ
donors. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(38), 15201-15205.
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2000). The 'what' and 'why' of goal pursuits: Human needs and the
self-determination of behavior. Psychological Inquiry, 11, 227-268.
Dee, T. S. (2005). Social identity and achievement gaps: Evidence from an affirmation
intervention. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 8, 149-168.
DeJong W., Schneider S.K., Towvim L.G., Murphy M.J., Doer E.E., Simonsen, N.R., Mason,
K.E., & Scribner, R. A. (2006). A multisite randomized trial of social norms marketing
campaigns to reduce college student drinking. Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs,
67, 868–879.
DeJong W., Schneider S.K., Towvim L.G., Murphy M.J., Doer E.E., Simonsen, N.R., Mason,
K.E., & Scribner, R. A. (2009). A multisite randomized trial of social norms marketing
campaigns to reduce college student drinking: A replication failure. Substance Abuse, 30,
127-140.

!

Wise Interventions 80
Department of Justice (2016). Investigation of the Baltimore City Police Department. Accessed:
http://civilrights.baltimorecity.gov/sites/default/files/20160810_DOJ%20BPD%20Report
-FINAL.pdf.
Destin, M., & Oyserman, D. (2009). From assets to school outcomes: How finances shape
children’s perceived possibilities and intentions. Psychological Science, 20, 414-418.
Diamond, A., Barnett, W.S., Thomas, J., & Munro, S. (2007). Preschool program improves
cognitive control. Science, 318, 1387-1388.
Diamond, A. & Lee, K. (2011). Interventions shown to aid executive function development in
children 4-12 years old. Science, 333, 959-964.
Dodge, K.A., Godwin, J., & Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group. (2013). Socialinformation processing patterns mediate the impact of preventive intervention on
adolescent antisocial behavior. Psychological Science, 24, 456-65.
Duckworth, A. L., Kirby, T., Gollwitzer, A., & Oettingen, G. (2013). From fantasy to action:
Mental contrasting with implementation intentions (MCII) improves academic
performance in children. Social Psychological and Personality Science, 4(6), 745-753.
Duckworth, A. L., Peterson, C., Matthews, M. D., & Kelly, D. R. (2007). Grit: Perseverance and
passion for long-term goals. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92(6), 10871101.
Duckworth, A. L. & Seligman, M. E. P. (2005). Self-discipline outdoes IQ predicting academic
performance in adolescents. Psychological Science, 16, 939-944.
Duyme, M., Dumaret, A-C., & Tomkiewicz, S. (1999). How can we boost IQs of “dull
children”?: A late adoption study. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 96,
8790-8794.

!

Wise Interventions 81
Dweck, C.S. (1999). Self-Theories: Their role in motivation, personality and development.
Philadelphia: Taylor and Francis/Psychology Press.
Dweck, C.S. (2006). Mindset. New York: Random House.
Dweck, C.S. (2008). Can personality be changed? The role of beliefs in personality and change.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 17, 391-394.
Dweck, C.S., & Leggett, E.L. (1988). A social-cognitive approach to motivation and personality,
Psychological Review, 95, 256-273.
Ehret, P. J., & Sherman, D. K. (2014). Public policy and health: A self-affirmation
perspective. Policy Insights from Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 1, 222-230.
Eskreis-Winkler, L., Shulman, E. P., Young, V., Tsukayama, E., Brunwasser, S. M., &
Duckworth, A. L. (2016). Using wise interventions to motivate deliberate practice.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 111, 728-744.
Festinger, L. (1957). A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press.
Festinger, L., & Carlsmith, J. M. (1959). Cognitive consequences of forced compliance. The
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 58(2), 203–210.
Finkel, E. J., DeWall, C. N., Slotter, E. B., Oaten, M., & Foshee, V. A. (2009). Self-regulatory
failure and intimate partner violence perpetration. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 97, 483-499.
Finkel, E. J., Slotter, E. B., Luchies, L. B., Walton, G. M., & Gross, J. J. (2013). A brief
intervention to promote conflict reappraisal preserves marital quality over time.
Psychological Science, 24, 1595-1601.
Forbes, C. E. & Schmader, T. (2010). Retraining attitudes and stereotypes to affect motivation

!

Wise Interventions 82
and cognitive capacity under stereotype threat. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 99, 740-754.
Forscher, P. S., Mitamura, C., Dix, E. L., Cox, W. T. L., & Devine, P. G. (Under review).
Breaking the prejudice habit: Mechanisms, timecourse, and longevity.
Fotuhi, O., Logel, C., Spencer, S., Fong, G. T., & Zanna, M. P. (2014). Contingent affirmation
intervention among smokers: Directly linking affirming values to health-specific goals.
Manuscript in preparation.
Fredrickson, B. L., Cohn, M. A., Coffey, K. A., Pek, J., & Finkel, S. M. (2008). Open hearts
build lives: Positive emotions, induced through loving-kindness meditation, build
consequential personal resources. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
95,1045-1062.
Fryer R. (2011). Financial incentives and student achievement: Evidence from randomized trials.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126, 1755-1798.
Fryer R. (2012). Learning from the Successes and Failures of Charter Schools. In The Hamilton
Project. Washington, D.C..
Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (2013). A social psychological perspective on educational
intervention. In E. Shafir (Ed.), Behavioral foundations of policy (pp. 329-350). New
York, NY: Russell Sage.
Gawronski, B., & Bodenhausen, G. V. (2006). Associative and propositional processes in
evaluation: An integrative review of implicit and explicit attitude change. Psychological
Bulletin, 132, 692-731.
Gehlbach, H., Brinkworth, M. E., King, A. M., Hsu, L. M., McIntyre, J., & Rogers, T. (2016).
Creating birds of similar feathers: Leveraging similarity to improve teacher-student

!

Wise Interventions 83
relationships and academic achievement. Journal of Educational Psychology, 108, 342352.
Gerber, A. S., Huber, G. A., Biggers, D. R., & Hendry, D. J. (2016). A field experiment shows
that subtle linguistic cues might not affect voter behavior. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Science, 113, 7112-7117.
Gertler, P, Heckman, J., Pinto, R., Zanolini, A., Vermeersch, C., Walker, S., Chang, S. M., &
Grantham-McGregor, S. (2014). Labor market returns to an early childhood stimulation
intervention in Jamaica. Science, 344, 998-1001.
Gibson, James J. (1977). The Theory of Affordances. In R. Shaw and J. Bransford (Ed.),
Perceiving, Acting, and Knowing (pp. 67-82). Lawrence Erlbaum.
Gneezy, U. & Rustichini, A. (2000). A fine is a price. The Journal of Legal Studies, 29, 1-17.
Goffmann, E. (1963). Stigma: Notes on the management of spoiled identity. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Goldrick-Rab S., Harris, D. N., Kelchen, R., & Benson, J. (2012). Need-based financial aid and
college persistence. Experimental evidence from Wisconsin (October 10, 2012).
Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1887826.
Goldstein, N. J., Cialdini, R. B., & Griskevicius, V. (2008). A room with a viewpoint: Using
social norms to motivate environmental conservation in hotels. Journal of Consumer
Research, 35, 472-482.
Gollwitzer, P. M. (1999). Implementation intentions: Strong effects of simple plans. American
Psychologist, 54, 493-503.
Gollwitzer, P. M., Sheeran, P., Michalski, V., & Seifert, A. E. (2009). When intentions go
public: Does social reality widen the intention-behavior gap? Psychological Science,

!

Wise Interventions 84
20, 612-618.
Good, C., Aronson, J., & Inzlicht, M. (2003). Improving adolescents’ standardized test
performance: An intervention to reduce the effects of stereotype threat. Journal of
Applied Developmental Psychology, 24, 645-622.
Goddard, R. D., Salloum, S. J., & Berebitsky, D. (2016). Trust as a mediator of the relationship
between poverty, racial composition, and academic achievement. Educational
Administration Quarterly, 45, 292-311.
Goyer, J. P., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Binning, K. R., Cook, J. E., Reeves, S. L., Apfel,
N., Taborsky-Barba, S., Sherman, D. K., & Cohen, G. L. (under review). Into swifter
currents: Self-affirmation nudges minority middle schoolers onto a college trajectory.
Graham, S., & Barker, G. (1990). The downside of help: An attributional-developmental analysis
of help-giving as a low ability cue. Journal of Educational Psychology, 82, 7- 14.
Grant, A. M., & Hofmann, D. A. (2011). It’s not all about me: Motivating hospital hand hygiene
by focusing on patients. Psychological Science, 22, 1494-1499.
Gunderson, L., Gripshover, S., Romero, C., Goldin-Meadow, S., Dweck, C.S., Levine, S. (2013).
Parent praise to 1-3 year-olds predicts children’s motivational frameworks 5 years later.
Child Development, 84, 1526-1541.
Haimovitz, K., & Dweck, C. S. (2016). What predicts children's fixed and growth mindsets? Not
their parent’s views of intelligence but their parents' views of failure. Psychological
Science, 27, 859-869.
Haimovitz, K., Dweck, C. S., & Walton, G. M. (under review). Implicit theories of willpower
encourage children to generate self-control strategies.
Hallsworth M, List J, Metcalfe R, Vlaev I. (2014). The behavioralist as tax collector: Using

!

Wise Interventions 85
natural field experiments to enhance tax compliance. Working Paper 20007, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. http://www.nber.org/papers/w20007.
Hammond D, Fong G.T., McDonald P.W., Cameron R., Brown K.S. (2003). The impact of the
graphic Canadian warning labels on adult smoking. Tobacco Control, 12, 391-395.
Hammond D., Fong G.T., McDonald P.W., Brown K.S., Cameron R. (2004). Graphic cigarette
package warning labels and adverse outcomes: Evidence from Canadian smokers.
American Journal of Public Health, 94, 1442-1445.
Hanks, A. S., Just. D. R., Smith, L. E., & Wansink B. (2012). Healthy convenience: Nudging
students toward healthier choices in the lunchroom,” Journal of Public Health, 34, 370376.
Hanselman, P., Bruch, S.K., Gamoran, A., & Borman, G.D. (2014). Threat in context: School
moderation of the impact of social identity threat on racial/ethnic achievement gaps.
Sociology of Education, 87, 106-124
Harackiewicz, J.M., Canning, E.A., Tibbetts, Y., Giffen, C.J., Blair, S.S., Rouse, D.I., & Hyde,
J.S. (2014). Closing the social class achievement gap for first-generation students in
undergraduate biology. Journal of Educational Psychology, 106, 375-389.
Harackiewicz, J.M., Canning, E.A., Tibbetts, Y., Priniski, S.J., & Hyde, J.S. (2016). Closing
achievement gaps with a utility-value intervention: Disentangling race and social
class. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 111, 745-765.
Harackiewicz, J.M., Rozek, C.R., Hulleman, C.S., & Hyde, J.S. (2012) Helping parents to
motivate adolescents in mathematics and science: An experimental test of a utility-value
intervention. Psychological Science, 23, 899-906.
Harris, P. R., Brearley, I., Sheeran, P., Barker, M., Klein, W. M. P., Creswell, J. D., Levine, J.

!

Wise Interventions 86
M., & Bond, R. (2014) Combining self-affirmation with implementation intentions to
promote fruit and vegetable consumption. Health Psychology, 33, 729-736.
Harris, P. R., Mayle, K., Mabbott, L., & Napper, L. (2007). Self-affirmation reduces smokers’
defensiveness to graphic on-pack cigarette warning labels. Health Psychology, 26, 437446.
Heider, F (1944). Social perception and phenomenal causality. Psychological Review, 51, 358–
374.
Heine, S. J., Lehman, D. R., Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1999). Is there a universal need for
positive self-regard? Psychological Review, 106, 766-794.
Heller, S. B., Shah, A. K., Guryan, J., Ludwig, J., Mullainathan, S., Pollack, H. A. (2015).
Thinking, fast and slow? Some field experiments to reduce crime and dropout in
Chicago. Working Paper 21178, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge,
MA. http://www.nber.org/papers/w21178.
Herrnstein, R. J. & Murray, C. (1994). The bell curve: Intelligence and class structure in
American life. New York: The Free Press.
Hoxby, C. & Turner, S. (2014). Expanding college opportunities for high-achieving, low income
students. Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper No. 12-014.
Howe, L. C., Carr, P. B., & Walton, G. M. (Under review). Making common cause: The feeling
of working together facilitates normative behavior.
Hudley, C., & Graham, S. (1993). An attributional intervention with African American boys
labeled as aggressive. Child Development, 64, 124-138.
Hulleman, C.S. & Harackiewicz, J.M. (2009). Promoting interest and performance in high school
science classes, Science, 326, 1410-1412.

!

Wise Interventions 87
Ikizer E. G. & Blanton, H. (2016). Media coverage of “wise” interventions can reduce concern
for the disadvantaged. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 22, 135-147.
Inzlicht, M., & Berkman, E. (2015). Six questions for the resource model of control (and some
answers). Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 9/10, 511-524.
Jaeggi, S. M, Buschkuehl, M., Jonides, J., & Perrig, W. J. (2008). Improving fluid intelligence
with training on working memory. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America, 105(19), 6829-6833.
Jensen, A. R. (1969) How much can we boost IQ and scholastic achievement? Harvard
Educational Review, 39, 1-123.
Jessop, D. C., Sparks, P., Buckland, N., Harris, P. R., & Churchill, S. (2014). Combining selfaffirmation and implementation intentions: Evidence of detrimental effects on behavioral
outcomes. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 47, 137-147.
Job, V., Dweck, C. S., & Walton, G. M. (2010). Ego-depletion—Is it all in your head? Implicit
theories about willpower affect self-regulation. Psychological Science, 21, 1686-1693.
Job, V. Flueckiger, L., Bernecker, K., Lieb, R. & Mata, J. (2016). An implicit theories about
willpower intervention helps students to deal with demands: Effects on academic selfregulation and grades. Manuscript in preparation.
Job, V., Friese, M., & Bernecker, K. (2015). Effects of practicing self-control on academic
performance. Motivation Science, 1, 219-232.
Job, V., Walton, G. M., Bernecker, K., & Dweck, C. S. (2015). Implicit theories about willpower
predict self-regulation and grades in everyday life. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 108, 637-347.
Johnson, E. J. & Goldstein, D. G. (2003). Do defaults save lives? Science, 302, 1338-1339.

!

Wise Interventions 88
Jones, E. E., & Davis, K. E. (1965) From acts to dispositions: the attribution process in social
psychology, in L. Berkowitz (ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Volume
2, pp. 219-266), New York: Academic Press.
Kahneman, D., Fredrickson, D.L., Schreiber, C.A., & Redelmeier, D.A. (1993). When more pain
is preferred to less: Adding a better end. Psychological Science, 4, 401-405.
Karniol, R., Galili, L., Shtilerman, D., Naim, R., Stern, K., Manjoch, H., & Silverman, R. (2011).
Why Superman can wait: Cognitive self-transformation in the delay of gratification
paradigm. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 40, 307-317.
Kawakami, K., Steele, J. R., Cifa, C., Phills, C. E., & Dovidio, J. F. (2008). Approaching math
increases math = me, math = pleasant. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 44,
818- 825.
Kazdin, A.E. (2007). Mediators and mechanisms of change in psychotherapy research. In S.
Nolen-Hoeksema, T.D. Cannon, & T. Widiger (Eds.), Annual Review of Clinical
Psychology, 3, 1-27.
Keizer, K., Lindenberg, S., & Steg, L. (2008). The spreading of disorder. Science, 322, 16811685.
Kelley, H. H. (1967). Attribution theory in social psychology. In D. Levine (ed.), Nebraska
Symposium on Motivation (Volume 15, pp. 192-238). Lincoln: University of Nebraska
Press.
Kelley, H.H. (1973). The processes of causal attribution. American Psychologist, 28, 107-128.
Kenthirarajah, D. & Walton, G. M. (2015). How brief social-psychological interventions can
cause enduring effects. In R. Scott & S. Kosslyn (Eds.) Emerging Trends in the Social
and Behavioral Sciences, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons.

!

Wise Interventions 89
Kidd, C., Palmeri, H., & Aslin, R.N. (2013.) Rational Snacking: Young children’s decisionmaking on the marshmallow task is moderated by beliefs about environmental reliability.
Cognition, 126, 109-114.
Kross, E., & Ayduk, O. (2011). Making meaning out of negative experiences by self-distancing.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 20, 187-191.
Kross, E., Ayduk, O., & Mischel, W. (2005). When asking “why” does not hurt: Distinguishing
rumination from reflective processing of negative emotions. Psychological Science, 16,
709-715.
Kross, E., Bruehlman-Senecal, E., Park. J., Burson, A., Shablack, H., Bremner, R., Moser, J., &
Ayduk, O. (2014). Self-talk as a regulatory mechanism: How you do it matters. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 106, 304-324.
Lai, C. K., Skinner, A. L., Cooley, E., Murrar, S., Brauer, M., Devos, T., . . . Nosek, B. A.
(2016). Reducing implicit racial preferences: II. Intervention effectiveness across time.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 145(8), 1001-1016.
Langer E. J. & Rodin, J. (1976). The effects of choice and enhanced personal responsibility for
the aged: A field experiment in an institutional setting. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 34, 191-198.
Latané, B. & Darley, J.M. (1970). The unresponsive bystander: Why doesn’t he help? New York:
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Layous, K., Davis, E. M., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Cook, J. E., & Cohen, G. L. (2016).
Feeling left out, but affirmed: Protecting against the negative effects of low belonging in
college. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology.
Lepper, M. R., Greene, D., & Nisbett, R. E. (1973). Undermining children’s intrinsic interest

!

Wise Interventions 90
with extrinsic reward: A test of the “overjustification” hypothesis. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 28, 129–37.
Lepper, M. R., Woolverton, M., Mumme, D. L., & Gurtner, J. (1993). Motivational techniques of
expert human tutors: Lessons for the design of computer-based tutors. In S. P. Lajoie &
S. J. Derry (Eds.), Computers as cognitive tools (pp. 75-105). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Leventhal, H., Singer, R., & Jones, S. (1965). Effects of fear and specificity of recommendation
upon attitudes and behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2, 20-29.
Levy, B. R., Pilver, C., Chung, P., & Slade, M. D. (2014). Subliminal strengthening improving
older individuals’ physical function over time with an implicit-age-stereotype
intervention. Psychological Science, 25, 2127-2135.
Lewin, K. (1947). Group decision and social change. In T. M. Newcombe & E. L. Hartley (Eds.),
Readings in social psychology (pp. 459- 473). New York: Henry Holt.
Lewin, K. (1951). Field theory in social science: Selected theoretical papers (D. Cartwright,
Ed.). New York, NY: Harper & Row
Liberman, N., Samuels, S. M., & Ross, L. (2004). The name of the game: Predictive power of
reputations versus situational labels in determining prisoner’s dilemma game moves.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 1175-1185.
Logel, C. & Cohen, G. L. (2012). The role of the self in physical health: Testing the effect of a
values-affirmation intervention on weight loss. Psychological Science, 23, 53-55.
Lyubomirsky, S., Dickerhoof, R., Boehm, J. K., & Sheldon, K. M. (2011).Becoming happier
takes both a will and a proper way: An experimental longitudinal intervention to boost
well-being. Emotion, 11, 391-402.
Mallett, R. K., & Wilson, T. D. (2010). Increasing positive intergroup contact. Journal of

!

Wise Interventions 91
Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 382-387.
Marigold, D. C., Holmes, J. G., & Ross, M. (2007). More than words: Reframing compliments
from romantic partners fosters security in low self-esteem individuals. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 232–248.
Marigold D. C., Holmes J.G., Ross, M. (2010). Fostering relationship resilience: An intervention
for low self-esteem individuals. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 624–
630.
Markus H. R. & Conner, A. (2014). Clash! 8 Cultural Conflicts That Make Us Who We Are.
Penguine: New York.
Markus, H., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the self: Implications for cognition, emotion,
and motivation. Psychological Review, 98, 224-253.
Markus H. R. & Kitayama, S. (2010). Cultures and selves: A cycle of mutual constitution.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 5, 420-430.
Martens, A., Johns, M., Greenberg, J., & Schimel, J. (2006). Combating stereotype threat: The
effect of self-affirmation on women’s intellectual performance. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 42, 236-243.
Martinez M. & McGrath, D. (2014). Deeper Learning: How Eight Innovative Public Schools Are
Transforming Education in the Twenty-First Century. The New Press: New York.
McCord, J. (1978). A thirty-year follow-up of treatment effects. American Psychologist, 33, 284289.
McNally, R. J. (2007). Mechanisms of exposure therapy: How neuroscience can improve
psychological treatments for anxiety disorders. Clinical Psychology Review, 27, 750-759.
Melby-Lervåg, M. & Hulme, C. (2013). Is working memory training effective? A meta-analytic

!

Wise Interventions 92
review. Developmental Psychology, 49, 270-291.
Menec, V. H., Perry, R, P., Struthers, C. W., Schonwetter, D. J., Hechter, F. J., & Eichholz, B. L.
(1994). Assisting at-risk college students with attributional retraining and effective
teaching. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 24, 675-701.
Miles, E., Sheeran, P., Baird, H., Macdonald, I., Webb, T. L., Harris, P. R. (2016). Does selfcontrol improve with practice? Evidence from a six-week training program. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 145, 1075-1091.
Milkman, K., Beshears, J., Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., & Madrian, B. C. (2011). Using
implementation intentions prompts to enhance influenza vaccination rates. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Science, 108, 10415-10420.
Miller, R. L., Brickman, P., & Bolen, D. (1975). Attribution versus persuasion as a means for
modifying behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 31, 430-441.
Miller, D. T., & Prentice, D. A. (2012). Psychological levers of behavior change. In E. Shafir
(Ed.), Behavioral foundations of policy. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Mischel, W. & Shoda, Y. (1995). A cognitive-affective system theory of personality:
Reconceptualizing situations, dispositions, dynamics, and invariance in personality
structure. Psychological Review, 102, 246-268.
Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., & Rodriguez, M. L. (1989). Delay of gratification in children. Science,
244, 933-938.
Miyake, A., Smith-Kost, L. E., Finkelstein, N. D., Pollock, S. J., Cohen, G. L., & Ito, T. A.
(2010). Reducing the gender achievement gap in college science: A classroom study of
values affirmation. Science, 330, 1234-1237.
Moffitt, T.E., Arseneault, L., Belsky, D., Dickson, N., Hancox, R.J., Harrington, H.L., Houts, R.,

!

Wise Interventions 93
Poulton, R., Roberts, B., Ross, S., Sears, M., Thomson, M., and Caspi, A. (2011). A
gradient of childhood self-control predicts health, wealth, and public safety. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Science, 108, 2693-2698.
Moriatry, T. (1975). Crime, commitment, and the responsive bystander: Two field experiments.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 31, 370-376.
Morisano, D., Hirsh, J. B., Peterson, J. B., Pihl, R. O., & Shore, B. M. (2010). Setting,
elaborating, and reflecting on personal goals improves academic performance. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 95, 255-264.
Motto, J. A. & Bostrom, A. G. (2001). A randomized controlled trial of postcrisis suicide
prevention. Psychiatric Services, 52, 828-833.
Mueller, C. M. & Dweck, C. S. (1998). Intelligence praise can undermine motivation and
performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 33-52.
Murphy, M. C., & Dweck, C.S. (2010). A culture of genius: How an organization’s lay theories
shape people’s cognition, affect, and behavior. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 36, 283- 296
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., & Collins, N. L. (2006). Optimizing assurance. The risk regulation
system in relationships. Psychological Bulletin, 132, 664–666.
Murray, S. L., Rose, P., Bellavia, G., Holmes, J. G., & Kusche, A. (2002). When rejection stings:
How self-esteem constrains relationship-enhancement processes. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 83, 556-573.
Nickerson, D.W. & Rogers, T. (2010). Do you have a voting plan? Implementation intentions,
voter turnout, and organic plan-making. Psychological Science, 21, 194-199.
Nisbett, R.E., Aronson, J., Blair, C., Dickens, W., Flynn, J., Halpern, D. F., & Turkheimer, E.

!

Wise Interventions 94
(2012). Intelligence: New findings and theoretical developments. American
Psychologist, 67(2), 130-159.
Nisbett, R. E. & Wilson, T. D. (1977). Telling more than we can know: Verbal reports on mental
processes. Psychological Review, 84, 231-259.
Oettingen, G. (2102). Future thought and behavior change. European Review of Social
Psychology, 23, 1-63.
Okonofua, J. A. Paunesku, D., & Walton, G. M. (2016). Brief intervention to encourage
empathic discipline cuts suspension rates in half among adolescents. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 113, 5221-5226.
Page-Gould, E., Mendoza-Denton, R., & Tropp, L. R. (2008). With a little help from my crossgroup friend: Reducing anxiety in intergroup contexts through cross-group friendship.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 95, 1080–1094.
Paluck, E.L. (2009). Reducing intergroup prejudice and conflict using the media: A field
experiment in Rwanda. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96, 574-587.
Paluck, E.L., & Shepherd, H. (2012). The salience of social referents: A field experiment on
collective norms and harassment behavior in a school social network. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 103, 899-915.
Paluck, E.L., Shepherd, H., & Aronow, P. (2016). Changing climates of conflict: A social
network experiment in 56 schools. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
113(3), 566–571, doi: 10.1073/pnas.1514483113.
Park, J., Ayduk, O., & Kross, E. (2015). Stepping back to move forward: Expressive writing
promotes self-distancing. Emotion, 16, 349-364.
Paunesku, D., Walton, G. M., Romero, C. L., Smith, E. N., Yeager, D. S., & Dweck, C. S.

!

Wise Interventions 95
(2015). Mindset interventions are a scalable treatment for academic underperformance.
Psychological Science, 26, 784-793.
Pennebaker, J.W. (1997). Writing about emotional experiences as a therapeutic process.
Psychological Science, 8, 162-166.
Perkins H.W. (2003). The emergence and evolution of the social norms approach to substance
abuse prevention. In H. W. Perkins (Ed.) The Social Norms Approach to Preventing
School and College Age Substance Abuse: A Handbook for Educators, Counselors, and
Clinicians, pp. 3–17. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass
Perry, R. P. & Hamm, J. M. (in press). An attribution perspective on competence and motivation:
Theory and treatment interventions. In A. Elliot, C. Dweck, & D. Yeager (Eds.),
Handbook of Competence and Motivation (2nd Edition): Theory and Applications. New
York: Guilford Press.
Perry, R. P., Stupnisky, R. H., Hall, N. C., Chipperfield, J. G., & Weiner, B. (2010). Bad starts
and better finishes: Attributional retraining and initial performance in competitive
achievement settings. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 29(6), 668-700.
Pettigrew, T. F., & Tropp, L. R. (2006). A meta-analytic test of intergroup contact theory.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 90, 751-783.
Phills, C.E., Kawakami, K., Tabi, E., Nadolny, D., & Inzlicht, M. (2011). Mind the gap:
Increasing associations between the self and Blacks with approach behaviors. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 100, 197-210.
Powers, J. T., Cook, J. E., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., Cohen, G. L. (2016).
Changing environments by changing individuals: The emergent effects of psychological
intervention. Psychological Science, 27, 150-160.

!

Wise Interventions 96
Pyszczynski, T., & Greenberg, J. (1987). Toward an integration of cognitive and motivational
perspectives on social inference: A biased hypothesis-testing model. In L. Berkowitz
(Ed.), Advances in Experimental Social Psychology (Vol. 20, pp. 297-340). San Deigo,
CA: Academic Press.
Ramirez, G., & Beilock, S. L. (2011). Writing about testing worries boosts exam performance in
the classroom. Science, 331, 211-213.
Rattan, A., Good, C., & Dweck, C.S. (2012). "It's ok - not everyone can be good at math":
Instructors with an entity theory comfort (and demotivate) students. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 48, 731–737.
Raudenbush, S.W. (1984). Magnitude of teacher expectancy effects on Pupil IQ as a function of
the credibility of expectancy induction: A synthesis of findings from 18 experiments.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 76(1), 85-97.
Redelmeier D.A., Katz, J., & Kahneman, D. (2003). Memories of colonoscopy: A randomized
trial. Pain, 104, 187-194.
Ridgeway, G. (2007). Analysis of Racial Disparities in the New York Police Department's Stop,
Question, and Frisk Practices. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation.
http://www.rand.org/pubs/technical_reports/TR534.html.
Robinson, T. (2011). Stealth interventions for obesity prevention and control: Motivating
behavior change. In L. Dube, A. Bechara, A. Dagher, A. Drewnowski, J. Lebel, P. James,
R. Yada, M. Laflamme-Sanders (Eds.), Obesity prevention: The role of society and brain
on individual behavior (pp. 319-327.
Rodin, J. & Langer, E. J. (1977). Long-term effects of a control-relevant intervention with the
institutionalized aged. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35, 897-902

!

Wise Interventions 97
Rogge, R.D., Cobb, R.J., Lawrence, E., Johnson, M.D., & Bradbury, T.N. (2013). Is skills
training necessary for the primary prevention of marital distress and dissolution? A 3year experimental study of three interventions. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 81, 949-961.
Rokeach, M. (1971). Long-range experimental modification of values, attitudes, and behavior.
American Psychologist, 26, 453-459.
Rosenthal, R. & Jacobson, L. (1968). Pygmalion in the Classroom. New York: Holt, Rinehart &
Winston.
Ross, L., Lepper, M. R., & Hubbard, M. (1975). Perseverance in self perception and social
perception: Biased attributional processes in the debriefing paradigm. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 32, 880-892.
Ross, L., & Nisbett, R. E. (1991). The person and the situation: Perspectives of social
psychology. New York, NY: Mcgraw-Hill.
Sachs, J. D. (2005). The End of Poverty: Economic Possibilities for Our Time. New
York: Penguin Books.
Sanbonmatsu, L., Ludwig, J., Katz, L. F., Gennetian, L. A., Duncan, G. J., Kessler, R. C., Adam,
E., McDade, T. W. & Lindau, S. T.. (2011). Moving to Opportunity for Fair Housing
Demonstration Program: Final Impacts Evaluation. Report prepared by the National
Bureau of Economic Research for the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development, Office of Policy Development and Research. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office of Policy Development and
Research.
Schmader, T., Johns, M., & Forbes, C. (2008). An integrated process model of stereotype threat

!

Wise Interventions 98
effects on performance. Psychological Review, 115(2), 336-356.
Schmeichel, B. J. and Vohs, K. D. (2009). Self-affirmation and self-control: Affirming core
values counteracts ego depletion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96, 770782.
Schmiedek, F., Lövdén, M., & Lindenberger, U. (2010). Hundred Days of Cognitive Training
Enhance Broad Cognitive Abilities in Adulthood: Findings from the COGITO
Study. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience, 2, 27.
Schultz, P. W., Nolan, J. M., Cialdini, R. B., Goldstein, N. J., & Griskevicius, V. (2007). The
constructive, destructive, and reconstructive power of social norms. Psychological
Science, 18, 429-434.
Schroeder, C. M. & Prentice, D. A. (1998). Exposing pluralistic ignorance to reduce alcohol use
among college students. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 28, 2150-2180.
Schulz, R. (1976). Effects of control and predictability on the physical and psychological wellbeing of the institutionalized aged. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 33,
563-573.
Schulz, R., & Hanusa, B. H. (1978). Long-term effects of control and predictability-enhancing
interventions: Findings and ethical issues. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
36(11), 1194.
Seligman, M. E P, Steen, T., Park, N., & Peterson, C. (2005). Positive psychology progress:
Empirical validation of interventions. American Psychologist, 60, 410-421.
Service, O., Hallsworth, M., Halpern, D., Algate, F., Gallagher, R. Nguyen, S., Ruda, S.,
Sanders, M., with Pelenur, M., Gyani, A., Harper, H., Reinhard, J., & Kirkman, E.
(2014). EAST: Four Simple Ways to Apply Behavioural Insights. The Behavioural

!

Wise Interventions 99
Insights. http://www.behaviouralinsights.co.uk/publications/east-four-simple-ways-toapply-behavioural-insights/ (accessed 10/4/2016).
Sherman, D. K., Bunyan, D. P., Creswell, J. D., & Jaremka, L. M. (2009). Psychological
vulnerability and stress: The effects of self-affirmation on sympathetic nervous system
responses to naturalistic stressors. Health Psychology, 28, 554-562.
Sherman, D. K., & Cohen, G. L. (2006). The psychology of self-defense: Self-affirmation
theory. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.) Advances in Experimental Social Psychology (Vol. 38, pp.
183-242). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Sherman, D. K., Cohen, G. L., Nelson, L. D., Nussbaum, A. D., Bunyan, D. P., & Garcia, J.
(2009). Affirmed yet unaware: The role of awareness in the process of self-affirmation.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 97, 745-764.
Sherman, D.K. & Hartson, K.A. (2011). Reconciling self-defense with self-criticism: Selfaffirmation theory. In M. D. Alicke & C. Sedikides (Eds). Handbook of SelfEnhancement and Self-Protection (pp. 128-151). New York: Guilford Press.
Sherman, D. K., Hartson, K. A., Binning, K. R., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., Taborsky-Barba,
S., Tomassetti, S., Nussbaum, A. D., & Cohen, G. L. (2013). Deflecting the trajectory
and changing the narrative: How self-affirmation affects academic performance and
motivation under identity threat. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 104, 591618.
Sherman, D., Nelson, L., & Steele, C. M. (2000). Do messages about health risks threaten the
self? Increasing the acceptance of threatening health messages via self-affirmation.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26, 1046-1058.
Shipstead, Z., Redick, T. S., & Engle, R. W. (2012). Is working memory training effective?

!

Wise Interventions100
Psychological Bulletin, 138, 628-654.
Shook, N. J., & Fazio, R. H. (2008). Interracial roommate relationships: An experimental test of
the contact hypothesis. Psychological Science, 19, 717–723.
Shu, L. L., Mazar, N., Gino, F., Ariely, D., & Bazerman, M. H. (2012). Signing at the beginning
makes ethics salient and decreases dishonest self-reports in comparison to signing at the
end. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 109, 15197-15200.
Silverman, A. M., Gwinn, J. D., & Van Boven, L. (2015). Stumbling in their shoes: Disability
simulations reduce judged capabilities of disabled people. Social Psychological and
Personality Science, 6, 464-471.
Silverman, A. M., Logel, C., & Cohen, G. L. (2013). Self-affirmation as a deliberate coping
strategy. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 49, 93-98
Simons, D. J., Boot, W. R., Charness, N., Gathercole, S. E., Chabris, C. F., Hambrick, D. Z.,
Stine-Morrow, E. A. L. (2016). Do “brain-training” programs work? Psychological
Science in the Public Interest, 17, 103-186.
Sorce, J. F., Emde, R. N., Campos, J., & Klinnert, M. D. (1985). Maternal emotional signaling:
Its effect on the visual cliff behavior of 1-year-olds. Developmental Psychology, 21, 195200.
Sparkman, G. & Walton, G. M. (under review). I’ll have what she’s going to have: Dynamic
norms promote beneficial counternormative behavior.
Steele, C. M. (1988). The psychology of self-affirmation: Sustaining the integrity of the self. In
L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 21, pp. 261-302).
San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Steele, C. M. (1997). A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape intellectual identity and

!

Wise Interventions101
performance. American Psychologist, 52, 613-629.
Steele, C. M. (2010). Whistling Vivaldi: And other clues how stereotypes affect us. New York:
Norton & Company Inc.
Steele, C. M., & Josephs, R. A. (1990). Alcohol myopia: Its prized and dangerous effects.
American Psychologist, 45(8), 921-933.
Steele, C. M., Spencer, S. J., & Aronson, J. (2002). Contending with group image: The
psychology of stereotype and social identity threat. In M.P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances
experimental social psychology (Vol. 34, pp. 379-440). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Steele D. M. & Cohn-Vargas, B. (2013). Identity Safe Classrooms: Places to Belong and Learn.
Corwin: Thousand Oaks, CA.
Stephens, N. M., Hamedani, M. G., & Destin, M. (2014). Closing the social-class achievement
gap: A difference-education intervention improves first-generation students’ academic
performance and all students’ college transition. Psychological Science, 25, 943-953.
Sternberg, R. J. (2008). Increasing fluid intelligence is possible after all. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 105, 6791-6792.
Stinson, D.A., Logel, C., Shepherd, S., & Zanna, M.P. (2011) Rewriting the self-fulfilling
prophecy of social rejection: Self-affirmation improves relational security and social
behavior up to 2 months later. Psychological Science, 22, 1145-1149.
Stone, J., Aronson, E., Crain, A. L., Winslow, M. P., & Fried, C. B. (1994). Inducing hypocrisy
as a means of encouraging young adults to use condoms. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 20(1), 116-128.
Storms, M. D., & McCaul, K. D. (1976). Attribution processes and emotional exacerbation of
dysfunctional behavior. In J. H. Harvey, W. J. Ickes, & R. F. Kidd (Eds.), New directions

!

Wise Interventions102
in attribution research (Vol. 1). Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.
Sunstein, C. R. (2016). The council of psychological advisers. Annual Review of Psychology.
Swann, W. B., Jr. (1983). Self-verification: Bringing social reality into harmony with the self. In
J. Suls & A. G. Greenwald (Eds.), Social psychological perspectives on the self (Vol. 2,
pp. 33-66). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Terman, L. M. & Oden, M. (1947). The Gifted Child Grows Up: Twenty-five Years’ Follow-up
of a Superior Group. Genetic Studies of Genius Volume 4. Stanford (CA): Stanford
University Press.
Thaler R. H. & Sunstein, C. R. (2008). Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth, and
Happiness. Penguin Books: New York.
Thomaes, S., Bushman, B. J., Orobio de Castro, B., Cohen, G., & Denissen, J. J. A.
(2009). Reducing narcissistic aggression by buttressing self-esteem: An experimental
field study. Psychological Science, 20, 1536-1542.
Thomaes, S., Bushman, B. J., Orobio de Castro, B., & Reijntjes, A. (2012). Arousing “gentle
passions” in young adolescents: Sustained experimental effects of value-affirmations on
prosocial feelings and behaviors. Developmental Psychology, 48, 103-110.
Tibbetts, Y., Harackiewicz, J. M., Canning, E. A., Boston, J. S., Priniski, S. J., & Hyde, J. S.
(2016). Affirming independence: Exploring mechanisms underlying a values affirmation
intervention for first-generation students. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
110, 635-659.
Tough, P. (2016). Helping Children Succeed: What Works and Why. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt:
New York.
Valins, S. Nisbett, R. E. (1971). Attribution processes in the development and treatment of

!

Wise Interventions103
emotional disorders. In E.E. Jones, D. E. Kanouse, H. H. Kelley, R. E. Nisbett, S. Valins,
& B. Weiner (Eds.), Attribution: Perceiving the causes of behavior (pp. 137-150).
Morristown, NJ: General Learning Press.
van den Boom, D. C. (1994). The influence of temperament and mothering on attachment and
exploration: An experimental manipulation of sensitive responsiveness among lowerclass mothers with irritable infants. Child Development, 65, 1457-1477.75
Vohs, K. D., Park, J., & Schmeichel, B. J. (2013). Self-affirmation can enable goal
disengagement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 104, 14-27.
Walton, G. M. (2014). The new science of wise psychological interventions. Current Directions
in Psychological Science, 23, 73-82.
Walton, G. M. & Cohen, G. L. (2007). A question of belonging: Race, social fit, and
achievement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 82-96.
Walton, G. M. & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A brief social-belonging intervention improves academic
and health outcomes of minority students. Science, 331, 1447-1451.
Walton, G. M. & Dweck, C. S. (2009). Solving social problems like a psychologist.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 4, 101-102
Walton, G. M., Logel, C., Peach, J., Spencer, S, & Zanna, M. P. (2015). Two brief interventions
to mitigate a “chilly climate” transform women’s experience, relationships, and
achievement in engineering. Journal of Educational Psychology, 107, 468-485.
Walton, G. M., Paunesku, D., & Dweck, C. S. (2012). Expandable selves. In M. R. Leary & J. P.
Tangney (Eds.) Handbook of Self and Identity (pp. 141-154). New York: The Guilford
Press.
Walton, G. M. & Spencer, S. J. (2009). Latent ability: Grades and test scores systematically

!

Wise Interventions104
underestimate the intellectual ability of negatively stereotyped students. Psychological
Science, 20, 1132-1139.
Watson, J. B. (1913). Psychology as the behaviorist views it. Psychological Review. 20, 158–
177.
Weber, A., Fernald, A., & Diop, Y. (2016). When cultural norms discourage talking to babies:
Effectiveness of a parenting program in rural Senegal. Child Development.
Weiner, B. (1985). An attributional theory of achievement motivation and emotion.
Psychological Review, 92, 548-573.
Weiss, M.J., Bloom, H.S., & Brock, T. (2013). A conceptual framework for studying the sources
of variation in program effects. MDRC Working Papers on Research Methodology.
Wilson J. Q. & Kelling, G. L. (1982). Broken windows: The police and neighborhood safety.
The Atlantic Monthly, 249, 29-38.
Wilson, T. D. (2002). Strangers to ourselves: Discovering the adaptive unconscious. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Wilson, T. D. (2005). The message is the method: Celebrating and exporting the experimental
approach. Psychological Inquiry, 16, 185-193.
Wilson, T. D. (2011). Redirect: The surprising new science of psychological change. New York:
Little Brown.
Wilson, T. D., Damiani, M., & Shelton, N. (2002). Improving the academic performance of
college students with brief attributional interventions. In J. Aronson (Ed.), Improving
academic achievement: Impact of psychological factors on education (pp. 88-108). San
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. (1982). Improving the academic performance of college

!

Wise Interventions105
freshmen: Attribution therapy revisited. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
42, 367-376.
Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. (1985). Improving the performance of college freshmen using
attributional techniques. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 287-293.
Woodhead, M. (1988). When psychology informs public policy: The case of early childhood
intervention. American Psychologist, 43, 443-454.
Yeager, D. S., Fong, C. J., Lee, H. Y., & Espelage, D. (2015). Declines in efficacy of antibullying programs among older adolescents: Theory and a three-level meta-analysis.
Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 37, 36-51.
Yeager, D. S., Henderson, M., D’Mello, S., Paunesku, D. Walton, G. M., Spitzer, B. J., &
Duckworth, A. L. (2014). Boring but important: A self-transcendent purpose for learning
fosters academic self-regulation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 107, 559580.
Yeager, D. S., Johnson, R., Spitzer, B., Trzesniewski, K., Powers, J., & Dweck, C. S. (2014).
The far-reaching effects of believing people can change: Implicit theories of personality
shape stress, health, and achievement during adolescence. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 106 (6), 867-884.
Yeager, D. S., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., Pebley, P., Master, A., Hessert, W.,
Williams, M. & Cohen, G. L. (2014). Breaking the cycle of mistrust: Wise interventions
to provide critical feedback across the racial divide. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 143 (2), 804-824.
Yeager, D., Romero, C., Hulleman, C., Schneider, B., Hinojosa, C., Lee, H. Y., O’Brien, J.,
Flint, K., Roberts, A., Trott, J., Greene, D., Walton, G. M., & Dweck, C. (2016). Using

!

Wise Interventions106
design thinking to make psychological interventions ready for scaling: The case of the
growth mindset during the transition to high school. Journal of Educational Psychology,
108, 374-391.
Yeager, D.S., Trzesniewski, K., & Dweck, C.S. (2013). An implicit theories of personality
intervention reduces adolescent aggression in response to victimization and
exclusion. Child Development, 84, 970-988.
Yeager, D. S. & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological interventions in education: They're
not magic. Review of Educational Research, 81, 267-301.
Yeager, D. S., Walton, G. M., Brady, S. T., Akcinar, E. N., Paunesku, D., Keane, L., Kamentz,
D., Ritter, G., Duckworth, A. L., Urstein, R., Gomez E., Markus, H. R. Cohen, G. L., &
Dweck, C. S. (2016). Teaching a lay theory before college narrows achievement gaps at
scale. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
113, E3341-3348.

!

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables

1

Supplementary Tables
Supplementary Tables 1-3 provide a theoretical organization and brief summaries of
more than 150 interventions culled from our literature review. Supplementary Table 1 includes
interventions that address the need to be accurate. Supplementary Table 2 includes interventions
that address the need for self-integrity. Supplementary Table 3 includes interventions that
address the need to belong. Interventions that cut across categories are referenced in multiple
tables but with a primary description in one. Although most entries reference a specific study, in
some cases interventions that have been examined in multiple studies—for instance, in multiple
forms or with multiple populations—are described in a single entry with multiple citations.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables

2

Table S1. Wise interventions approach #1: Wise interventions that address the need to be accurate.
SubCategory
My identity

Object of
Judgment
Who am I?
(Current identity)

Reference
EskreisWinkler et
al., under
review
Miller et al.,
1975

Who could I
become?
(Prospective or
potential
identity)

Who do I not
want to become
or be confused
with?

Specificity of
Content
Change
Intervention
Area
Strategy
Category A: The Self (My Self)
Specific
SelfPrompting
regulation
new
meanings, by
altering the
situation
Specific
Education
Direct
labeling, of
self-identity

Bryan et al.,
2011; see also
Bryan et al.,
2016; Gerber
et al., 2016

Specific

Civic
behavior

Oyserman et
al., 2006; see
also
Oyserman et
al., 2002

General

Education

Berger &
Rand, 2008

Specific

Health

Sherman et
al., 1992

Specific

Close
relationships

Prompting
new
meanings, by
asking
leading
questions
Active
reflection
exercise, on
future selves;
Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

Prompting by
providing
new
information
Prompting
new
meanings, by

Summary
Asking adolescents to role play “someone slightly harderworking than you” increased persistence following failure
and focus on challenging learning tasks.
5th graders commended by teachers and other school
personnel for keeping their room clean and being litterconscious, as compared to encouraging them to clean up
and those in a control condition, littered less when
unobtrusively observed as long as seven weeks later.
Changing the grammatical structure of 10 survey items
completed the day before a major election to represent
voting in terms of nouns—as an opportunity to become
“a voter”—rather than in verbs—as a task to be
completed, “to vote”—increased voter turnout by 11
percentage-points.
Predominantly African American inner city students in a
high poverty middle school took part in an 11-session
program delivered approximately twice weekly over 7
weeks to encourage children to imagine themselves as
becoming more successful in school and becoming
successful adults, to identify potential obstacles, to
understand these as normal and not self-defining, and to
identify strategies to overcome obstacles. As compared to
a randomized control group this improved students’
standardized test scores and grades, and reduced
depression, absences, and in-school misbehavior through
a 2-year follow-up.
Posting a flier in undergraduate dorms indicating that
most drinking on campus is done by graduate students
reduced drinking among undergraduates who did not
want to be confused with graduate students.
Arresting rather than warning married and employed men
detained for misdemeanor domestic battery reduced the
incidence of subsequent domestic violence offenses;

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables
altering the
situation
My self

My emotions

Do I think
positively about
my self?

What does this
feeling mean?

Lyubomirsky,
et al., 2011;
see also
Boehm et al.,
2011;
Emmons &
McCullough,
2003; Layous
et al., 2013;
Lyubomirksy
et al., 2005;
Sheldon &
Lyubomirsky,
2006;
Seligman et
al., 2005

General

Well-Being

Active
reflection
exercise, on a
positive
aspect of self;
Prompting by
providing
new
information

Seligman et
al., 2005

General

Well-Being

Active
reflection
exercise, on a
positive
aspect of self

Fredrickson
et al., 2008;

General

Well-being

Active
reflection

3

however, for unmarried/unemployed men, who may have
less stake in conventional society, such arrests increased
recidivism.
College students were encouraged to take 15-minutes per
week over 8 weeks (1) to make regular expressions of
gratitude—to write about “times in their lives when they
were grateful for something that another person did for
them and then writing a letter about those experiences
directly to that person (but not sending it)”—or (2) to
make regular expressions of optimism—to write about
“to visualize living a life consistent with their ideal self”
in terms of romance, educational attainment, family life,
etc.. Students who self-selected into a study on a
“happiness intervention” (who were presumably
motivated to increase their happiness) and who
completed one of these exercises, as compared to those in
a randomized control condition (who listed what they had
done over the past week to increase “organizational
skills”) and to students who self-selected into a study on
“cognitive exercises” in any of the conditions, reported
greater well-being at the end of the writing period and at
a 6-month follow-up. Other trials have found that the
effectiveness of such activities can be enhanced when
people read a peer testimonial, who said the activity
helped them (Layous et al., 2013). Gratitude exercises
can also improve well-being and sleep quality among
adults with chronic disease (Emmons & McCullough,
2003).
Encouraging visitors to a website on “happiness
exercises” (1) to “write down three things that went well
each day and their causes every night for a week” or (2)
to take an online survey of “character strengths,” where
they received individualized feedback on their top five
strengths, and were then asked to “use one of these top
strengths in a new and different way every day for one
week,” as compared to writing down early memories
every day for a week, increased happiness and reduced
depressive symptoms over six months.
Teaching people to practice loving-kindness mediation—
a contemplative practice designed to increase feelings of

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables
see also Cohn
&
Fredrickson,
2010

exercise, on
emotions

Hülsheger et
al., 2012; see
also Creswell,
2016

General

Work, wellbeing

Active
reflection
exercise, on
emotions

Hülsheger et
al., 2015

Specific

Work

Active
reflection
exercise, on
emotions

Ramirez &
Beilock, 2011

Specific

Education

Active
reflection
exercise, on a
negative

4

warmth and caring for the self and others—in 6 hour-long
sessions over 7 weeks caused increases in positive
emotions, which mediated an increased sense of purpose
in life, increased feelings of social support, and reduced
illness symptoms. This in turn predicted increased life
satisfaction and fewer depressive symptoms. Fifteen
months after the program ended, about one in three
participants reported continuing to mediate and those
who did continued to report more positive emotions.
Employees in diverse jobs took part in a 2-week
intervention to teach them “mindfulness mediation and
informal daily exercises [aimed] at cultivating an
accepting, nonjudgmental attitude to what one
experiences in each moment.” As compared to a notreatment randomized control group, this reduced
emotional exhaustion and increased job satisfaction over
10 work days.
Hairdressers learned about emotion-regulation techniques
including “(a) reappraising difficult situations by
considering that offensive client behavior is not meant as
personal assault, but rather reflects the customer’s
personal problems (reappraisal); (b) reappraising difficult
situations by considering them a personal challenge and
opportunity for growth (reappraisal); (c) putting
themselves in the client’s shoes (perspective taking). To
train attentional deployment, participants were
encouraged to (d) trigger positive emotions by thinking of
positive and enjoyable past or future events.” They then
wrote down, on each of four consecutive mornings, how
they could use these techniques in a “typical difficult
situation with a customer” at work and, on each of 10
consecutive evenings, how they had done so, what was
effective and how they could improve their use of the
strategy. As compared to those in a control condition,
hairdressers in the treatment condition earned higher tips
over the 10 days.
9th-grade students given the opportunity to write down
thoughts and feelings about the first final exam of high
school immediately before taking the test earned higher
scores if they were anxious about test-taking (B+ vs. B-).

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables

My goals

When and how
will I accomplish
my goals?
(Implementation
intentions)

aspect of self
Active
reflection
exercise, on
goals

Chen et al.,
under review

Specific

Education

Christiansen
et al., 2010

Specific

Health

Active
reflection
exercise, on
goals

Duckworth et
al., 2013; see
also
Duckworth et
al., 2011

Specific

Education

Active
reflection
exercise, on
goals

Harris et al.,
2014

General and
specific

Health

Jessop et al.,
2014

General and
specific

Health

Active
reflection
exercise, on
goals
Active
reflection

5

Encouraging undergraduates to reflect on what learning
resources would help them learn best—identifying
specific resources, writing about why each resource they
chose would be helpful, and creating a specific plan to
use that resource—improved performance in an
introductory statistics class by one-third of a letter grade.
The effect was mediated by greater reflection students
reported about their learning progress which, in turn,
predicted greater reported effectiveness of learning
resources.
Chronic pain patients who, in addition to conventional
care at an outpatient pain center, completed a 1-hour
intervention focused on goal setting with regard to
exercise. The intervention comprised (1) mental
contrasting (listing positive aspects of exercising more
and obstacles to this), (2) problem-solving to overcome
these obstacles using a cognitive-behavioral approach,
and (3) implementation intentions using “If…then…”
statements (e.g., “If I am afraid of hurting myself, then I
will remember that movement is good against pain”). As
compared to patients who received only conventional
care, those in the treatment condition had greater physical
capacity along both behavioral measures and subjective
ratings 3-weeks after discharge and 3-months after
returning home.
Asking urban 5th grade students to identify an important
personal goal relevant to their school work and to write
about obstacles that could prevent them from achieving
this goal and what they would do if such obstacles arose
following an “If… , then…” template (“mental contrasting
with implementation intentions”), improved students’
grades, attendance, and classroom behavior that academic
quarter.
[see Table S2]

[see Table S2]

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables

Leventhal et
al., 1965

Specific

Health

Milkman et
al., 2011

Specific

Health

Morisano et
al., 2010

Specific

Education

Nickerson &
Rogers, 2010

Specific

Civic
Behavior

Pham &
Taylor, 1999

Specific

Education

Prestwich et
al., 2005

Specific

Health

exercise, on
goals
Prompting
new
meanings, by
asking
leading
questions
Prompting
new
meanings, by
asking
leading
questions
Active
reflection
exercise, on
goals

Prompting
new
meanings, by
asking
leading
questions
Active
reflection
exercise, on
goals

Active
reflection
exercise, on
goals

6

College seniors learned about the importance of getting a
tetanus shot in either a high or low fear condition.
Regardless of this manipulation, giving seniors a map
with the health center circled and asking students when
would be a convenient time for them to go increased the
percentage of students who got a tetanus shot from 3.3%
to 27.6%.
3,272 employees of a large utility company received
mailers with information about upcoming flu shot clinics.
Including a prompt to write down the date and time the
employee would get the shot increased vaccination rates
from 33.1% to 37.3%.
A series of online exercises in which struggling college
students identified personal life goals and how they
would implement these (i.e., goal-setting +
implementation intentions) raised term GPA over the
next four months, and reduced the percentage of students
who ended the term less than full-time enrolled from 20%
to 0%.
Adding to a get-out-the-vote call script implementation
intention questions—asking when a person would vote,
where they would be coming from, and what they would
be doing beforehand—increased turnout in a competitive
presidential primary by 0.9%. (intention to treat) or 4.1%
(average treatment on treated).
Undergraduates asked to mentally simulate the process
for doing well on an exam (good study habits), as
compared to those asked to simulate a positive outcome
(getting a good grade) or those in a control condition,
earned higher exam scores 1 week later. The intervention
also increased planning, reduced anxiety, and increased
studying.
Female undergraduates were asked to decide where and
when they would perform a breast self-exam and to
commit to doing so. This increased the number of breast
self-exams women reported performing one and six
months later. In a second study, women randomized to

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables

Prestwich et
al., 2008

Specific

Health

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information;
Active
reflection
exercise, on
goals
Active
reflection
exercise, on
goals

Prestwich et
al., 2010

Specific

Health

Sherman et
al., 2010

Specific

Health

Prompting
new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Stadler et al.,
2009

Specific

Health

Active
reflection
exercise, on
goals

7

form implementation intentions were again more likely to
perform breast self-exams over the next month. In
addition, those who had a romantic partner and chose to
have their partner perform the exam for them were
especially likely to have performed a breast self-exam.
People who were both (1) exposed to information
concerning the health risks of saturated food and (2)
asked to make “If….then…” plans to avoid buying foods
high in saturated fat (e.g., “If I’m in the supermarket then
I will check the food labels of the product and not buy the
product if the label says the food contains more than
1.5% saturated fat”) reported less consumption of
saturated fat 1 month later. This effect was found relative
to people who did neither (1) nor (2) and who did either
but not both.
Adults asked to form specific plans about when they
would walk briskly 5 days/week using the form “When
I’m in situation X, then I will do Y” and who received
text message reminders of either their walking goal or
plan reported walking briskly for at least 30 minutes/day
more than participants in a control condition over the
next month.
Based on the theory that some forms of cognition are
represented in the motor system, researchers theorized
that the physical embodiment of health behaviors can
promote those behaviors among people who intend to
enact them. Among people who intended to floss, those
who held floss while watching a video about the
importance of flossing, instead of just watching the video
flossed more over the next week. People who jogged in
place while watching a video of a person exercising, as
compared to those who just watched the video, exercised
16 minutes/day more over the next week.
Women received information about the benefits of
exercise. Those in the “mental contrasting +
implementation intentions” group also wrote down “(1)
their most important current wish regarding physical
activity (e.g., biking to work); (2) the most positive
outcome of realizing their wish (e.g., getting into better
shape) and events and experiences they associated with

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables

What do I need
to do to

Stadler et al.,
2010

Specific

Health

Active
reflection
exercise, on
goals

EskreisWinkler et

General

Education

Increasing
commitment

8

this positive outcome; (3) the most critical obstacle (e.g.,
getting up too late) together with events and experiences
they associated with this obstacle; and (4) three
implementation intentions with the following questions:
(1) When and where does the obstacle occur, and what
can I do to overcome or circumvent the obstacle?; (2)
When and where is an opportunity to prevent the obstacle
from occurring, and what can I do to prevent it from
occurring?; and (3) When and where is a good
opportunity for me to act on my wish, and what would
this action be?”. Participants in the latter group were
twice as physically active as participants in the former
group (1 hour more per week) over the course of a 4month follow-up period.
Adults received information about the role fruit and
vegetables play in a healthy diet. Those in the “mentalcontrasting + implementation intentions” group also were
asked to write down “(a) their most important wish
regarding their diet that should be both challenging and
feasible (e.g., ‘eating more fruits and vegetables’); (b) the
most positive outcome of realizing their wish (e.g.,
‘greater wellbeing’) and events and experiences they
associated with this positive outcome; (c) the most
critical obstacle (e.g., ‘no fruits at work’) together with
events and experiences they associated with this obstacle;
and (d) formed three implementation intentions with the
following questions: (1) ‘When and where does the
obstacle occur, and what can I do to overcome or
circumvent the obstacle?’; (2) ‘When and where is an
opportunity to prevent the obstacle from occurring, and
what can I do to prevent it from occurring?’; and (3)
‘When and where is a good opportunity for me to act in a
goal-directed way, and what would the goal-directed
action be?’ Both groups reported greater consumption of
fruit and vegetables through four months later but only
people in the mental-contrasting + implementation
intentions group showed sustained higher intake two
years later.
Students learned (1) the tents of deliberate (or “deep”)
practice—“(a) focus on weakness, (b) get feedback, (c)

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables
accomplish my
goals?

al., 2016

through
action:
Saying-isbelieving

What is
necessary for me
to accomplish
my goals?

Destin &
Oyserman,
2010

Specific

Education

What were my
goals?

Dal Cin et al.,
2006

Specific

Health

Is this goal my
own or imposed?

Bryan,
Yeager et al.
2016

Specific

Health

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information
Prompting
new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Increasing
commitment
through
action:
Saying-isbelieving

9

concentrate 100%, and (d) repeat until mastery”—, (2)
the importance of deliberate effort in academic success
and how this is often underestimated, and (3) how
frustration and confusion is a sign that “one is engaging
in optimal practice activities using stories from other
students and by writing a letter to another student
advocating deliberate practice. As compared to students
who received standard study advice, this raised term GPA
for both 5th, 6th, and 7th grade students and college
undergraduates with lower prior achievement.
Representing career success (e.g., earnings) as dependent
on education led predominantly low-income, African
American 7th graders to plan to work harder on
homework and to be more likely to complete an extracredit assignment that night (23% vs. 3%).
Sexually active undergraduates who watched a video
about the risks of unprotected sex—and who were given
a “friendship” bracelet and told to remember the dangers
of unprotected sex when they looked at it—were more
likely to use a condom over the next 5-7 weeks during
sex than those who just watched the safe sex video or an
unrelated video. The effect was greatest when people had
sex after drinking, a state in which people are especially
responsive to situational cues.
Adolescents read about journalism exposing the
deceptive and manipulative marketing practices of food
companies and their harmful effects on society, especially
to young children and the poor (e.g., formulating foods
based on research designed to make it more addictive) as
well as stories from older students describing their
outrage about food company practices and efforts to
“fight back against the companies by buying and eating
less processed food.” They then wrote essays explaining
why they were outraged and might fight back. As
compared to a traditional public health message
(conveying scientific information about how the body
processes food, recommendations for a balanced diet,
etc.), the “exposé” message, which connected with
adolescents’ goals around autonomy and social justice,

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 10

My ability or
potential

My behavior

Self-efficacy

Bandura &
Schunk, 1981

Specific

Education

Direct
labeling, of
goals

Sense of control

Langer &
Rodin, 1976;
Rodin &
Langer, 1977

General

Health

Schulz, 1976;
Schulz &
Hanusa, 1978

Specific but
symbolic

Health

Direct
labeling, of a
situation;
Prompting
new
meanings, by
altering the
situation
Prompting
new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Detweiler et
al., 1999; see
also Rothman
et al., 1993

Specific

Health

Representation
of potential
behaviors

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

led students to choose fewer unhealthy foods in a snack
form in their homerooms a day later, representing less
carbohydrates and sugar.
7-10-year-old children behind and with little interest in
math were asked to complete instructional items with a
proximal goal (6 pages/session). As compared to students
assigned a distal goal (42 pages over 7 sessions) or no
specific goal (“as many pages…as possible”), the
proximal goal intervention increased students’ selfefficacy in math and learning.
Nursing-home residents were told of their many
responsibilities and choices and given a plant and told it
was their responsibility to take care of it. As compared to
a control-condition floor, this increased (at 3-weeks)
residents’ self-reported happiness, activity level, and
nurses’ judgment of improvement and (at 18-months)
nurses’ rating of activity level, doctors’ rating of health,
and reduced the mortality rate from 30% to 15%.
Retirement-home residents were given the opportunity to
control or to predict when a college student visitor would
come visit them over a 2-month period, or received the
same number and length of visits but without this
predictability, or no visits. At 2-months, residents in the
former conditions reported being happier and having
more “zest for life” and were rated as being healthier and
showed a smaller increase in the use of medications.
Then the visits ended. At 42-months, residents in the
former conditions were rated as having less “zest for
live” and as less healthy and had a mortality rate of 20%
as compared to 0% in the random-visit and no-visit
conditions.
Based on prospect theory, which suggests that people are
risk-averse in the context of gains, the authors theorized
that emphasizing “gains” rather than “losses” would
promote prevention behaviors like sunscreen use. Beach
goers were randomized to receive a brochure that
highlighted the benefits of using sunscreen (e.g., “Protect
yourself from the sun and you will help yourself stay
healthy”) or the potential losses of not using sunscreen
(e.g., “Expose yourself to the sun and you will risk

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 11

Feedback on
ongoing behavior

GarciaRetamero &
Cokely, 2011

Specific

Health

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

Graham et al.,
2011

Specific

Environmen
t

Zohar, 2002;

Specific

Work

Prompting
new
meanings, by
asking
leading
questions;
Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information
Prompting

becoming sick”). Whereas 71% of those in the gainframe condition redeemed a coupon to obtain a free
sample of sunscreen, only 53% of those in the loss-frame
condition did so. Additionally, those who did not intend
to use sunscreen reported greater intentions to do so in
the gain-frame than loss-frame condition.
Sexually active undergraduates read a brochure about
sexually transmitted diseases. Following prospect theory,
the authors hypothesized that (1) emphasizing gains
rather than losses in describing a prevention behavior
(condom use; e.g., “using condoms reduce[s] the chance
of…contracting STDs” versus “not using condoms
increase[s] the chance of…contracting a STD”) would
promote compliance but (2) that emphasizing losses
rather than gains in describing a detection behavior
(screening; e.g., “not conducting screening reduce[s] the
chance of receiving effective treatment” versus
“screening increase[s] the chance of receiving an
effective treatment”) would promote compliance. This
was the case. Whereas ~65% of participants reported
using condoms in every sexual encounter in the next six
weeks in the gain-frame condition, only ~35% in the lossframe condition did. For reports of making a screening
appointment with a doctor, these numbers reversed.
However, when the brochure included graphics depicting
risk information, compliance rates were high overall and
gain/loss framing did not matter.
People who reported how much they drove online every
two days for two weeks reported driving less within this
period and, after this period ended, less over the
subsequent two weeks. In addition, people who received
online feedback information about how much money (on
gasoline and maintenance) and pollution they had saved
by reducing their driving drove even less.

Providing supervisors in a regional maintenance center

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 12
see also
Zohar &
Polachek,
2014

Nature of
psychological
qualities or
states

Arousal

Category B: Selves (In General)
Education
Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

Jamieson et
al., 2010; see
also
Brady et al.,
under review;
Johns et al.,
2008
Crum et al.,
2013

Specific

General

Health and
well-being

Implicit theories
of willpower

Job et al., in
prep; see also
Haimovitz et
al., under
review

General

Selfregulation

Implicit theories
of intelligence

Aronson et al.,
2002;
Blackwell et
al., 2007;
Good et al.,

General

Education

Stress

Potential for
psychological
qualities or
states to
change/grow

new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information
Increasing
commitment
through
action:
Saying-isbelieving

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new

focused on heavy-duty equipment weekly feedback on
the cumulative frequency of subordinates’ reports of
safety-related conversations with supervisors over 8
weeks, as well as communications of the priority put on
safety by superiors, increased the frequency of safetyrelated conversations reported by subordinates and
improved workplace safety, including frequency of ear
plug use from 25% to 73%, up to 5 months after the
intervention ended as compared to a randomized control
group. In addition, whereas the microaccident rate (minor
injuries that occurred due to unsafe behavior during work
hours) increased in the control group over a three-month
assessment period, it declined in the treatment group.
Telling people preparing for the GRE that arousal
“doesn’t hurt…and can actually help performance”
improved scores on the math section of the GRE taken up
to 3 months later.

Employees of a major financial services company who
learned that stress can promote functioning and
performance reported reduced symptoms of anxiety
(headaches, insomnia) and greater improvement in “hard”
and “soft” work skills (e.g., efficiency, communication)
several days later.
College students learned that how you think about
willpower—as dependent on a limited resource or not—
matters, and that you can choose how to think about it,
and wrote a letter of advice to a person who struggles
with willpower. Among students who faced high
demands on self-control this improved self-reported
academic regulation a month later and raised end-of-term
grades.
Diverse exercises to encourage students to view
intelligence as malleable—as a quality that can grow with
effort, effective strategies, and help from others rather
than as a quality that is fixed—can raise achievement and
reduce course failures especially among initially low-

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 13

Qualities of
other
individuals

Implicit theories
of groups

2003;
Paunesku et
al., 2015;
Yeager,
Romero et al.,
2016; see also
Lin-Siegler et
al., 2016
Halperin et al.,
2011

Implicit theories
of weight

information;
Increasing
commitment
through
action:
Saying-isbelieving
General

Intergroup
relations

Burnette &
Finkel, 2012

Specific

Health

Implicit theories
of persons

Yeager et al.,
2013

General

Education
and health

Can other
people learn
and grow?

Rosenthal &
Jacobson,
1968; see also
Raudenbush,
1984

Specific

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information
Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

Increasing
commitment
through
action:
Saying-isbelieving
Category C: Other People
Education
Direct
labeling, of
other people

performing students. The exercises include college
students advocating this idea to a struggling middle
school student (Aronson et al., 2002); middle school
students who received mentorship focused on growthmindset (Good et al., 2003); a 6-session workshop for
middle school students (Blackwell et al., 2007); and
online modules for high school students (Paunesku et al.,
2015; Yeager, Romero et al., 2016).
Encouraging Israeli Jews and Palestinians to view
aggressive groups in general as capable of change led to
more positive intergroup attitudes and increased
willingness to compromise for peace.

People trying to lose weight were (1) led to view weight
as changeable with effort (implicit-theories treatment);
(2) received high quality information about scientifically
validated means to lose weight (e.g., reduced pace of
eating, mechanisms linking exercise to weight loss)
(knowledge treatment); or (3) assigned to a control
condition. Over a 12-week assessment period, both
treatments prevented weight gain observed in the control
condition. Additionally, whereas people in the knowledge
treatment and control conditions gained more weight
when they experienced more severe dieting setbacks
(e.g., overeating at a party), those in the implicit-theories
treatment lost more weight when they experienced
greater setbacks.
[see Table S3]

Telling elementary-school teachers that a test
administered at the beginning of the school year has
identified certain children as “growth spurters” led to
significantly greater intellectual growth in children, as
measured by improved intelligence-quotient scores over

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 14

Qualities of
other groups

What are the
experiences of
people in other
groups like?
How is it like
mine? How do
we relate?

Aronson et al.,
2016; see also
Hodson et al.,
2015

Specific

Intergroup
relationships

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

Broockman &
Kalla, 2016

Specific

Intergroup
relationships

Prompting
new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Cameron et al.,
2006

Specific

Intergroup
relationships

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

the school year. The greatest effects were observed for
children in first and second grades, and arise most when
the teacher expectancies are established at the outset of
the school year (Raudenbush, 1984)
In samples of (1) predominantly White second- and thirdgrade children in the United States and (2) ethnically
diverse 8-9 year-old Italian children, those who read 5-6
weekly storybooks including immigrant protagonists
(Somali or African and Chinese) and relevant cultural
information (e.g., religious holidays, food) reported
greater interest in interacting with immigrant children 2-3
weeks after the intervention ended with the greatest
effects among younger children (2nd-graders and 8 yearolds). The younger children in the US sample, also
reported less anxiety about interacting with immigrant
children up to 9-10 weeks later; the Italian sample,
however, showed the opposite pattern for anxiety.
Having a 10-minute face-to-face conversation with a
door-to-door canvasser about transgender rights,
including reflecting on their own experiences being
judged negatively for being different and how this might
offer a window into the experiences of transgender
people, reduced transphobia over 3 months and increased
support for a nondiscrimination law even after exposure
to counterarguments.
White 5-11 year-old children in England were read three
stories over two sessions, which represented close
friendships between ingroup members and refugees. The
stories emphasized the individual characteristics of
refugees (decategorization intervention), the common
ingroup identity of refugees as a member of the school
community (common ingroup identity intervention) or
both the common ingroup identity and the unique
subgroup identity of refugees (dual identity intervention).
One to two weeks later, children in all three intervention
conditions, as compared to a no-treatment control
condition, reported a greater sense of connection to
refugees and more positive attitudes toward refugees,
with the dual identity intervention the most effective.
However, there was no effect on children’s interest in

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 15

Guerra et al.,
2013

Specific

Intergroup
relationships

Prompting
new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Liebkind &
McAlister,
1999

Specific

Intergroup
relationships

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

Shook &
Fazio, 2008

Specific

Intergroup
relationships

Stathi et al.,
2014

Specific

Intergroup
relationships

Prompting
new
meanings, by
altering the
situation
Prompting
new
meanings, by
asking
leading
questions

interacting with refugees.
9-11 year-old European and African Portuguese children
worked together on a school-related activity in 45-minute
weekly sessions for a month that was identified and
functioned as either the “Portuguese team”
(recategorization condition) or the “Portuguese team with
Portuguese and African origin students” (dual identity
condition). One month after the last interaction, African
Portuguese children in the recategorization condition
exhibited less bias against European Portuguese children
as compared to both the dual identity condition and a notreatment control condition in which students did not
interact. European Portuguese children did not differ
significantly by condition, but if anything the dual
identity condition was more effective for them.
Finish middle schools were randomized to a treatment in
which students read stories of close friendships between
prototypical Finnish students and immigrant students and
how this improved Finnish students’ intergroup attitudes;
heard support from university students for positive
intergroup attitudes; and took part in brief discussion
groups about intergroup relations. This treatment
prevented a decline in students’ “tolerance” of immigrant
students observed in control-condition schools 2-3 weeks
later.
White first-year college students randomly assigned an
African American (versus White) roommate reported less
satisfaction with their roommate relationship but showed
reductions in automatic racial prejudice and intergroup
anxiety over the first academic term of college.
White 7-9 year-old children in England imagined
interacting with a different Asian child once a week for
three weeks in routine settings (park, birthday party,
beach). In each session, children received a picture of the
Asian child and were prompted to tell a story “about a
day that you might have with a new friend.” One week
later, as compared to children in a no-treatment control
condition, those who in the imagined contact condition
reported being more similar to Asian children, more
positive attitudes toward Asian children, and more

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 16

How others
view the self

Am I loved and
valued?

Marigold et
al., 2007, 2010

Specific but
symbolic

Close
relationships

Prompting
new
meanings, by
asking
leading
questions

Am I viewed as
a person with
potential?

Yeager,
PurdieVaughns et al.,
2014,
Experiments 1
and 2

Specific

Education

Prompting
new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Yeager,
PurdieVaughns et al.,
2014,
Experiment 3;
see also
Yeager,
Walton, et al.,
2016,
Experiment 3
Carrell et al.,
2010; Dee,
2004; Huang,
2009

General

Education

Increasing
commitment
through
action:
Saying-isbelieving

Specific

Education

Prompting
new
meanings, by
altering the

Am I viewed
through the lens
of a negative
stereotype?

interest in interacting with Asian children.
People were asked to recall a recent compliment from
their romantic partner and to “Explain why your partner
admired you. Describe what it meant to you and its
significance for your relationship.” As compared to
multiple control conditions, this led people with low selfesteem to feel more secure in the relationship and to
value the relationship more immediately and over the
next 2-3 weeks, to behave more positively toward their
partner as reported by the partner, to see their partner as
behaving more positively toward them, and to continue to
feel more secure in and valuing of the relationship.
Black and White 7th grade students turned in an essay, on
which their teacher provided critical feedback. When a
paper clipped note was appended to the marked-up essay
reading, “I’m giving you these comments because I have
high standards and I know that you can meet them,” this
increased the percentage of White students who chose to
revise their essay from 64% to 82%, and increased the
percentage of Black students from 27% to 64%. In
another study were a revision was required, this note
increased the quality of students’ revisions. The greatest
effects were observed for Black students who were
mistrustful of school and, among these students, halted a
2-year decline in school trust over the rest of the school
year.
High school students read stories from other students
about receiving critical feedback, which emphasized
understanding criticism as helping students achieve a
higher level and given with this purpose, and practiced
these attributions by interpreting critical feedback on
another student’s essay. This raised end-of-term core
academic grades for Black students, reducing the
achievement gap with White students by 39%, and
reduced the percentage of classes in which Black students
performed at a D or lower level from 43% to 23%.
Performing in real-world contexts with in-group teachers
and evaluators can improve performance, often especially
for women and minorities, including women’s
performance in college math and science classes with a

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 17
situation

Danaher &
Crandall, 2008

Specific

Education

Good et al.,
2008

Specific

Education

[multiple]

Specific

Education

Prompting
new
meanings, by
altering the
situation
Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information
Prompting
new
meanings, by
altering the
situation, by
providing
new
information,
or by asking
leading
questions

female professor (Carrell et al., 2010); Black and White
elementary school students’ school achievement with a
same-race teacher (Dee, 2004); and Black adults’
performance on a vocabulary quiz administered by a
Black interviewer (Huang, 2009)
High school students took the AP Calculus test with
standard demographic questions (race, gender) moved to
the end instead of immediately before the test. This raised
girls’ scores, and increased the percentage of girls who
received AP credit from 32% to 38%.
Women enrolled in demanding college calculus sequence
took a practice final exam. When this exam was
described as evaluative of calculus ability but as yielding
“no gender differences,” as compared to when it was
simply described as evaluative of ability, women and
especially White women performed significantly better.
Diverse experiments show ways to reduce stereotype
threat in laboratory settings, and to raise test performance
for students who face negative intellectual stereotypes
such as women in math and science and negatively
stereotyped racial minority students on intellectual tasks
in general. These include:
• Reflecting on individual aspects of the self (Ambady et
al., 2004; Gresky et al., 2005) or completing a valueaffirmation exercise (Martens et al., 2006)
• Learning about positive in-group role models (Marx &
Goff, 2005; Marx & Roman, 2002; McIntyre et al.,
2003)
• Being treated by a man in a way that signals that he
thinks of a woman as a partner working together on the
test (Aguilar et al., under review)
• Reflecting on characteristics shared between men and
women (Rosenthal & Crisp, 2006)
• Learning about stereotype threat and, thus, that negative
thoughts and feelings may arise from this threat not
imply a risk of poor performance (Johns et al., 2005)
Learning effective emotion reappraisal strategies, such as
to view anxiety as a potential source of strong
performance not a hindrance, or to replace feelings of

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 18

Personal
Experiences
and Contexts

Of experiences
that lack
meaning

Grant, 2008

Harackiewicz
et al., 2012

Harackiewicz
et al., 2016

Hulleman &
Harackiewcz,
2009

Jang, 2008

worry with thoughts about a neutral subject (Johns et al.,
2008; Logel et al., 2009)
Category D: Past, Ongoing, or Future Experiences
Specific
Work
Prompting
Providing employees reasons why their work was of
new
value to others improved work performance. University
meanings, by fundraisers who read stories about how their job could
providing
make a difference in the lives of scholarship recipients
new
raised more money over the next week. Lifeguards who
information
read stories about lifeguards saving swimmers
volunteered to work more hours and were rated by
supervisors as more helpful of guests over the following
month. These effects were observed above and beyond
stories that emphasized the personal benefits of the job
(e.g., skills and knowledge acquired).
Specific
Education
Prompting
Mailing brochures to parents and creating a website
new
highlighting the usefulness of math and science courses
meanings, by and how to talk with adolescents about this increased
providing
students’ enrollment in math and science courses in the
new
last two years of high school.
information
Specific
Education
Prompting
Asking students in an introduction biology course to
new
reflect on why “specific [course content] is relevant to
meanings, by your life or useful to you” raised the course grades of
asking
first-generation and racial-ethnic minority college
leading
students, reducing the achievement gap with advantaged
questions;
students by 61%. Simultaneously, a value-affirmation
Active
intervention was not effective.
reflection
exercise,
valueaffirmation
Specific
Education
Prompting
Asking 9th-grade science students who expected to
new
perform poorly how the course material might be useful
meanings, by to them or a friend or relative 3-5 times over the course of
asking
the term raised end-of-quarter interest and grades in
leading
science for students who expected to perform poorly in
questions
the course.
Specific
Education
Prompting
Teaching students training to be teachers that an
new
introductory statistics lesson helps people become more
meanings, by effective teachers increased engagement and learning in

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 19

Of how
experiences
affect the self

Of aversive
experiences

providing
new
information
Prompting
new
meanings, by
altering the
situation
Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information
Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

Benedetti et
al., 2003

Specific

Health

Crum &
Langer, 2007

Specific

Health

Kaptchuk et
al., 2010

Specific

Health

Kross et al.,
2014; see also
Kross &
Ayduk, 2011;
Kross et al.,
2005; Park et
al., 2015

Specific

Well-being

Active
reflection
exercise, on
negative
experiences

Pennebaker et
al., 1988; see
also
Pennebaker,
1997; Kirk et
al., 2011
Redelmeier et
al., 2003

Specific

Health and
well-being

Active
reflection
exercise, on
negative
experiences

Specific

Health

Prompting
new
meanings, by

the lesson.

Making the injection of drugs visible rather than invisible
to patients increased their effectiveness, including greater
reductions in pain from morphine, greater reductions in
anxiety from diazepam, and greater reductions in heart
rate from propranolol.
Telling hotel room attendants that cleaning hotel rooms
meets the Surgeon General’s recommendations for an
active lifestyle reduced attendants’ weight, systolic blood
pressure, and percent body fat and increased their job
satisfaction four weeks later.
Telling patients with irritable bowel syndrome that a pill
they are to take twice daily contains no medication (i.e.,
is a placebo) but that the placebo effect is powerful and
can lead the body to respond effectively led, as compared
to a no-pill condition, to greater improvement, and
reduced symptoms at three weeks. At this point, 59% of
treated patients, as compared to 35% of control patients,
reported adequate relief.
Asking people to write about a negative event from a
third-person perspective as if they were a fly on the wall
observing it, using a third- and specifically to describe
why the event occurred the way it did (e.g., “Greg failed
a test”), as compared to writing about the event from a
first-person perspective (e.g., “I failed a test”), made
people more likely to interpret the event in a nonpejorative way, to stop ruminating on it, and to
experience less psychological distress.
Asking people to describe their “deepest thoughts and
feelings” about “the most traumatic and upsetting
experiences of your entire life” for 20 minutes/day on
four consecutive days improved measures of immune
system function and reduced doctor visits and subject
distress over six weeks.
Based on the theory that people’s evaluations of
experiences are disproportionately shaped by the end of
experiences, modifying a colonoscopy by leaving the tip

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 20
altering the
situation

Of setbacks

Boese et al.,
2013; Hall et
al., 2004,
2006, 2007;
Haynes et al.,
2006; Menec
et al., 1994;
Perry &
Penner, 1990;
Perry et al.,
2010; Ruthig
et al., 2004

General

Education

Prompting,
by providing
new
information;
Direct
labeling, of
attributions;
Increasing
commitment
through
action:
Saying-isbelieving

Weinberg et
al., 2015

General

Health

Prompting,
by providing
new
information

of the colonoscope in patients’ rectums for up to an
additional three minutes without moving it reduced
patients’ recalled pain and, at a median of 5.3 years
follow-up, increased the likelihood patients agreed to
have another colonoscopy if needed by 41%, controlling
for medical circumstances.
Across many studies, college students were exposed to
information that failures arise from a lack of effort and
inappropriate strategies and that increasing effort and
changing strategies can improve outcomes. This
represents effort and strategies as under a person’s
control. Often this information is provided in videotaped
interviews of other students and/or of professors telling
stories from their own lives. Often it includes an explicit
discussion of attribution theory and why attributions
matter, and a direct exhortation to students to attribute
setbacks to a lack of effort (and success to ability and
effort) (e.g., Perry & Penner, 1990; Perry et al., 2010).
Some forms also incorporate writing exercises to help
students articulate the idea for themselves and relate them
to their own lives (e.g., Boese et al., 2013; Hall et al.,
2004, 2007; Haynes et al., 2006) or small-group
discussions (Boese et al., 2013; Perry et al., 2010; Ruthig,
et al., 2004). These “attributional retraining”
interventions can improve learning and performance,
especially for students who are struggling and who
otherwise tend to attribute poor performance to limited
ability (Boese et al., 2013; Menec et al., 1994; Perry &
Penner, 1990; Perry et al., 2010) or who are overly
optimistic (Haynes et al., 2006; Ruthig et al., 2004), with
improvements in GPA that can last at least a full
academic year (Hall et al., 2004; Perry et al., 2010;
Ruthig et al., 2004).
Older adults (80+) in a rehabilitation center who received
information encouraging “personally controllable
attributions for loss of function (e.g., effort invested in
exercise protocols) and discouraging maladaptive
attributions (e.g., ‘old age’)” were more motivated to
exercise, reported higher life satisfaction, and exhibited
greater function

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 21
Of challenging
life transitions

Destin &
Oyserman,
2009

Specific

Education

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information
Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

Stephens et al.,
2014

General

Education

Good et al.,
2003

General

Education

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

Wilson &
Linville, 1982,
1985

General

Education

Walton &
Cohen, 2011

General

Education,
health, and
well-being

Prompting,
by providing
new
information;
Increasing
commitment
through
action:
Saying-isbelieving
Increasing
commitment
through

Representing college as accessible by providing
information about need-based financial aid to low-income
African American and Latino 7th-grade students led
students to be more likely to plan to do their homework
that night.
A panel discussion that provided first-generation college
students information about how students’ social-class
backgrounds affect their experiences in college, including
unique challenges faced by first-generation students and
how students overcome these with time, as compared to a
panel discussion that did not link college experiences to
students’ social-class background, reduced the socialclass achievement gap in first-year GPA among students
at a selective college by 63%.
7th grade students in a rural, low-income, and
predominantly Hispanic and Black population were
matched with a college student mentor with whom they
had two in-person 90-minute meetings plus email
exchanges. In a treatment condition, the mentor shared
that many students experience difficulties in the transition
to junior high school but bounce back as they get used to
their new environment (e.g., changing classes, more
difficult subjects, many teachers not one). As compared
to a randomized control condition, girls (but not boys)
earned higher math scores on a state test while both girls
and boys earned higher reading scores.
First-year undergraduates worried about their academic
performance viewed videos of upper-year students
describing difficulties they experienced in their first year
and how these improved with time. In some cases,
students also wrote essays to high school students
describing why academic difficulties in the transition to
college are normal and temporary. This reduced
sophomore-year dropout rates (in one trial, from 25% to
5%) and raised GPA.
[see Table S3]

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 22

Social
Experiences

Interpersonal
relationships
and conflicts

action:
Saying-isbelieving
Increasing
commitment
through
action:
Saying-isbelieving
Prompting
new
meanings, by
asking
leading
questions

Yeager,
Walton, et al.,
2016,
Experiment 3

General

Education

Bugental et al.,
2002;
Bugental et al.,
2010, 2012

Specific

Parenting

Finkel et al.,
2013

Specific

Close
relationships

Active
reflection
exercise, on a
conflict

Hudley &
Graham, 1993

Specific

Peer
relationships

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

Representing college as a place where people can
maintain an interdependent self-concept—maintain
interdependent ties with people back home and join new
interdependent communities on campus—raised first-year
GPA for negatively stereotyped racial-minority students
and first-generation college students.
Over an average of 17 home visits during the baby’s first
year, paraprofessionals asked mothers demographically at
risk of committing child abuse to identify challenges in
parenting (e.g., “My baby won’t stop crying”) and kept
asking why they were having this challenge until the
mother gave a reason that did not blame themselves or
their baby. They then problem-solved with the mother to
address this problem. As compared to both visits without
this component and a no-visit condition, this reduced the
rate of child abuse during the first year from 23% to 4%,
with the greatest effect among high-risk infants (58% vs.
10%). It also improved children’s health and reduced
mothers’ depression at the child’s first birthday, and
reduced aggression and stress markers in children and
improved children’s cognitive functioning through the
age of three.
Asking married couples in three 7-minute writing
exercises over a year to consider how “a neutral third
party who wants the best for all” would think about a
conflict in their marriage and how they could take this
perspective in future conflict situations halted the typical
decline in marital satisfaction over the year.
African American 3rd through 5th grade boys in lowincome schools identified by teacher ratings and peer
nominations as aggressive completed a 12-lesson
intervention using role-playing, discussion of personal
experiences, and other experiences to encourage them (1)
to accurately understand cues provided by others in social
interactions, (2) to attribute ambiguous negative social
encounters to nonhostile intentions, and (3) to respond
appropriately. As compared to children in two control

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 23

Intergroup
relationships

LaBrie et al.,
2016; see also
Turrisi et al.,
2001, 2010

Specific

Health

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information;
Active
reflection, on

Carnes et al.,
2015

General

Intergroup
relationships

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

Devine et al.,
2012; see also
Forscher et al.,
under review

General

Intergroup
relationships

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

conditions, this intervention reduced perceptions of
hostility in hypothetical peer encounters and teacher
ratings of aggression two weeks after the intervention.
Parents of new college students learned in a 60-minute
in-person session during the summer before college
began about college drinking, including how they as a
group tend to “overestimate how accepting other parents
are of drinking,” “underestimate the extent to which other
parents speak to their children about alcohol,” and
“underestimate how much their child would drink in
college,” as well as research showing parents’ ongoing
influence on students’ drinking in college and strategies
to speak with their child about college drinking
effectively, reduced students’ reports of the extent to
which they drank in the first month of college by 30% as
compared to a randomized control group. Using a nonrandomized comparison group, Turrisi et al. (2001, 2010)
found similar reductions in first-year college student
drinking from a 35-page handbook distributed to parents.
An implicit-bias reduction program modeled on Devine
et al. (2012) but focused on gender bias was randomized
to math, science, and engineering departments. Over 3
days and 3 months, the intervention did not reduce bias
among faculty, but it did raise awareness of and
motivation to remedy bias, improved faculty members’
sense of fit and respect in the department, and, when at
least a quarter of department faculty attended the
program, increased self-reported actions to promote
gender equity. In another study this program increased
faculty hiring of women in math, science, and
engineering departments (Forscher, 2016)
Non-African American undergraduates learned about
implicit bias, its link to discrimination, and strategies to
reduce bias in daily life (e.g., recognizing and replacing
stereotypic responses, imagining counterstereotypical
outgroup members. This led to a decline in implicit
prejudice that lasted through two months and an increase
in concern about discrimination. A replication study
(Forscher et al., 2012) found no reduction in implicit
prejudice over two weeks but sustained increases in

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 24
concern about prejudice over this period. A subsample
recruited two years later showed that treated participants
were more likely to object in an online forum to an essay
endorsing racial stereotyping (79% vs. 48%).

The NonSocial World

To inform
meaning

Mallett &
Wilson, 2010

General

Intergroup
relationships

Increasing
commitment
through
action:
Saying-isbelieving

Au et al., 2008

Specific

Health

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

Gripshover &
Markman,
2013

Specific

Health

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

Undergraduates watched a video depicting a friendship
between a Black and a White student. Both friends
mentioned that they did not expect to become friends or
have much in common. As compared to students who just
watched the video, students who then wrote about “a time
when you didn’t think you could become friends with a
person, but were wrong for some reason” had a better
interracial interaction immediately and initiated more
interracial friendships in the next two weeks.
Teaching 4th-grade children in Hong Kong following the
2003 SARS epidemic the biological theory of germs,
challenging the traditional folk theory that being cold
causes colds, increased the percentage who washed their
hands before folding napkins for a class party from 14%
to 41%. The effects were observed above and beyond a
teacher-designed program based on publicly available
resources, which emphasized the symptoms of flus, do’s
and don’ts, etc.
Teaching preschool-aged children a theory of nutrition—
that variety is important because different foods contain
different nutrients, that nutrients are there even if you
can’t see them, and that foods within a category share
similar nutrients—led children to take more vegetables at
snack time.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 25
Table S2. Wise interventions approach #2: Interventions that address the need for self-integrity.
Threat
Addressed
Social identity
threat: Will I be
seen or treated
negatively
because of my
group identity?

Reference

Specificity of
Intervention

Cohen et al.,
2006, 2009; see
also Borman et
al., 2015; Bowen
et al., 2013;
Cook et al.,
2012; Dee,
2015; Goyer,
Garcia et al.,
under review;
Hanselman et
al., 2014;
Sherman et al.,
2013

General

Brady et al.,
2016;
Harackiewcz et
al., 2014, 2015;
Miyake et al.,
2010; Tibbetts et
al., 2016

General

Hall et al., 2014

General

Silverman &

General

Content
Change
Summary
Area
Strategy
Strategy A. Remedy threats to self-integrity
Education
Active reflection Completing several 15-20 minute writing exercises about
exercise, valueimportant values over the school year increased African
affirmation
American middle students’ course grades, reducing the racial
achievement gap by 40% (Cohen et al., 2006), and improving
grades over the next two years, especially for initially lowperforming students (Cohen et al., 2009; see also Cook et al.,
2012). Similar benefits have been found for Latino students
(Sherman et al., 2013). Moreover, six years after the original
intervention, African American students who had received the
affirmation were more likely to enroll in college (92% versus
78%; Goyer, Garcia et al., in prep). A full-district
administration found reductions in the Black-White
achievement gap (Borman et al., 2015); in one case especially
in schools in which African American students were less well
represented and where the achievement gap was highest,
where identity threat may be highest (Hanselman et al., 2014;
but see also Dee, 2015)
Education
Active reflection In college samples, value-affirmation interventions have
exercise, valueraised women’s grades in physics, eliminating gender
affirmation
differences (Miyake et al., 2010); raised grades in biology
among first-generation college student, reducing the socialclass achievement gap by 50%, as well as raising term GPA,
and increasing the percentage of first-generation students who
enrolled in the second semester of the course from 66% to
86% (Harackiewicz et al., 2014; but see Harackiewicz et al.,
2015) and caused improvements in first-generation students’
college GPA over the next three years (Tibbetts et al., 2016);
and raised GPA among Latino American students over two
years, reducing the ethnic achievement gap by 90% (Brady et
al., 2016).
Poverty
Active reflection Clients at a soup kitchen scored higher on IQ and cognitiveexercise, valuecontrol tasks and were more likely to accept information
affirmation
about public benefit programs if they first described a
personal success.
Education
Active reflection Blind students in a compensatory skill-training program made

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 26
Cohen, 2014

Stressful event:
Will this go
badly?
Self-regulation:
Can I regulate
my behavior
effectively to
accomplish
important
personal goals?
Health risk
information: Am
I doing
something that is
harming my
health?

exercise, valueaffirmation

Walton, Logel et
al., 2015

General

Education

Increasing
commitment
through action:
Saying-isbelieving
Active reflection
exercise, valueaffirmation
Active reflection
exercise, valueaffirmation

Sherman,
Bunyan, et al.,
2009
Logel & Cohen,
2012

General

Stress and health

General

Self-regulation
and health

Armitage et al.,
2011

General

Health

Active reflection
exercise, valueaffirmation and
implementation
of valueaffirmation

Harris et al.,
2007

General

Health

Active reflection
exercise, valueaffirmation

Harris et al.,
2014

General

Health

Active reflection
exercise, valueaffirmation;
Active reflection
exercise, on
goals

more progress in four courses (Braille, computers, home
management, and travel) over a month if they had completed
a value-affirmation.
Encouraging women enrolled in male-dominated engineering
majors to “keep balanced” by incorporating personal values
in their daily lives and activities (“affirmation-training”)
raised grades and eliminated gender differences in first-year
engineering performance.
Completing two value-affirmation exercises in the weeks
preceding a major test reduced levels of stress hormones as
the test approached.
Completing a value-affirmation exercise led overweight
women to lose more two-and-a-half months later, and show
evidence of enhanced self-regulation.

Adults (1) who described times they had behaved kindly
toward others or (2) who reflected on how to affirm using ifthen propositions (“If I feel threatened or anxious, then I
will…think about the things I value about myself…think
about things that are important to me…”) were more
accepting of information about the health risks of drinking
and, a month later, reported drinking less.
Smokers who first reflected on their desirable characteristics
were more accepting of information about the health risks of
smoking. They also reported greater motivation to reduce
consumption 1-week later but no change in reported
consumption.
Adults who both reflected on personal values before reading
information about the benefits of eating fruits and vegetables
and who made a plan about how to do so using an
“If…then…” template reported eating more fruit and
vegetables 7 days later; there was no benefit for either
intervention on its own. At a 3-month follow-up, both the
affirmation intervention and the implementation-intention
intervention produced independent (non-interacting) increases
in reported fruit and vegetable consumption, though the later
was marginally significant.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 27
Jessop et al.,
2014

General

Layous et al.,
2016

General

Stinson et al.,
2011

General

Thomaes et al.,
2012

General

Thomaes et al.,
2009

General

Did I work hard
at this because
it’s important to
me?

Axsom &
Cooper, 1985

Specific

Am I advocating
for something I
don’t (yet) do
myself?

Rokeach, 1971

General

Negative
relationships:
Can I get along
with important
people in my
environment?

Health

Active reflection
exercise, valueaffirmation;
Active reflection
exercise, on
goals

Adults who described times they had behaved kindly toward
others before receiving information about the health risks of a
lack of exercise reported exercising more over the next week;
however, if people also completed an implementation
intention exercise this benefit was eliminated. In a second
study focused on people who did not exercise much found no
effect of affirmation in the absence of the implementationintention exercise, and a negative effect (reduction in
exercise) in its presence.
Education
Active reflection Mostly first- and second-year college students completed a
exercise, valuevalue-affirmation or control exercise immediately before
affirmation
taking a challenging math test described as predictive of
future success. Among those who felt they did not belong in
college, the value-affirmation reversed a downward slope in
GPA through the subsequent semester.
Interpersonal
Active reflection College students who felt insecure in their personal
relationships
exercise, valuerelationships felt more secure in their relationships and
affirmation
showed more confident social behavior 2-4 weeks after a
value-affirmation, and this contributed to similar
improvements another 4 weeks later.
Prosocial
Active reflection Adolescents, especially those who were more antisocial at
behavior
exercise, valuebaseline, showed greater prosocial feelings and behavior over
affirmation
a 3-month period following a value-affirmation.
Aggression
Active reflection Narcissistic adolescents with low self-esteem who completed
exercise, valuea value-affirmation were less likely to be nominated by peers
affirmation
as aggressive in the subsequent week.
Strategy B. Leverage a potential threat of inconsistency
Health
Increasing
Overweight undergraduates were told that various perceptual
commitment
and cognitive tasks they would complete over four
through action:
experimental sessions would enhance “neuro-physiological
Effort
arousal” and help them lose weight. Those for whom the
justification
tasks required high effort (distinguishing similar limes,
reciting text as their voice echoes back) lost an average of 6
pounds a year later. By contrast, students for whom the tasks
were easy, short, and included breaks and those in a control
condition lost no weight.
Intergroup
Prompting new
Undergraduates in the 1960s were asked to rank their values
meanings, by
and typically ranked “freedom” over “equality.” Some were
providing new
told that this ranking meant that people valued freedom for
information;
themselves more than freedom for other people, and further

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 28
Increasing
commitment
through action:
Hypocrisy

Did I say I
would do it?

Son Hing et al.,
2002

Specific

Intergroup

Increasing
commitment
through action:
Hypocrisy

Stone et al.,
1994

Specific

Health

Increasing
commitment
through action:
Hypocrisy

Dholakia &
Morwitz (2002)

Specific

Business

Increasing
commitment
through action:
Commitment

Greenwald et al.
1987; see also
Nickerson &
Rogers, 2010;
Smith et al.,
2003
Gringart et al.,
2008

Specific

Civic behavior

Increasing
commitment
through action:
Commitment

Specific

Intergroup

Increasing
commitment
through action:

elaborated on this. This message led students to value
“equality” and equal rights more highly over the next 15-17
months, increased the percentage who chose to major in an
ethnic studies core 5 months later from 22% to 42%, and
increased the percentage who responded to a solicitation from
the NAACP over this period from 11% to 26%.
Undergraduates first advocated a nonprejudicial stance
toward Asians and then, in the hypocrisy condition, wrote
“about two situations in which you reacted more negatively to
an Asian person than you thought you should or treated an
Asian person in a prejudiced manner.” As compared to those
who did not complete the hypocrisy induction, people in the
hypocrisy condition with low implicit but high explicit
prejudice against Asians felt more guilt and discomfort and,
subsequently, advocated smaller cuts to the Asian Student
Association. There was no condition difference for people
low in implicit and explicit prejudice.
Sexually active undergraduates were led to feel hypocritical
about their own safe sex practice by (a) helping to create an
AIDS prevention program for high school students and (b)
reviewing circumstances in which they personally had failed
to use condoms. This led 83% of students to subsequently
purchase condoms. By contrast, just 33-50% of students who
did neither (a) nor (b) or either but not both purchased
condoms.
Customers of a financial services firm were randomized to
receive a telephone survey assessing satisfaction with the
company; 96% reported being satisfied. As compared to
customers not surveyed, this increased the percentage who
opened a new account over the next year from 13% to 51%,
and reduced unprofitability/customer from $13.80 to $1.20.
College undergraduates were called just before the 1984
Presidential election and asked if they knew where and when
to vote. Those who were also asked if they expected to vote
were more likely to vote (87% vs. 62%) (for non-replications,
see Nickerson & Rogers, 2010; Smith et al., 2003)
Australian hiring managers received letters emphasizing (1)
common stereotypes about older workers and empirically
based counter evidence and (2) information about hiring

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 29
Commitment

Does my
behavior
contradict an old
belief or
attitude?

Lewin, 1947

Specific

Civic behavior

Prompting new
meanings, by
altering the
situation
Increasing
commitment
through action:
Commitment
Increasing
commitment
through action:
Commitment

Moriatry, 1975

Specific

Crime

Shu et al., 2012

Specific

Civic behavior

Aronson &
Osherow, 1980

Specific

Education,
Intergroup
relationships

Increasing
commitment
through action:
Counterattitudinal
behavior

Brannon &
Walton, 2013

Specific but
symbolic

Intergroup
relationships

Increasing
commitment
through action:

discrimination against older workers, how this violates
national norms, and a booklet with names of hiring managers
who oppose age discrimination, and an invitation to add their
own name to this list to be distributed to the broader
community. As compared to hiring managers who received
only (1) or (2) or neither, those who received both reported
over the next few weeks expressed more positive views of
older workers, a greater preference for hiring older workers,
and being more likely to hire older workers.
[see Table S3]

Beach goers asked to watch another person’s belongings were
more likely to chase after an accomplice who attempted to
steal a radio (94% vs. 20%).
Policy owners received a car insurance form on which to
report the number of miles they had driven in the previous
year. Those for whom the signature line (“I promise that the
information I am providing is true”) was at the top rather than
the bottom disclosed having driven 10% more miles (26,098
vs. 23,671), increasing payments and promoting fairness.
Restructured newly desegregated 5th grade classrooms to
feature jigsaw groups, in which each child learns a portion of
an assignment, has to teach and learn from other students, and
then is tested on the whole. This procedure encourages
cooperation rather than competition, requires children to
behave in ways that are inconsistent with negative intergroup
attitudes, and meet’s classic conditions for successful
intergroup contact (sanctioned by authority, equal status,
intergroup cooperation, common goals) (Allport, 1954). The
procedure caused students to like each other more within and
across ethnic lines, raised students’ self-esteem, led White
and African American children (but not Latino children) to
like school more, and improved academic test performance
among African American and Latino children.
White and Asian undergraduates had a positive interaction
with a Mexican American student. When they (1) were led to
feel socially connected to this student, disposing them to

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 30
Counterattitudinal
behavior

share her interests; and (2) had the opportunity to freely work
with her to design a Mexican cultural product (a music video
for a Mexican band), giving them an opportunity to enact an
interest in Mexican culture, students showed reduced levels
of implicit prejudice against Latinos. This was mediated by
greater engagement in the Mexican cultural task. Also, an
average of 6-months later, they reported greater interest in
talking with Mexican American peers and more positive
attitudes toward Mexican immigrants.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 31
Table S3. Wise interventions approach #3: Interventions that address the need to belong.
Category

Subcategory

Social
recognition

Bolster
existing social
relationships

Encourage
prosocial
behaviors

Reflect on social
connections

Specificity of
Content
Change
Summary
Intervention
Area
Strategy
Strategy A. Satisfy or Remedy Threats to People’s Need to Belong
Motto &
Specific but
Health
Prompting new
Receiving a series of caring notes from a hospital
Bostrom,
symbolic
meanings, by
following a suicidal or depressive incident (e.g.,
2001; see also
altering the
“Dear___: It has been some time since you were
Carter et al.,
situation
at the hospital, and we hope things are going
2013
well for you. If you wish to drop us a note we
would be glad to hear from you.”) reduced
suicide rates over the next two years from 3.52%
to 1.80% (Motto & Bostrom, 2001). Another
trial found that such notes reduced psychiatric
readmissions among patients admitted following
a self-poisoning incident by a third over 5 years
(Carter et al., 2013)
Dunn et al.,
General
Well-being
Prompting new
Giving people on a college campus $5 or $20
2008
meanings, by
and asking them to spend it on other people
altering the
increased happiness at the end of the day.
situation
Otake et al.,
General
Well-being
Active
Undergraduates asked to reflect on their own
2007
reflection
kind behavior toward others every day for a
exercise, on a
week showed significant increases in happiness
positive aspect
over this period, while those in a no-treatment
of self
control group did not. Randomization was at the
class level.
Layous et al., General
Well-being; Peer
Prompting new
Encouraging 9 to 11 year-olds to perform three
2012
Relationships
meanings, by
kind acts (instead of to visit three places) per
altering the
week over 4 weeks increased well-being at the
situation
end of this period and showed a greater increase
in the number of peers who nominated them as
someone they would like to spend time with.
Lyubomirsky, General
Well-Being
Active
[see Table S1]
et al., 2011
reflection
exercise, on a
positive aspect
of self
Brummelman General
Well-being
Active
Asking adolescents several weeks before
et al., 2014
reflection
receiving final course grades to write for 15Reference

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 32
exercise, on a
positive aspect
of self

Allay social
norms that
contribute to
negative
behaviors

Value
contributions to a
group

Coch &
French, 1948

Specific

Work

Prompting new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Challenge
perceived norms
to expand the
scope of what
behavior is
acceptable

Halliwell &
Diedrichs,
2014

Specific

Health

Increasing
commitment
through action:
Saying-isbelieving

Schroeder &
Prentice,
1998; see also
DeJong et al.,
2006, 2009

Specific

Health

Prompting new
meanings, by
providing new
information

minutes about times when they had experienced
unconditional regard from peers (“who always
accept and value you, no matter how you behave
or how good you are at something”) reduced
feelings of shame among students who later
received poor grades.
Employees of a pajama factory who took part in
a group meeting discussing the need to revise the
product and endorsing this change showed more
rapid improvement in productivity, as compared
to workers who took part in a group meeting in
which they were told of the necessary changes
Adolescent girls took part in weekly 20-minute
small-group sessions for 4 weeks that described
the thin ideal for women, the costs of this,
writing a letter to a teenage girl struggling with
her body image to persuade her not to, critiquing
beauty ideals and myths (e.g., “Most models and
actresses are a healthy weight”) and role-playing
efforts to encourage a person (the proctor) to
resist severe dieting. As compared to girls in a
no-treatment control condition, those in the
treatment condition were less dissatisfied with
their bodies and less likely to internalize a thin
body ideal a week later. A month later, their
body satisfaction was more resilient to thin
ideals represented in advertisements in teen
magazines.
First-year undergraduates who took part in a
dorm discussion in which they learned how
students can be less comfortable with drinking
than they seem, as compared to students who
took part in a discussion focused on making
responsible decisions (“just say no”), reported
drinking less 4-6 months later, with the greatest
effects for students who were less comfortable
drinking than they perceived others to be and yet
feared negative evaluations from others. Thus
the intervention seemed to sever a perceived link
between drinking and social acceptance

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 33

Remedy
beliefs and
experiences
that
undermine
relationships,
belonging,
and have
downstream
effects

Strahan et al.,
2008

Specific

Health

Increasing
commitment
through action:
Saying-isbelieving

Encourage
beliefs that
people in
conflicts can
change

Yeager et al.,
2013; see also
Miu &
Yeager, 2015;
Yeager,
Johnson, et
al., 2014

General

Education and
health

Increasing
commitment
through action:
Saying-isbelieving

Remedy the
worry that,
“Maybe people
like me don’t
belong here.”

Walton &
Cohen, 2011;
see also
Brady et al.,
in prep B;

General

Education, health,
and well-being

Increasing
commitment
through action:
Saying-isbelieving

(Schroeder & Prentice, 1998). In an 18-site
randomized trial, students in institutions of
higher education randomized to a social-norms
marketing condition perceived less drinking on
campus and reported less alcohol consumption
(DeJong et al., 2006; but see DeJong et al.,
2009).
Adolescent girls took part in two 80-minute
sessions over two weeks to critique thin body
ideals, including the source of these norms in
popular media, how unrealistic they are, and how
they have changed over time, including creating
posters challenging sociocultural norms. As
compared to girls in a control condition, those in
the treatment condition were less likely a week
later to base their self-worth on their appearance,
reported being more satisfied with their bodies,
and reported less concern about others’
perceptions of their bodies.
Adolescents who learned in a 6-session
classroom workshop that people can change and,
thus, that bullies need not always be bullies and
victims need not always be victims, were less
aggressive and more prosocial following peer
ostracism one month later; three months later
victims of peer bullying were more likely to be
nominated by teachers as showing reduced
conduct problems and showed fewer depressive
symptoms. Another trial found less negative
immediate reactions to a social adversity and,
over 8 months, lower overall stress, reduced
physical illness, and better academic
achievement. A third found a 40% reduction in
clinically significant depressive symptoms at 9
months.
Students in the transition to college read stories
from ethnically diverse older students that
conveyed that it is normal to worry at first about
whether you belong in college and this improves
with time. They then wrote an essay describing

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 34
Murphy et al.,
in prep;
Walton &
Cohen, 2007;
Walton,
Logel, et al.,
2015; Yeager,
Walton, et al.,
2016

Goyer,
Cohen, et al.,
under review

General

Education

Increasing
commitment
through action:
Saying-isbelieving

how this process was true for them and delivered
this as a speech to a video camera to help future
students in their transition. This led African
American students to engage more in the
academic environment (e.g., emailing professors,
meeting with study groups) and increased their
grade-point-average over the next three years
through the end of college, reducing the
achievement gap with White students by 50%.
At this point, African American students also
reported greater confidence in their belonging,
being happier, and being healthier (Walton &
Cohen, 2011). Follow-up surveys find that the
intervention, delivered in the first year of
college, improved African American graduates’
life and career satisfaction at the age of 25-27, an
effect that was mediated by greater reported
mentorship in college (Brady et al., in prep B). In
other trials, adapted versions of the intervention
raised women’s first-year grades in maledominated engineering fields, eliminating gender
differences (Walton, Logel et al., 2015);
increased the percentage of racial minority and
first-generation students at a large, broad-access
institution who maintained continuous full-time
enrollment over two years by 9 percentage points
(Murphy et al., in prep); and, when delivered
online to full institutional cohorts prior to college
matriculation, improved first-year outcomes for
racial minority and first-generation students, for
instance increasing the percentage of African
American first-generation college student
graduates from urban charter schools who took a
full course load the first year of college from
32% to 41% (Yeager, Walton et al., 2016).
An adapted version of the social-belonging
intervention (Walton & Cohen, 2011) delivered
to African American and White students at the
outset of middle school reduced disciplinary
citations among African American boys through

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 35

Shook &
Clay, 2012

General

Education

Prompting new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Remedy
experiences that
signal
nonbelonging

Brady et al.,
in prep A

Specific

Education

Prompting new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Replace a
punitive with an
empathic
mindset about
student
misbehavior

Okonofua et
al., 2016

Specific

Education

Increasing
commitment
through action:
Saying-isbelieving

the end of high school by 64%, reducing the gap
with White boys by 83%. The intervention
seemed to cut off a cycle of mistrust and
negative interactions between African American
boys and teachers in 6th and 7th grades as
evidenced by an increasing rate of citations for
incidents requiring subjective judgment within
the school year in the control condition only.
Additionally, the intervention reduced
uncertainty about belonging over the course of
middle school for African American boys, and
protected their level of belonging and forestalled
the emergence of high levels of stereotype threat
at the end of 7th grade and into 8th grade.
Ethnic-minority first-year students at a
predominantly White university randomly
assigned a White (versus ethnic-minority)
roommate reported a greater sense of belonging
at the university over the first semester and this
mediated higher first-year GPA.
Revising the letter sent to college students to
place them on academic probation to mitigate
shame and stigma students perceived—by
framing probation as a process not a label,
communicating “you’re not the only one,”
acknowledging specific, valid reasons students
can struggle in college, and offering hope for
returning to good standing—increased the
percentage of students who returned to good
standing a year later from 26% to 43% and the
percentage who were still enrolled (had not
dropped out or been suspended) from 48% to
79%.
Two online exercises encouraging middle-school
teachers to take on an empathic rather than
punitive mindset about student misbehavior—to
understand misbehaving students’ experience
and perspective, to sustain positive relationships,
and to work with students to improve behavior—
reduced suspension rates among students by 50%

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 36

Create new
social
relationships
and groups
that leverage
behavior
change

Form teams to
support goal
pursuit

over the school year.
Strategy B. Leverage People’s Need to Belong to Motivate Positive Behavior Change
Prestwich et
Specific
Health
Prompting new
[see Table S1]
al., 2005
meanings, by
asking leading
questions

Prestwich et
al., 2012

Specific

Self-regulation
and health

Prompting new
meanings, by
asking leading
questions

Spiegel et al.,
1989

Specific

Health

Wing &
Jeffery, 1999;
see also
Leahey et al.,
2012

Specific

Self-regulation
and health

Prompting new
meanings, by
altering the
situation
Prompting new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Adults were asked to form collaborative
implementation-intentions to exercise more.
They read, “Past research suggests that despite
intending to undertake regular physical activity,
many people fail to do so. To give yourself the
best chances of succeeding, it seems that it can
be helpful to make a very specific plans with a
partner (e.g., husband, wife, girlfriend,
boyfriend, housemate, etc.) about how together
you will go about increasing the amount of
regular physical activity you do” and then
completed “If…then…we” statements. As
compared to participants in a control condition,
in a personal implementation intentions
condition, and in a partner but no
implementation intentions condition, those in the
collaborative implementation-intentions
condition engaged more frequently in physical
activity one and six months later and reported
losing more weight six months later.
Providing women with metastatic breast cancer a
weekly support group including self-hypnosis for
pain increased mean survival time from 18.9
months to 36.6 months.
People trying to lose weight were randomized to
a standard behavioral treatment (weekly group
meetings over 16 weeks) or this treatment with
social support: 4-person teams in which each
person supported the others’ efforts to lose
weight. Although all participants lost weight
over the 4-month treatment with no difference by

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 37

Facilitate
important
social
relationships

Leverage
prosocial
motivations

Facilitate
intergroup
relationships to
promote positive
intergroup
attitudes

Page-Gould,
et al., 2008

Specific but
symbolic

Intergroup
relationships

Prompting new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Learn about the
personal
qualities of other
people

Bowen et al.,
2013

Specific

Education

Prompting new
meanings, by
providing new
information

Gehlbach et
al. 2016

Specific

Education

Prompting new
meanings, by
providing new
information

Receive
expressions of
gratitude

Grant &
Gino, 2010

Specific

Work

Prompting new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Represent a
behavior as a
means to connect

Fotuhi et al.,
2014

Specific

Health

Active
reflection
exercise, goal-

condition, those who received the social support
component were more likely to maintain their
weight loss through 10 months than those who
did not.
Pairs of White and Latino undergraduates got to
know each other using a “fast friends”
procedure, asking and answering a series of
increasingly self-disclosing questions and
playing cooperative games over three sessions.
Over this period, students, especially those
higher in prejudice and in worries about
prejudice, showed strong declines in cortisol
levels, a stress hormone. Moreover, as compared
to students in same-race dyads, the intervention
led students with higher initial levels of
prejudice to initiate more cross-group
interactions in their daily lives on campus.
Providing middle-school teachers essays written
by middle-school students about their personal
values, as compared to students who wrote
similar essays but which were not provided to
their teachers, raised year-long grades among a
sample of primarily African American and lowincome students.
Providing 9th-grade teachers information about
personal views they shared with specific students
raised African American and Hispanic students’
end-of-term course grades, reducing the
achievement gap by 60%.
Having a director of annual giving thank
university fundraisers for their work (“I am very
grateful for your hard work. We sincerely
appreciate your contribution to the university”)
increased the number of calls fundraisers made
over the next week by about 50%, an effect
mediated by greater feelings of social worth
(e.g., feeling valued as a person).
With the theory that even as a standard
affirmation can open people up to threatening
health information it may also remove threat that

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 38
with valued
others

Represent a
behavior as a
means to help
others

contingent
valueaffirmation

Bryan &
Hershfield,
2012

Specific

Retirement
savings

Prompting new
meanings, by
providing new
information

Grant &
Hofmann,
2011

Specific

Health

Direct labeling,
of a situation

Yeager,
Henderson, et
al., 2014; see
also
Paunesku et
al., 2015; see

General

Education

Increasing
commitment
through action:
Saying-isbelieving

could otherwise motivate positive behavior
change, an exercise was developed that tied a
value-affirmation to quitting. Smokers reflected
on a personally important value they shared with
a close friend or family member who supported
their intention to quit. At a 6-month follow-up,
this increased the percentage of smokers who
had quit (36%), as compared to both a standard
values-affirmation (16%) and a control condition
(1%).
University staff members saving less than 10%
of their salaries for retirement were encouraged
to reflect on either their self-interest (“We urge
you to consider your long-term interest and to
start saving more now. After all, your long-term
well-being is at stake. Your decisions now will
determine how much money is available to you
when you retire.”) or their responsibility to their
future self (“We urge you to consider the
responsibility you have to yourself in retirement
and urge you to start saving more now…your
‘future self’ is completely dependent on you…”).
For people who felt psychologically close to
their retirement-age self, the social responsibility
message increased savings rates greater than the
self-interest message (0.97 percentage points vs.
0.12 percentage points). For participants who felt
distant from their retirement-age self, there was
no difference in effectiveness.
Placing signs on hospital soap dispensers to
encourage medical professionals to wash their
hands to protect their patients’ health, instead of
signs that emphasized protecting their own
health, increased soap use over a 2-week period.
High school students (1) identified a social
problem important to them, (2) reviewed stories
from other adolescents describing how an
awareness of social problems and a desire to
contribute positively to the world motivated
them to work harder in school, and (3) wrote

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 39
also Brown et
al., 2015

Leverage
descriptive
social norms

Represent what
people “like me”
do

Represent what

Bond et al.,
2012

Specific

Civic behavior

Prompting new
meanings, by
providing new
information

Lewin, 1947

Specific

Civic behavior

Prompting new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Paluck, 2009

Specific

Intergroup
relations

Prompting new
meanings, by
providing new
information

Yoshida et
al., 2012

Specific

Intergroup
relations

Prompting new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Paluck &

Specific

Peer relationships

Prompting new

their own story for future high school students
about their purposes for learning. As compared
to an active placebo control condition, this raised
GPA in math and science classes the next
academic term with the greatest effect for
initially low-performing students. It also
promoted sustained self-regulation on boring but
important foundational learning tasks.
Incorporating references to friends who have
voted on an election day get-out-the-vote
message on a social-media website (Facebook)
seen by an estimated 61 million people raised
turnout in US Congressional elections by an
estimated 340,000
Middle class, Midwestern housewives during
World War II either listened to a lecture
providing substantive information on the virtues
of “ethnic” organ meats and recipes or took part
in a small-group discussion that emphasized how
“housewives like you” can serve such meats.
Facilitating the illusion of group decision making
to make this change, the discussion ended with a
show of hands to serve organ meats. The smallgroup discussion increased the percentage of
housewives who served organ meats to their
families over the next week from 3% to 32%.
Providing villages in post-genocidal Rwanda
access to a radio soap opera that described
positive norms of intergroup relationships led
villages to be less likely to require that their
children marry within their group, to be more
willing to speak out in dissent, and to report
more empathy for other Rwandans.
Exposing people to a video depicting a racist
joke but withholding the audience’s laughter
improved implicit normative evaluations of that
group (the association between the group and
“most people like”) and reduced discrimination
against the group on a laboratory task.
High school students identified through social

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 40
attractive or
desirable people
do

Shepherd,
2012;

Paluck et al.,
2016

meanings, by
altering the
situation

Specific

Peer relationships

Prompting new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

network analyses as social referents (nominated
by many peers as high status and as friends)
were randomized to an anti-bullying intervention
in which they identified roles students can play
in harassment, wrote essays and discussed
experiences of harassment. They then read their
essays at a school assembly, performed a skit
illustrating common types of harassment and
ways to speak out against it, and created posters
of themselves wearing anti-harassment slogans.
A week later students who were more socially
connected to social referents randomized to the
treatment versus a control condition reported
seeing conflict as normal less and greater efforts
to deescalate conflicts and to stand up for peers
subject to harassment. Toward the end of the
year they were more likely to be nominated by
teachers as defending other students from
harassment and received fewer disciplinary
citations for harassment-related infractions.
Fifty-six middle schools were randomized to an
intervention in which 15% of students at each
treated school were randomized to receive an
anti-conflict norm intervention or not. The
intervention comprised every-other-week
meetings to encourage students to identify
common conflict behaviors, to oppose those
behaviors publicly, to create hashtag slogans and
online and physical posters including their own
photographs, and to distribute distinctive
wristbands to students seen mitigating conflict.
A total of 728 students received the intervention.
This reduced disciplinary problems among the
11,938 students in the treated schools over a year
by 30%. The greatest effects were observed in
schools in which more of the participating
students were influential within the school peer
network and thus positioned to alter school
norms.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 41
Represent what
people do “here”

Represent how
people are
changing
(dynamic norms)

Braga &
Bond, 2008

Specific

Criminal
behavior

Prompting new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Goldstein et
al., 2008

Specific

Environmental
behavior

Direct labeling,
of social norms

Hallsworth et
al., 2014

Specific

Civic behavior

Direct labeling,
of social norms

Sparkman &
Walton,
under review
Experiment 3

Specific

Environmental
behavior

Direct labeling,
of social norms

Sparkman &
Walton,
under review
Experiment 4

Specific

Environmental
behavior

Direct labeling,
of social norms

Cleaning up signs of physical and social disorder
in crime hotspots in Lowell, MA (e.g., clean up
graffiti, more aggressive responses to social
disorder) reduced citizen 911 calls by 20% over
6 months as compared to standard policing.
Signs in hotel bathrooms that conveyed that most
guests in the room reused their towels at least
once increased the towel reuse rate, as compared
to a standard environmental appeal, from 37% to
49%.
In a trial of letters sent to more than 100,000
citizens delinquent in their tax payments, the
letter containing the strongest norm statement
(“Nine out of ten people in the UK pay their
taxes on time. You are currently in the very
small minority of people who have not paid us
yet”) produced an additional £1.9 million
(≈$2.73) in tax revenue among 16,515 recipients
over 23 days.
Lunch goers who learned that the number of
people who make an effort to limit their meat
consumption is rising (a “dynamic norm”) were
twice as likely to order lunch without meat as
compared to either those who learned that some
people make an effort to limit their meat
consumption or those in a control condition
(34% versus 17%).
Laundry machines in a room labeled with a
dynamic norm about water conservation
(“Stanford residents are changing: Now most use
full loads. Help Stanford conserve water!”)
showed a 28.5% reduction in usage over 3
weeks, as compared to the prior 3 weeks. By
contrast, machines in a room labeled with a static
norm (“Most Stanford residents use full loads.
Help Stanford conserve water!”) showed a
reduction of just 9.73% and those in a notreatment control room showed a reduction of
2.5%.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 42

Leverage
prescriptive
social norms

Represent norms
as a collective
goal

Howe et al.,
under review

Specific

Environmental
behavior

Direct labeling,
of social norms

Represent what
another group to
be distinguished
from does
Represent what
people should do

Berger &
Rand, 2008

Specific

Health

Prompting by
providing new
information

Allcott, 2011

Specific

Environmental
behavior

Direct labeling,
of social norms

Schultz et al.,
2007

Specific

Environmental
behavior

Direct labeling,
of social norms

Campus bathrooms randomized to include signs
indicating that most people on campus had
reduced their paper towel use and, in addition,
that invited people to “join in” and “do it
together” showed reduced paper-towel use over
two weeks and 14% less use than bathrooms
with signs that conveyed the same norm but
without this working together element.
[see Table S1]

Social-norm information provided in home
utility bills, including comparisons with average
and efficient neighbors, reduced home energy
use by 2% across nearly 600,000 households,
with the greatest reductions among high users.
Residents received handwritten information
about (1) energy use in their home in the
previous week and (2) information about how
much energy the average household in their
neighborhood had used. Some residents also
received (3) a happy face if they were using less
energy than average or a sad face if they were
using more. Among those residents who were
using less energy than others, the addition of the
happy face reduced energy use over the
subsequent three weeks.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 43
!

Supplementary References
Aguilar, L. J., Carr, P. B., & Walton, G. M. (Under review). Cues of working together reduce
stereotype threat among women.
Allcott, H. (2011). Social norms and energy conservation. Journal of Public Economics, 95,
1082-1095.
Ambady, N., Paik, S. K., Steele, J., Owen-Smith, A., & Mitchell, J. P. (2004). Deflecting
negative self-relevant stereotype activation: The effects of individuation. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 40, 401-408.
Armitage, C. J., Harris, P. R., & Arden, M. A. (2011). Evidence that self-affirmation reduces
alcohol consumption: Randomized exploratory trial with a new, brief means of selfaffirming. Health Psychology, 30, 633-641.
Aronson, E. & Osherow, N. (1980) Cooperation, prosocial behaviour, and academic
performance: Experiments in the desegregated classroom. In L, Bickerman (Ed.) Applied
Social Psychology Annual, Beverley Hills: Sage.
Aronson, J., Fried, C. B., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the effect of stereotype threat on African
American college students by shaping theories of intelligence. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 38, 113-125.
Aronson, K. M., Stefanile, C., Matera, C., Nerini, A., Grisolaghi, J., Romani, G., Massai, F.,
Antonelli, P., Ferraresi, L., & Brown, R. (2016). Telling tales in school: Extended contact
interventions in the classroom. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 46, 229-241.
Au, T. K., Chan, C. K. K., Chan T., Cheung, M. W. L., Ho, J. Y. S., & Ip, G. W. M. (2008).
Folkbiology meets microbiology: A study of conceptual and behavioral change.
Cognitive Psychology, 57, 1-19.
Axsom, D. & Cooper, J. (1985). Cognitive dissonance and psychotherapy: The role of effort
justification in inducing weight loss. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 21,
149-160.
Bandura, A., & Schunk, D. H. (1981). Cultivating competence, self-efficacy, and intrinsic
interest through proximal self-motivation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
41, 586-598.
Benedetti, F., Maggi, G., Lopiano, L. Lanotte, M., Rainero, I., Vighetti, S., Pollo, A. (2003).
Open versus hidden medical treatments: The patient’s knowledge about a therapy affects
the therapy outcome. Prevention & Treatment, Vol 6(1), No Pagination Specified Article
1a.
Berger, J. & Rand, L. (2008). Shifting signals to help health: Using identity-signaling to reduce
risky health behaviors. Behaviors,Journal of Consumer Research, 35(2), 509-518.
Blackwell, L. A., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Theories of intelligence and
achievement across the junior high school transition: A longitudinal study and an
intervention. Child Development, 78, 246-263.
Boehm, J. K., Lyubomirsky, S., & Sheldon, K. M. (2011). A longitudinal experimental study
comparing the effectiveness of happiness-enhancing strategies in Anglo Americans and
Asian Americans. Cognition & Emotion, 25, 1152-1167.
Boese, G. D. B., Stewart, T. L., Perry, R. P., & Hamm, J. M. (2013). Assisting failure-prone
individuals to navigate achievement transitions using a cognitive motivation treatment
(attributional retraining). Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 43, 1946-1955.
Bond, R. M., Fariss, C. J., Jones, J. J., Kramer, A. D. I., Marlow, C., Settle, J. E., & Fowler, J. H.
(2012). A 61-million-person experiment in social influence and political mobilization.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 44
!

Nature, 489, 295-298.
Borman, G. D., Grigg, J., & Hanselman, P. (2016). An effort to close achievement gaps at scale
through self-affirmation. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 38, 21-42.
Bowen, N. K., Wegmann, K. M., & Webber, K. C. (2013). Enhancing a brief writing
intervention to combat stereotype threat among middle-school students. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 105, 427-435.
Brady, S. T., Walton, G. M., Cohen, G. L., Fotuhi, O, Gomez, E., & Urstein, R. [in prep A].
Revising the scarlet letter of academic probation: Reframing institutional messages to
increase student success and reduce shame and stigma
Brady, S. T., Walton, G. M., Cohen, G. L., Jarvis, S. [in prep B]. Downstream consequences of a
social-belonging intervention in the transition to college.
Brady, S. T., Reeves, S L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Cook, J., Taborsky-Barba, S.,
Tomasetti, S., Davis, E., & Cohen, G. L. (2016). The psychology of the affirmed learner:
Spontaneous self-affirmation in the face of stress. Journal of Educational Psychology,
108, 353-373.
Brady, S. T., Hard, B. M., & Gross, J. J. (under review). Reappraising test anxiety increases
academic performance of first-year college students.
Braga, A. A. & Bond, B. J. (2008). Policing crime and disorder hot spots: A randomized
controlled trial. Criminology, 46, 577-607
Brannon, T. N. & Walton, G. M. (2013). Enacting cultural interests: How intergroup contact
reduces prejudice by sparking interest in an outgroup’s culture. Psychological Science,
24, 1947-1957.
Broockman, D. E. & Kalla, J. L. (2016). Durably reducing transphobia: A field experiment on
door-to-door canvassing. Science, 352, 220-224.
Brown, E. R., Smith, J. L., Thoman, D. B., Allen, J. M., & Muragishi, G. (2015). From bench to
bedside: A communal utility value intervention to enhance students’ biomedical science
motivation. Journal of Educational Psychology, 107, 1116-1135.
Brummelman, E., Thomaes, S., Walton, G. M., Poorthuis, A. M. G., Overbeek, G., Castro, B. O.,
Bushman, B. J. (2014). Unconditional regard buffers children’s negative self-feelings.
Pediatrics, 134, 1119-1126.
Bryan, C. J., & Hershfield, H. E. (2012). You owe it to yourself: Boosting retirement saving with
a responsibility-based appeal. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 141, 429432.
Bryan, C. J., Walton, G. M., Rogers, T. & Dweck, C. S. (2011). Motivating voter turnout by
invoking the self. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America, 108, 12653-12656.
Bryan, C. J., Walton, G. M., & Dweck, C. S. (2016). Psychologically authentic versus
inauthentic replication attempts. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America.
Bryan, C. J., Yeager, D. S., Hinojosa, C. P., Chabot, A., Bergen, H., Kawamura, M., & Steubing,
F. (2016). Harnessing adolescent values to motivate healthier eating. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Science. 113, 10830-10835.
Bugental, D. B., Ellerson, P. C., Lin, E. K., Rainey, B., Kokotovic, A., & O’Hara, N. (2002). A
cognitive approach to child abuse prevention. Journal of Family Psychology, 16, 243258.
Bugental, D. B., Schwartz, A., & Lynch, C. (2010). Effects of an early family intervention on

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 45
!

children’s memory: The mediating role effects of cortisol levels. Mind, Brain, and
Education, 4, 159-170.
Bugental, D. B., Corpuz, R., & Schwartz, A. (2012). Preventing children’s aggression: Outcomes
of an early intervention. Developmental Psychology, 48, 1443-1449.
Burnette, J. B., & Finkel, E. J. (2012). Buffering against weight gain following dieting setbacks:
An implicit theory intervention. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48, 721-725.
Cameron, L., Rutland, A., Brown, R., & Douch, R. (2006). Changing children's intergroup
attitudes towards refugees: testing different models of extended contact. Child
Development, 77(5), 1208-1219.
Carnes, M. L., Devine, P. G., Manwell, L. B., Byars-Winston, A., Fine, E., Ford, C. E.,
Forscher, P. S., Iaasc, C., Kaatz, A, Magua, W., Palta, M, & Sherridan, J. (2015). Effect
of an intervention to break the gender bias habit: A cluster randomized, controlled trial.
Academic Medicine, 90, 221-230.
Carrell, S. E., Page, M. P., & West, J. E. (2010). Sex and science: How professor gender
perpetuates the gender gap. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125, 1101-1144.
Carter, G. L., Clover, K., Whyte, I. M., Dawson, A. H., D’Este, C. (2013). Postcards from the
EDge: 5-year outcomes of a randomised controlled trial for hospital-treated selfpoisoning. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 202, 372-380.
Chen, P., Chavez, O., Ong, D. C., Gunderson, B. (under review) Strategic resource use for
learning: A self-administered intervention that guides effective resource use enhances
academic performance.
Christiansen, S., Oettingen, G., Dahme, B., & Klinger, R. (2010). A short goal-pursuit
intervention to improve physical capacity: A randomized clinical trial in chronic back
pain patients. Pain, 149, 444-452.
Coch L. & French, J. R. P. (1948). Overcoming resistance to change. Human Relations, 1, 512532.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., & Master, A. (2006). Reducing the racial achievement gap: A
social-psychological intervention. Science, 313, 1307-1310.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaugns, V., Apfel, N., & Brzustoski, P. (2009). Recursive
processes in self-affirmation: Intervening to close the minority achievement gap. Science,
324, 400-403.
Cohn, M. A. & Fredrickson, B. L. (2010). In search of durable positive psychology
interventions: Predictors and consequences of long-term positive behavior change.
Journal of Positive Psychology, 5, 355-366.
Cook, J. E., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (2012). Chronic threat and
contingent belonging: Protective benefits of values affirmation on identity development.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102, 479-496.
Creswell, J. D. (in press). Mindfulness interventions. Annual Review of Psychology.
Crum, A. & Langer, E. (2007). Mind-set matters: Exercise and the placebo
effect. Psychological Science, 18(2), 165-171.
Crum, A., Salovey, P. & Achor, S. (2013). Rethinking stress: The role of mindsets in
determining the stress response. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 104(4),
716-733.
Dal Cin, S., MacDonald, T. K., Fong, G. T., Zanna, M. P., & Elton-Marshall, T. E. (2006).
Remembering the message: Using a reminder cue to increase condom use following a
safer sex intervention. Health Psychology, 25, 438-443.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 46
!

Danaher, K. & Crandall, C. S. (2008). Stereotype threat in applied settings re-examined. Journal
of Applied Social Psychology, 38, 1639-1655.
Dee, T. S. (2004). Teachers, race, and student achievement in a randomized experiment. The
Review of Economics and Statistics, 86, 195-210.
Dee, T. S. (2015). Social identity and achievement gaps: Evidence from an affirmation
intervention. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 8, 149-168.
DeJong W., Schneider S.K., Towvim L.G., Murphy M.J., Doer E.E., Simonsen, N.R., Mason,
K.E., & Scribner, R. A. (2006). A multisite randomized trial of social norms marketing
campaigns to reduce college student drinking. Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs,
67, 868–879.
DeJong W., Schneider S.K., Towvim L.G., Murphy M.J., Doer E.E., Simonsen, N.R., Mason,
K.E., & Scribner, R. A. (2009). A multisite randomized trial of social norms marketing
campaigns to reduce college student drinking: A replication failure. Substance Abuse, 30,
127-140.
Destin, M., & Oyserman, D. (2009). From assets to school outcomes: How finances shape
children’s perceived possibilities and intentions. Psychological Science, 20, 414-418.
Destin, M., & Oyserman, D. (2010). Incentivizing education: Seeing schoolwork as an
investment, not a chore. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 846-849.
Detweiler, J.B., Bedell, B.T., Salovey, P., Pronin, E., & Rothman, A.J. (1999). Message framing
and sunscreen use: Gain-framed messages motivate beach-goers. Health Psychology, 18,
189-196.
Devine, P. G., Forscher, P. S., Austin, A. J., & Cox, W. T. L. (2012). Long-term reduction in
implicit race bias: A prejudice habit-breaking intervention. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 48, 1267-1278.
Dholakia U. M. & Morwitz V. G. (2002). The scope and persistence of mere measurement
effects: Evidence from a field study of customer satisfaction measurement. Journal of
Consumer Research, 29, 159-167.
Duckworth, A. L., Grant, H., Loew, B., Oettingen, & Gollwitzer, P. M. (2011). Self-regulation
strategies improve self-discipline in adolescents: Benefits of mental contrasting and
implementation intentions. Educational Psychology, 31, 17-26.
Duckworth, A. L., Kirby, T., Gollwitzer, A., & Oettingen, G. (2013). From fantasy to action:
Mental contrasting with implementation intentions (MCII) improves academic
performance in children. Social Psychological and Personality Science, 4(6), 745-753.
Dunn, E. W., Aknin, L. B., & Norton, M. I. (2008). Spending money on others promotes
happiness. Science, 319, 1687-1688.
Emmons R. A. & McCullough, M. E. (2003). Counting blessings versus burdens: An
experimental investigation of gratitude and subjective well-being in daily life. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 377-389.
Eskreis-Winkler, L., Shulman, E. P., Young, V., Tsukayama, E., Brunwasser, S. M., &
Duckworth, A. L. (2016). Using wise interventions to motivate deliberate practice.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 111, 728-744.
Eskreis-Winkler, L., Walton, G. M., Young, V., Tsukayama, E., & Duckworth, A. L. (under
review). Stepping into the shoes of an industrious other: Role-playing can increase
persistence and performance.
Finkel, E. J., Slotter, E. B., Luchies, L. B., Walton, G. M., & Gross, J. J. (2013). A brief
intervention to promote conflict reappraisal preserves marital quality over time.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 47
!

Psychological Science, 24, 1595-1601.
Forscher, P. S., Mitamura, C., Dix, E. L., Cox, W. T. L., & Devine, P. G. (under review).
Breaking the prejudice habit: Mechanisms, timecourse, and longevity.
Fotuhi, O., Logel, C., Spencer, S., Fong, G. T., & Zanna, M. P. (2014). Contingent affirmation
intervention among smokers: Directly linking affirming values to health-specific goals.
Manuscript in preparation.
Fredrickson, B. L., Cohn, M. A., Coffey, K. A., Pek, J., & Finkel, S. M. (2008). Open hearts
build lives: Positive emotions, induced through loving-kindness meditation, build
consequential personal resources. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
95,1045-1062.
Garcia-Retamero R. & Cokely, E. T. (2011). Effective communication of risks to young adults:
Using message framing and visual aids to increase condom use and STD screening.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 17, 270-287.
Gehlbach, H., Brinkworth, M. E., King, A. M., Hsu, L. M., McIntyre, J., & Rogers, T. (2016).
Creating birds of similar feathers: Leveraging similarity to improve teacher-student
relationships and academic achievement. Journal of Educational Psychology, 108, 342352.
Gerber, A. S., Huber, G. A., Biggers, D. R., & Hendry, D. J. (2016). A field experiment shows
that subtle linguistic cues might not affect voter behavior. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Science, 113, 7112-7117.
Goldstein, N. J., Cialdini, R. B., & Griskevicius, V. (2008). A room with a viewpoint: Using
social norms to motivate environmental conservation in hotels. Journal of Consumer
Research, 35, 472-482.
Good, C., Aronson, J., & Inzlicht, M. (2003). Improving adolescents’ standardized test
performance: An intervention to reduce the effects of stereotype threat. Journal of
Applied Developmental Psychology, 24, 645-622.
Good, C., Aronson, J., & Harder, J. A. (2008). Problems in the pipeline: Stereotype threat and
women’s achievement in high-level math courses. Journal of Applied Developmental
Psychology, 29, 17-28.
Goyer, J. P., Cohen, G. L., Cook, J. E., Master, A., Okonofua, J. A., Apfel, N., & Walton, G. M.
(Under review). A social-belonging intervention reduces discipline citations among
minority boys over 7 years.
Goyer, J. P., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Binning, K. R., Cook, J. E., Reeves, S. L., Apfel,
N., Taborsky-Barba, S., Sherman, D. K., & Cohen, G. L. (under review). Into swifter
currents: Self-affirmation nudges minority middle schoolers onto a college trajectory.
Graham, J., Koo, M., & Wilson, T. D. (2011). Conserving energy by inducing people to drive
less. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 41, 106-118.
Grant, A. M. (2008). The significance of task significance: Job performance effects, relational
mechanisms, and boundary conditions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 93, 108-124.
Grant, A. M., & Gino, F. 2010. A little thanks goes a long way: Explaining why gratitude
expressions motivate prosocial behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
98, 946-955.
Grant, A. M., & Hofmann, D. A. (2011). It’s not all about me: Motivating hospital hand hygiene
by focusing on patients. Psychological Science, 22, 1494-1499.
Greenwald, A. G., Carnot, C. G., Beach, R., & Young, B. (1987). Increasing voting behavior by
asking people if they expect to vote. Journal of Applied Psychology, 72, 315-318.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 48
!

Gresky, D. M., Ten Eyck, L. L., Lord, C. G., & McIntyre, R. B. (2005). Effects of salient
multiple identities on women’s performance under mathematics stereotype threat. Sex
Roles, 53, 703-716.
Gringart, E., Helmes, E., & Speelman, C. (2008). Harnessing cognitive dissonance to promote
positive attitudes toward older workers in Australia. Journal of Applied Social
Psychology, 38, 751-778,
Gripshover S. J. & Markman, E. M. (2013). Teaching young children a theory of nutrition:
Conceptual change and the potential for increased vegetable consumption. Psychological
Science, 24, 1541-1553.
Guerra, R., Rebelo, M., Monteiro, M. B., & Gaertner, S. (2013). Translating recategorization
strategies into an antibias educational intervention. Journal of Applied Social Psychology,
43, 14-23.
Haimovitz, K., Dweck, C. S., & Walton, G. M. (under review). Implicit theories of willpower
encourage children to generate self-control strategies.
Hall, C. C., Zhao, J., & Shafir, E. (2014). Self-affirmation among the poor: Cognitive and
behavioral implications. Psychological Science, 25, 619-625.
Hall, N. C., Hladkyj, S., Perry, R. P., & Ruthig, J. C. (2004). The role of attributional retraining
and elaborative learning in college students’ academic development. Journal of Social
Psychology, 144, 591-612.
Hall, N. C., Perry, R. P., Chipperfield, J. G., Clifton, R. A., & Haynes, T. L. (2006). Enhancing
primary and secondary control in achievement settings through writing-based
attributional retraining. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 25, 361-391.
Hall, N. C., Perry, R. P., Goetz, T., Ruthig, J. C., Stupnisky, R. H., & Newall, N. E. (2007).
Attributional retraining and elaborative learning: Improving academic development
through writing-based interventions. Learning and Individual Differences, 17, 280-290.
Halliwell E. & Diedrichs, P. C. (2014). Testing a dissonance body image intervention among
young girls. Health Psychology, 33, 201-204.
Hallsworth M, List J, Metcalfe R, Vlaev I. (2014). The behavioralist as tax collector: Using
natural field experiments to enhance tax compliance. Working Paper 20007, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. http://www.nber.org/papers/w20007.
Halperin, E., Russell, A. G., Trzesniewski, K. H., Gross, J. J. & Dweck, C. S. (2011). Promoting
the Middle East peace process by changing beliefs about group malleability. Science,
333, 1767-1769.
Hanselman, P., Bruch, S.K., Gamoran, A., & Borman, G.D. (2014). Threat in context: School
moderation of the impact of social identity threat on racial/ethnic achievement gaps.
Sociology of Education, 87, 106-124
Harackiewicz, J.M., Canning, E.A., Tibbetts, Y., Giffen, C.J., Blair, S.S., Rouse, D.I., & Hyde,
J.S. (2014). Closing the social class achievement gap for first-generation students in
undergraduate biology. Journal of Educational Psychology, 106, 375-389.
Harackiewicz, J.M., Canning, E.A., Tibbetts, Y., Priniski, S.J., & Hyde, J.S. (2016). Closing
achievement gaps with a utility-value intervention: Disentangling race and social
class. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 111, 745-765.
Harackiewicz, J.M., Rozek, C.R., Hulleman, C.S., & Hyde, J.S. (2012) Helping parents to
motivate adolescents in mathematics and science: An experimental test of a utility-value
intervention. Psychological Science, 23, 899-906.
Harris, P. R., Brearley, I., Sheeran, P., Barker, M., Klein, W. M. P., Creswell, J. D., Levine, J.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 49
!

M., & Bond, R. (2014) Combining self-affirmation with implementation intentions to
promote fruit and vegetable consumption. Health Psychology, 33, 729-736.
Harris, P. R., Mayle, K., Mabbott, L., & Napper, L. (2007). Self-affirmation reduces smokers’
defensiveness to graphic on-pack cigarette warning labels. Health Psychology, 26, 437446.
Haynes, T. L., Ruthig, J. C., Perry, R. P., Stupnisky, R. H., & Hall, N. C. (2006). Reducing the
academic risks of over-optimism: The longitudinal effects of attributional retraining on
cognition and achievement. Research in Higher Education, 47, 755–779.
Hodson, G., Dube, B., & Choma, B. L. (2015). Can (elaborated) imagined contact interventions
reduce prejudice among those higher in intergroup disgust sensitivity (ITG-DS)? Journal
of Applied Social Psychology, 45, 123-131.
Howe, L. C., Carr, P. B., & Walton, G. M. (Under review). Making common cause: The feeling
of working together facilitates normative behavior.
Huang, M-H. (2009). Race of the interviewer and the black-white test score gap. Social Science
Research, 38, 29-38.
Hudley, C., & Graham, S. (1993). An attributional intervention with African American boys
labeled as aggressive. Child Development, 64, 124-138.
Hulleman, C.S. & Harackiewicz, J.M. (2009). Promoting interest and performance in high school
science classes, Science, 326, 1410-1412.
Hülsheger, U. R., Alberts, H. J. E. M., Feinholdt, A., Lang, J. W. B. (2012). Benefits of
mindfulness at work: The role of mindfulness in emotion regulation, emotional
exhaustion, and job satisfaction. Journal of Applied Psychology, 98, 310-325.
Hülsheger, U. R., Lang, J. W. B., Schewe, A. F., & Zijlstra, F. (2015). When regulating emotions
at work pays off: A diary and an intervention study on emotion regulation and customer
tips in service jobs. Journal of Applied Psychology,100, 263-277.
Jamieson, J.P., Mendes, W.B., Blackstock, E., & Schmader, T. (2010). Turning the knots in your
stomach into bows: Reappraising arousal improves performance on the GRE. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 208-212.
Jang, H. (2008). Supporting students’ motivation, engagement, and learning during an
uninteresting activity. Journal of Educational Psychology, 100, 798-811.
Jessop, D. C., Sparks, P., Buckland, N., Harris, P. R., & Churchill, S. (2014). Combining selfaffirmation and implementation intentions: Evidence of detrimental effects on behavioral
outcomes. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 47, 137-147.
Job, V. Flueckiger, L., Bernecker, K., Lieb, R. & Mata, J. (2016). An implicit theories about
willpower intervention helps students to deal with demands: Effects on academic selfregulation and grades. Manuscript in preparation.
Johns, J., Inzlicht, M., & Schmader, T. (2008). Stereotype threat and executive resource
depletion: Examining the influence of emotion regulation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 137, 691-705.
Johns, M., Schmader, T., & Martens, A. (2005). Knowing is half the battle: Teaching stereotype
threat as a means of improving women’s math performance. Psychological Science, 16,
175-179.
Kaptchuk T.J., Friedlander E., Kelley J.M., Sanchez M.N., Kokkotou E., Singer J.P.,
Kowalczykowski M., Miller F.G., Kirsch I., Lembo A.J. (2010. Placebo without
deception: A randomized controlled trial in irritable bowel syndrome. PLoS One, 5,
e15591.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 50
!

Kirk, B. A., Schutte, N. S., Hine, D. W. (2011). The effect of an expressive-writing intervention
for employees on emotional sefl-efficacy, emotional intelligence, affect, and workplace
incivility. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 41, 179-195.
Kross, E., & Ayduk, O. (2011). Making meaning out of negative experiences by self-distancing.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 20, 187-191.
Kross, E., Ayduk, O., & Mischel, W. (2005). When asking “why” does not hurt: Distinguishing
rumination from reflective processing of negative emotions. Psychological Science, 16,
709-715.
Kross, E., Bruehlman-Senecal, E., Park. J., Burson, A., Shablack, H., Bremner, R., Moser, J., &
Ayduk, O. (2014). Self-talk as a regulatory mechanism: How you do it matters. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 106, 304-324.
LaBrie, J. W., Earle, A. M., Boyle, S. C., Hummer, J. F., Montes, K., Turrisi, R., & Napper, L.
E. (2016). A parent-based intervention reduces heavy episodic drinking among first-year
college students. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 30, 523-535.
Langer E. J. & Rodin, J. (1976). The effects of choice and enhanced personal responsibility for
the aged: A field experiment in an institutional setting. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 34, 191-198.
Layous, K., Nelson, S. K., & Lyubomirsky, S. (2013). What is the optimal way to deliver a
positive activity intervention? The case of writing about one’s best possible
selves. Journal of Happiness Studies, 14, 635-654.
Layous, K., Nelson, S. K., Oberle, E., Schonert-Reichl, K., & Lyubomirsky, S. (2012). Kindness
counts: Prompting prosocial behavior in preadolescents boosts peer acceptance and wellbeing. PLOS ONE, 7, e51380.
Layous, K., Davis, E. M., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Cook, J. E., & Cohen, G. L. (2016).
Feeling left out, but affirmed: Protecting against the negative effects of low belonging in
college. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology.
Leahey, T. M., Kumar, R., Weinberg, B. M., & Wing, R. R. (2012). Teammates and social
influence affect weight loss outcomes in a team-based weight loss competition. Obesity,
20, 1413-1418.
Leventhal, H., Singer, R., & Jones, S. (1965). Effects of fear and specificity of recommendation
upon attitudes and behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2, 20-29.
Lewin, K. (1947). Group decision and social change. In T. M. Newcombe & E. L. Hartley (Eds.),
Readings in social psychology (pp. 459- 473). New York: Henry Holt.
Liebkind K. & McAlister, A. L. (1999). Extended contact through peer modeling to promote
tolerance in Finland. European Journal of Social Psychology, 29, 765-780.
Lin-Siegler, X. D., Ahn, J., Chen, J., A. Fang & Luna-Lucero, M. (in press). Even Einstein
struggled: Effects of learning about great scientists’ struggles on high school students’
motivation to learn science. Journal of Educational Psychology, 108, 314-328.
Logel, C. & Cohen, G. L. (2012). The role of the self in physical health: Testing the effect of a
values-affirmation intervention on weight loss. Psychological Science, 23, 53-55.
Logel, C., Iserman, E. C., Davies, P. G., Quinn, D. M., & Spencer, S. J. (2009). The perils of
double consciousness: The role of thought suppression in stereotype threat. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 45, 299-312.
Lyubomirsky, S., Dickerhoof, R., Boehm, J. K., & Sheldon, K. M. (2011).Becoming happier
takes both a will and a proper way: An experimental longitudinal intervention to boost
well-being. Emotion, 11, 391-402.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 51
!

Lyubomirsky, S., Sheldon, K. M., & Schkade, D. (2005). Pursuing happiness: The architecture
of sustainable change. Review of General Psychology, 9, 111-131.
Mallett, R. K., & Wilson, T. D. (2010). Increasing positive intergroup contact. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 382-387.
Marigold, D. C., Holmes, J. G., & Ross, M. (2007). More than words: Reframing compliments
from romantic partners fosters security in low self-esteem individuals. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 232–248.
Marigold D. C., Holmes J.G., Ross, M. (2010). Fostering relationship resilience: An intervention
for low self-esteem individuals. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 624–
630.
Martens, A., Johns, M., Greenberg, J., & Schimel, J. (2006). Combating stereotype threat: The
effect of self-affirmation on women’s intellectual performance. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 42, 236-243.
Marx, D. M. & Goff, P. A. (2005). Clearing the air: The effect of experimenter race on target’s test
performance and subjective experience. British Journal of Social Psychology, 44, 645-657.
Marx, D. M. & Roman, J. S. (2002). Female role models: Protecting women’s math test
performance. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 1183-1193.
McIntyre, R. B., Paulson, R. M., & Lord, C. G. (2003). Alleviating women’s mathematics
stereotype threat through salience of group achievements. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 39, 83-90.
Menec, V. H., Perry, R, P., Struthers, C. W., Schonwetter, D. J., Hechter, F. J., & Eichholz, B. L.
(1994). Assisting at-risk college students with attributional retraining and effective
teaching. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 24, 675-701.
Milkman, K., Beshears, J., Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., & Madrian, B. C. (2011). Using
implementation intentions prompts to enhance influenza vaccination rates. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Science, 108, 10415-10420.
Miller, R. L., Brickman, P., & Bolen, D. (1975). Attribution versus persuasion as a means for
modifying behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 31, 430-441
Miu, A. & Yeager, D. S. (2015). Preventing symptoms of depression by teaching adolescents
that people can change: Effects of a brief incremental theory of personality intervention
at 9-month follow-up. Clinical Psychological Science, 3(5), 726-743.
Miyake, A., Smith-Kost, L. E., Finkelstein, N. D., Pollock, S. J., Cohen, G. L., & Ito, T. A.
(2010). Reducing the gender achievement gap in college science: A classroom study of
values affirmation. Science, 330, 1234-1237.
Moriatry, T. (1975). Crime, commitment, and the responsive bystander: Two field experiments.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 31, 370-376.
Morisano, D., Hirsh, J. B., Peterson, J. B., Pihl, R. O., & Shore, B. M. (2010). Setting,
elaborating, and reflecting on personal goals improves academic performance. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 95, 255-264.
Motto, J. A. & Bostrom, A. G. (2001). A randomized controlled trial of postcrisis suicide
prevention. Psychiatric Services, 52, 828-833.
Murphy, M.C., Carter E.R., Emerson, K.T.U., Gopalan, M., Walton, G., & Bottoms, B. (in prep).
Testing a social belonging intervention in a broad access university setting: Effects on
persistence and achievement of ethnic minority and first-generation college students.
Nickerson, D.W. & Rogers, T. (2010). Do you have a voting plan? Implementation intentions,
voter turnout, and organic plan-making. Psychological Science, 21, 194-199.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 52
!

Otake, K., Shimai, S., Tanaka-Matsumi, J., Otsui, K., & Fredrickson, B. L. (2007). Happy people
become happier through kindness: A counting kindnesses intervention. Journal of
Happiness Studies, 7, 361-375.
Okonofua, J. A. Paunesku, D., & Walton, G. M. (2016). Brief intervention to encourage
empathic discipline cuts suspension rates in half among adolescents. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 113, 5221-5226.
Oyserman, D., Bybee, D. & Terry, K. (2006). Possible selves and academic outcomes: How and
when possible selves impel action. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91,
188-204.
Oyserman, D., Terry, K., & Bybee, D. (2002). A possible selves intervention to enhance school
involvement. Journal of Adolescence, 24, 313-326.
Page-Gould, E., Mendoza-Denton, R., & Tropp, L. R. (2008). With a little help from my crossgroup friend: Reducing anxiety in intergroup contexts through cross-group friendship.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 95, 1080–1094.
Paluck, E.L. (2009). Reducing intergroup prejudice and conflict using the media: A field
experiment in Rwanda. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96, 574-587.
Paluck, E.L., & Shepherd, H. (2012). The salience of social referents: A field experiment on
collective norms and harassment behavior in a school social network. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 103, 899-915.
Paluck, E.L., Shepherd, H., & Aronow, P. (2016). Changing climates of conflict: A social
network experiment in 56 schools. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
113(3), 566–571, doi: 10.1073/pnas.1514483113.
Park, J., Ayduk, O., & Kross, E. (2015). Stepping back to move forward: Expressive writing
promotes self-distancing. Emotion, 16, 349-364.
Paunesku, D., Walton, G. M., Romero, C. L., Smith, E. N., Yeager, D. S., & Dweck, C. S.
(2015). Mindset interventions are a scalable treatment for academic underperformance.
Psychological Science, 26, 784-793.
Pennebaker, J.W. (1997). Writing about emotional experiences as a therapeutic process.
Psychological Science, 8, 162-166.
Pennebaker, J.W., Kiecolt-Glaser, J., & Glaser, R. (1988). Disclosure of traumas and immune
function: Health implications for psychotherapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 56, 239-245.
Perry R. P. & Penner, K. S. (1990). Enhancing academic achievement in college students
through attributional retraining and instruction. Journal of Educational Psychology, 82,
262-271.
Perry, R. P., Stupnisky, R. H., Hall, N. C., Chipperfield, J. G., & Weiner, B. (2010). Bad starts
and better finishes: Attributional retraining and initial performance in competitive
achievement settings. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 29(6), 668-700.
Pham, L. B., & Taylor, S. E. (1999). From thought to action: Effects of process-versus outcomebased mental simulations on performance. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 25, 250-260.
Prestwich A., Conner M.T., Lawton R.J., Bailey W., Litman J., Molyneaux V. (2005). Individual
and collaborative implementation intentions and the promotion of breast selfexamination. Psychology and Health, 20(6), 743-760.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 53
!

Prestwich A., Ayres K., Lawton R. (2008). Crossing two types of implementation intentions with
a protection motivation intervention for the reduction of saturated fat intake: A
randomized trial. Social Science and Medicine, 67(10), 1550-1558.
Prestwich A., Perugini M., Hurling R. (2010). Can implementation intentions and text messages
promote brisk walking? A randomized trial. Health Psychology, 29(1), 40-49.
Prestwich A., Conner M.T., Lawton R.J., Ward J.K., Ayres K., McEachan R.R.C. (2012).
Randomized controlled trial of collaborative implementation intentions targeting working
adults’ physical activity. Health Psychology, 31(4), 486-495.
Ramirez, G., & Beilock, S. L. (2011). Writing about testing worries boosts exam performance in
the classroom. Science, 331, 211-213.
Raudenbush, S.W. (1984). Magnitude of teacher expectancy effects on Pupil IQ as a function of
the credibility of expectancy induction: A synthesis of findings from 18 experiments.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 76(1), 85-97.
Redelmeier D.A., Katz, J., & Kahneman, D. (2003). Memories of colonoscopy: A randomized
trial. Pain, 104, 187-194.
Rodin, J. & Langer, E. J. (1977). Long-term effects of a control-relevant intervention with the
institutionalized aged. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35, 897-902
Rokeach, M. (1971). Long-range experimental modification of values, attitudes, and behavior.
American Psychologist, 26, 453-459.
Rosenthal, H. E. S. & Crisp, R. J. (2006). Reducing stereotype threat by blurring intergroup
boundaries. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 32, 501-511.
Rosenthal, R. & Jacobson, L. (1968). Pygmalion in the Classroom. New York: Holt, Rinehart &
Winston.
Rothman, A.J., Salovey, P., Antone, C., Keough, K., & Martin C.D. (1993). The influence of
message framing on intentions to perform health behaviors. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 29, 408-433.
Ruthig, J. C., Perry, R. P., Hall, N. C., & Hladkyj, S. (2004). Optimism and attributional
retraining: Longitudinal effects on academic achievement, test anxiety, and voluntary
course withdrawal in college students. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 34, 709730.
Schroeder, C. M. & Prentice, D. A. (1998). Exposing pluralistic ignorance to reduce alcohol use
among college students. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 28, 2150-2180.
Schultz, P. W., Nolan, J. M., Cialdini, R. B., Goldstein, N. J., & Griskevicius, V. (2007). The
constructive, destructive, and reconstructive power of social norms. Psychological
Science, 18, 429-434.
Schulz, R. (1976). Effects of control and predictability on the physical and psychological wellbeing of the institutionalized aged. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 33,
563-573.
Schulz, R., & Hanusa, B. H. (1978). Long-term effects of control and predictability-enhancing
interventions: Findings and ethical issues. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
36(11), 1194.
Seligman, M. E P, Steen, T., Park, N., & Peterson, C. (2005). Positive psychology progress:
Empirical validation of interventions. American Psychologist, 60, 410-421.
Sheldon, K. M., & Lyubomirsky, S. (2006a). How to increase and sustain positive emotion: The
effects of expressing gratitude and visualizing best possible selves. The Journal of
Positive Psychology, 1, 73-82.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 54
!

Sherman, D. K., Bunyan, D. P., Creswell, J. D., & Jaremka, L. M. (2009). Psychological
vulnerability and stress: The effects of self-affirmation on sympathetic nervous system
responses to naturalistic stressors. Health Psychology, 28, 554-562.
Sherman, D. K., Gangi, C., & White, M. L. (2010). Embodied cognition and health persuasion:
Facilitating intention-behavior consistency via motor manipulations. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 461-464.
Sherman, D. K., Hartson, K. A., Binning, K. R., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., TaborskyBarba, S., Tomassetti, S., Nussbaum, A. D., & Cohen, G. L. (2013). Deflecting the
trajectory and changing the narrative: How self-affirmation affects academic performance
and motivation under identity threat. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 104,
591-618.
Sherman, L. W., Smith, D. A., Schmidt, J. D., & Rogan, D. P. (1992). Crime, punishment, and
stake in conformity: Legal and informal control of domestic violence. American
Sociological Review, 57, 680-690.
Shook, N. & Clay, R. (2012). Interracial roommate relationships: A mechanism for promoting a
sense of belonging at university and academic performance. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 48(5), 1168-1172.
Shook, N. J., & Fazio, R. H. (2008). Interracial roommate relationships: An experimental test of
the contact hypothesis. Psychological Science, 19, 717–723.
Shu, L. L., Mazar, N., Gino, F., Ariely, D., & Bazerman, M. H. (2012). Signing at the beginning
makes ethics salient and decreases dishonest self-reports in comparison to signing at the
end. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 109, 15197-15200.
Silverman A. M. & Cohen, G. L. (2014). Stereotypes as stumbling-blocks: How coping with
stereotype threat affects life outcomes for people with physical disabilities. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 40, 1330-1340.
Smith, J.K., Gerber, A.S., & Orlich, A. (2003). Self-prophecy effects and voter turnout: An
experimental replication. Political Psychology, 24, 593–604.
Son Hing L. S., Li, W., & Zanna, M. P. (2002). Inducing hypocrisy to reduce prejudicial
responses among aversive racists. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 71-78.
Sparkman, G. & Walton, G. M. (under review). I’ll have what she’s going to have: Dynamic
norms promote beneficial counternormative behavior.
Spiegel, D., Bloom, J. R., Kraemer, H. C., & Gottheil, E. (1989). Effect of psychosocial
treatment on survival of patients with metastatic breast cancer. Lancet, 2, 888-891.
Stadler, G., Oettingen, G., & Gollwitzer, P. M. (2009). Physical activity in women: Effects of a
self-regulation intervention. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 36, 29-34.
Stadler, G., Oettingen, G., & Gollwitzer, P. M. (2010). Intervention effects of information and
self-regulation on eating fruits and vegetables over two years. Health Psychology,
29, 274-283.
Stathi, S., Cameron, L., Hartley, B., & Bradford, S. (2014). Imagined contact as a prejudicereduction intervention in schools: The underlying role of similarity and attitudes. Journal
of Applied Social Psychology, 44, 536-546.
Stephens, N. M., Hamedani, M. G., & Destin, M. (2014). Closing the social-class achievement
gap: A difference-education intervention improves first-generation students’ academic
performance and all students’ college transition. Psychological Science, 25, 943-953.
Stinson, D.A., Logel, C., Shepherd, S., & Zanna, M.P. (2011) Rewriting the self-fulfilling
prophecy of social rejection: Self-affirmation improves relational security and social

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 55
!

behavior up to 2 months later. Psychological Science, 22, 1145-1149.
Stone, J., Aronson, E., Crain, A. L., Winslow, M. P., & Fried, C. B. (1994). Inducing hypocrisy
as a means of encouraging young adults to use condoms. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 20(1), 116-128.
Strahan, E. J., Lafrance, A., Wilson, A. E., Ethier, N., Spencer, S. J., & Zanna, M. P. (2008).
Victoria’s dirty secret: How sociocultural norms influence adolescent girls and women.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 34, 288-301.
Thomaes, S., Bushman, B. J., Orobio de Castro, B., Cohen, G., & Denissen, J. J. A.
(2009). Reducing narcissistic aggression by buttressing self-esteem: An experimental
field study. Psychological Science, 20, 1536-1542.
Thomaes, S., Bushman, B. J., Orobio de Castro, B., & Reijntjes, A. (2012). Arousing “gentle
passions” in young adolescents: Sustained experimental effects of value-affirmations on
prosocial feelings and behaviors. Developmental Psychology, 48, 103-110.
Tibbetts, Y., Harackiewicz, J. M., Canning, E. A., Boston, J. S., Priniski, S. J., & Hyde, J. S.
(2016). Affirming independence: Exploring mechanisms underlying a values affirmation
intervention for first-generation students. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
110, 635-659.
Turrisi, R., Abar, C., Mallett, K. A., & Jaccard, J. (2010). An examination of the mediational
effects of cognitive and attitudinal factors on a parent intervention to reduce college
drinking. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 40(10), 2500-2526.
Turrisi, R., Jaccard, J., Taki, R., Dunnam, H., & Grimes, J. (2001). Examination of the shortterm efficacy of a parent intervention to reduce college student drinking
tendencies. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors: Special Issue on Understanding Binge
Drinking, 15(4), 366-372.
Walton, G. M. & Cohen, G. L. (2007). A question of belonging: Race, social fit, and
achievement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 82-96.
Walton, G. M. & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A brief social-belonging intervention improves academic
and health outcomes of minority students. Science, 331, 1447-1451.
Walton, G. M., Logel, C., Peach, J., Spencer, S, & Zanna, M. P. (2015). Two brief interventions
to mitigate a “chilly climate” transform women’s experience, relationships, and
achievement in engineering. Journal of Educational Psychology, 107, 468-485.
Weinberg, L. E., Hall, N. C., & Sverdlik, A. (2015). Attributional retraining and physical
rehabilitation in later life: Intervention effects on motivation, mobility, and well-being.
Physical & Occupational Therapy in Geriatrics, 33(4), 294-302.
Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. (1982). Improving the academic performance of college
freshmen: Attribution therapy revisited. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
42, 367-376.
Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. (1985). Improving the performance of college freshmen using
attributional techniques. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 287-293.
Wing R. R. & Jeffery, R. W. (1999). Benefits of recruiting participants with friends and
increasing social support for weight loss and maintenance. Journal of Counseling and
Clinical Psychology, 67, 132-138.
Yeager, D. S., Henderson, M., D’Mello, S., Paunesku, D. Walton, G. M., Spitzer, B. J., &
Duckworth, A. L. (2014). Boring but important: A self-transcendent purpose for learning
fosters academic self-regulation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 107, 559580.

See	discussions,	stats,	and	author	profiles	for	this	publication	at:	https://www.researchgate.net/publication/316049019

Dealing	With	Social	Difficulty	During
Adolescence:	The	Role	of	Implicit	Theories	of
Personality
Article		in		Child	Development	Perspectives	·	April	2017
DOI:	10.1111/cdep.12234

CITATION

READS

1

202

1	author:
David	S.	Yeager
University	of	Texas	at	Austin
41	PUBLICATIONS			1,482	CITATIONS			
SEE	PROFILE

Some	of	the	authors	of	this	publication	are	also	working	on	these	related	projects:

Online	panels	data	quality	View	project

All	content	following	this	page	was	uploaded	by	David	S.	Yeager	on	13	April	2017.
The	user	has	requested	enhancement	of	the	downloaded	file.

CHILD DEVELOPMENT PERSPECTIVES

Dealing With Social Difficulty During Adolescence:
The Role of Implicit Theories of Personality
David S. Yeager
University of Texas at Austin

ABSTRACT—Social

difficulty during adolescence contributes to internalizing problems (e.g., depression, stress)
and spurs cycles of aggression and retaliation. In this article, I review how implicit theories of personality—beliefs
about whether people can change their socially relevant
characteristics—cause some adolescents to respond to
social difficulty in these ways while others do not. Believing an entity theory of personality—the belief that people
cannot change—causes people to blame their own and
others’ traits for social difficulty, and predicts more
extreme affective, physiological, and behavioral responses
(e.g., depression, aggression). Interventions that teach an
incremental theory of personality—the belief that people
can change—can reduce problematic reactions to social
difficulty. I discuss why interventions to alter implicit
theories improve adolescents’ responses to conflict, and I
propose suggestions for research.

David S. Yeager, University of Texas at Austin Department of
Psychology.
Work on this article was supported by the Thrive Foundation for
Youth, the Spencer Foundation, the Raikes Foundation, the William
T. Grant Foundation, the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute
of Child Health and Human Development (award number
R01HD084772), and a fellowship from the Center for Advanced
Study in the Behavioral Sciences. The content does not necessarily
represent the official view of the National Institutes of Health. I am
grateful to Carol Dweck for her feedback on an earlier draft of the
article, and to James Gross for suggesting the connections with the
emotion-regulation process model. I also appreciate the contributions of all the students and teachers who participated in this
research.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to
David S. Yeager, University of Texas at Austin, 108 E. Dean Keeton
Stop A8000, Austin, TX 78712-1043; e-mail: dyeager@utexas.edu.

KEYWORDS—implicit

theories; coping; adolescence; mental
representations; social-cognitive development; psychological
intervention

Why do some young people respond to social difficulties such
as peer victimization and exclusion with despair or a thirst for
revenge, while others find more productive ways of coping?1
Adolescents suffer more when they blame their social difficulties
on their flawed traits (3), and they want to lash out more when
they conclude their peers are fundamentally bad people who
deserve to suffer (4). These fixed-trait attributions are problematic in part because of what they portend. Illustrating this, a
ninth-grade student once asked me, “If my friends make fun of
me or don’t ask me to sit with them at lunch, does that mean I’ll
have no friends for life? That they’ll make fun of me forever?”
This is a stressful thought that might elicit extreme emotion or
action.
Our research has identified the mindsets, or implicit theories
of personality, that can underlie such thoughts. Because implicit
theories can be altered through intervention (and perhaps socialization), they represent one way to help adolescents deal more
effectively with social difficulty. In this article, I review basic
processes through which implicit theories shape responses to
social difficulty, using the process model of emotion regulation
(5) as an organizing framework. Next, I examine intervention
studies that demonstrate causality and practical impact, followed
by a discussion of promising areas for research.
IMPLICIT THEORIES: HIGH SCHOOL SOCIAL LIFE
FROM TWO PERSPECTIVES

Implicit theories are beliefs about the malleability of human
characteristics (6). According to an entity theory of personality,
people’s socially relevant traits (e.g., whether they are mean or
nice people, whether they are likable or not) are fixed and

© 2017 The Authors
Child Development Perspectives © 2017 The Society for Research in Child Development
DOI: 10.1111/cdep.12234

1
For evidence that some adolescents develop internalizing and externalizing
symptoms when they are victimized, see (1, 2).

Volume 0, Number 0, 2017, Pages 1–6

2

David S. Yeager

unchangeable. According to an incremental theory of personality, people can change their socially relevant traits. These
implicit theories of personality—entity and incremental—can
create different worldviews through which people interpret and
respond to social conflicts with peers (e.g., victimization and
exclusion; 7).2

Table 1
The Experience of Being Subjected to High School Social Conflict
from Two Worldviews: Entity and Incremental Theories of
Personality.

Worldview
The different implicit theories imply worldviews that shape the
way we strive for goals. Adolescents who ascribe to an entity
theory tend to endorse the goal of demonstrating social success
or avoiding demonstrating social ineptitude (i.e., a performance
approach or avoidance goal; 9, 10). This is because, if traits are
fixed, it is threatening to be identified as lacking in social status
or competence. However, those who ascribe to an incremental
theory tend to endorse the goal of learning how to develop social
competence or relationships (11). Often, adolescents pursue this
goal by putting themselves in socially challenging situations
where they can acquire more friendship skills or repair relationships with others (10, 12).
The entity and incremental theories—and the social goals that
emanate from them (13)—shape reactions to social difficulties
like bullying, victimization, and exclusion. Consider how implicit theories affect each step in the process model of coping (5):
Depending on what implicit theories of personality people
believe, they may show different patterns of attention, appraisal,
and responses when they face socially difficult situations (see
Table 1 and Figure 1).

Worldview
Beliefs
Goals

Attention and Information-Seeking
Implicit theories affect the kinds of information people think is
relevant to their social conflict. A person who ascribes to an
incremental theory might ask: What was the person’s psychology
—the person’s motivations, beliefs, thoughts, or feelings? By
contrast, someone who ascribes to an entity theory might ask:
What kind of person would do this (14, 15)?
Moreover, for someone who ascribes to more of an entity theory and prioritizes the goal of demonstrating social competence
or status, attention is allocated more toward peers’ status and
social rank or underlying traits (16; see Table 1, row 3). For
instance, in one study, adolescents who believed in an entity
theory more readily sorted the social world in terms of who was
popular or unpopular rather than in terms of qualities like personal interests (17). Furthermore, when judging a person who
harmed others, adolescents who believed in an entity theory

2
For this review, I do not differentiate implicit theories about the malleability of
one’s own versus others’ traits. In our experience, the two go hand in hand. When
we feel our own traits are fixed, we expect that others will treat us the same way
forever. When we feel others’ traits are fixed, it can lead to the same conclusion.
Although in general, the closer an implicit theory is to the domain of the outcome,
the more predictive it will be (8), we have not yet found different associations for
self theories of personality versus other theories. To reflect the state of the evidence so far, I discuss them jointly.

Entity theory of
personality

Attention

Appraisal
Attributions

Predictions
Resource
appraisal

Response
Physiology

Emotion
Internalizing

Externalizing

Incremental
theory of
personality

People cannot change
Demonstrate social
competence (or avoid
social catastrophe)
Status and social rank;
trait-revealing
information

People can change
Develop social
relationships

Perpetrator was “mean
on purpose” due to
fixed traits of the self
(“I’m not likable”) and
of the perpetrator
(“he’s a bad person”)

The perpetrator
had psychological
reasons, or
extenuating
circumstances,
for his or her
behavior
Negative events
can improve
Challenge: I have
or can acquire
the resources to
overcome
a difficult situation

Negative events will
always stay this way
Threat: No amount of
resources can help me
overcome a difficult
situation

Threat: Constriction of
blood vessels, less
efficient heart,
greater cortisol
Shame, humiliation,
hatred
Depression, stress,
and hopelessness
Aggression and
desire for revenge

Personal interests
and values;
psychological and
situational
information

Challenge: Less
constriction of
blood vessels,
more efficient
heart, less cortisol
Sadness, anger
Active problem
solving and
optimism
Confrontation
(with intent to
change),
reconciliation,
or moving on

expressed a desire to know more about the person’s traits, while
those who ascribed to an incremental theory wanted to know
more about the situation in which the harm occurred (15).
Appraisal
Implicit theories affect appraisals at several levels of analysis
(see Table 1, row 4, and Figure 1). They shape attributions for
cause and effect, and these attributions can affect judgments of

Child Development Perspectives, Volume 0, Number 0, 2017, Pages 1–6

Implicit Theories of Personality

A High School Transition Linear Model
Uncertain
hierarchy +
drive for status
Situation (S):
Social exclusion,
insults, rumors, or
reputational aggression

3

Belief that
people cannot
change
+
+

Appraisal (Ap):
Attention (At):
Response (R):
Attributing
Anticipating
Aggression or
to fixed traits
and noticing
helplessness
status threats (demands > resources)

B High School Transition Developmental Process Model
Belief that
people cannot
change
(S)Popular peers (At)Notice that (Ap)Wonder if
laugh at
they are laughing they think you
what you wear
at you
are a "loser"

Uncertain
hierarchy in
high school +
adolescent
drive for
status

Acquaintances
do not invite
you to a party

e
Tim

Wariness in taking
risks to make
friends

(R)Feel
ashamed,
hate them

Belief that
people cannot
change
Notice that
you were
"left out"

Worry that
you are
"not likable"

Reduced social
motivation

Feel anxious
and
"stressed out"

Belief that
people cannot
change

People make
fun of you for
being a "loner"

Notice
the
insults

They are "bad people" Despair
or desire
who will always
for revenge
make fun of you

Figure 1. A hypothesized recursive process model illustrating how an entity theory of personality (“belief that people cannot change”) could relate to less
effective coping outcomes in response to peer social conflict during the transition to high school. Model based on (5).

how demanding a stressor seems and whether one has the
resources to deal with it. In a study, participants who ascribed
to an entity theory were more likely to view an accidental conflict (e.g., a peer bumping into you in the hallway) as having
been done intentionally to be mean (i.e., the hostile attributional
bias; 18, 19). The same was true for participants who had a negative experience where hostile intent was unclear, such as ostracism during an online game of catch with two peers (i.e.,
Cyberball; 19, 20). Ascribing to an entity theory also predicts
trait-relevant attributions for both accidental and obviously
intended conflicts. High school students who believed in an
entity theory were more likely to say a peer who made fun of
and embarrassed them was a bad person (4), and fifth-graders
were more likely to wonder if failing socially with peers meant
they were not likable (10). These kinds of fixed-trait attributions,
in turn, create the perception that the bad things happening now
can never change (see Table 1, row 5).
New research has moved from intent and trait attributions to
the appraisal processes commonly studied in the biopsychosocial model of challenge and threat (21, 22; see Table 1, row 6).
Physiological responses to a stressor are shaped by whether
individuals feel they have the resources to cope with the

demands facing them (i.e., the ratio of perceived resources to
perceived demand; 21, 22). Individuals experience threat when
they appraise the demand as greater than the resources and
challenge when they appraise the resources as sufficient to meet
the demand.
Belief in an entity theory predicts more of a threat appraisal
to stressors—that is, it calls into question whether fixed traits
are up to the task of social success. In two studies (23), an
incremental theory of personality created less of a threat appraisal and more of a challenge appraisal, both in response to a
stressor (having to give a speech to upperclass students about
what makes someone popular) and to typical events in high
school (as reported in a daily diary).
Responses
These different appraisals give rise to different responses
depending on one’s implicit theory, again at many levels of analysis (see Table 1, rows 7–10). Physiologically, threat-type
appraisals lead to cardiovascular and hormonal responses that
prepare the body for damage and defeat: constricted blood vessels and secretion of cortisol (activation of the HPA axis; 21,
22). Ascribing to an incremental theory, which promotes more

Child Development Perspectives, Volume 0, Number 0, 2017, Pages 1–6

4

David S. Yeager

challenge-type appraisals, reduces adolescents’ threat-type
physiological responses when they are evaluated negatively by a
peer (23; see also 24 for a replication).
Furthermore, adolescents report different emotions after being
victimized and excluded by peers, depending on the implicit
theories to which they ascribe. Those with an entity theory of
personality are more likely to report self-relevant emotions such
as shame, humiliation, and hatred (4). These emotions differ
from more situation-focused emotions such as anger or sadness
because they stem from the judgment that a person’s core is
flawed; with shame, the emotion stems from the belief that the
self is bad (25), and with hatred, that another person’s core self
is bad or evil (26). In one study, ascribing to an incremental theory reduced shame and hatred after serious bullying, but did not
reduce anger or sadness (4). Thus, believing in an incremental
theory does not make someone oblivious to the injustice of being
victimized; victims are still sad and angry. However, believing
in an incremental theory helps adolescents avoid destructive
emotions like shame and hatred (26).
Finally, the different coping processes created by implicit theories of personality sometimes translate into different overall
levels of internalizing or externalizing responses (see Table 1,
rows 7–10 and the bottom of Figure 1). In a meta-analysis,
ascribing to an entity theory of personality predicted both
depression and aggression in adolescence (27). In our studies,
we gave adolescents hypothetical scenarios of bullying or victimization or put them in experimental situations in which they
were excluded by peers (i.e. Cyberball; 20). In response to either
situation, adolescents who ascribed to an entity theory expressed
greater desire to retaliate and get revenge (4). Those who
believed in an entity theory expected that getting revenge would
make them feel better. In contrast, adolescents who believed in
an incremental theory had less desire for aggression and less of
an expectation that revenge would improve their mood (4).
CHANGING IMPLICIT THEORIES THROUGH
PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERVENTION

Implicit theories of personality are typically stable because
adults rarely teach such theories explicitly to young people.
However, adolescents can be redirected toward more of an
incremental theory with targeted interventions. When this happens, adolescents cope more effectively. Interventions designed
to encourage adolescents to adopt an incremental theory of personality illustrate that people can change their socially relevant
characteristics at any age, under the right conditions, and with
the right support. The interventions contain three messages.
First, they teach that people do not do things because of their
labels (e.g., bully, jerk), but because of their thoughts and feelings, which are located in the brain. Second, an individual’s
thoughts and feelings can change when the brain learns new
ways to view and deal with the social world. Third, this potential
for change means that people are not stuck being one way—that

people who are mean, who bully, or who exclude are not going
to act that way forever but, with the right support, can see that
what they are doing is harmful, and then change. This can provide a basis for hope.
In the interventions, these messages are wrapped in now-standard tactics for wise interventions—that is, ways to produce
internalization of novel worldviews (28). The interventions use
scientific authority (by summarizing neuroscientific findings),
align the message with descriptive social norms (by presenting
statistical information and narrative summaries of older students
who endorse the view that people can change; 29), and implement saying-is-believing activities (by inviting participants to
write a persuasive, comforting letter to a future, excluded student who might be bullied but not yet know that people can
change; 30). The interventions are not passive (they do not tell
adolescents what to think) but active (they ask adolescents to
draw on personal wisdom and pass it on to others).
The first intervention my colleagues and I conducted to introduce youth to the incremental theory of personality was a sixsession workshop in high school science classes at a low-income
school (31). Our study featured two control groups—a group that
took part in a six-session intervention that taught social-emotional coping skills (but no incremental theory) and a group that
received no lessons on these topics. A month after the intervention, students who participated in the classroom workshops on
incremental theory retaliated less toward a peer who excluded
them (via Cyberball). Three and a half months later, those who
took part in the workshop were nominated by their teachers (who
were blind to condition) for having fewer conduct problems than
students in the control groups (31). Students who were taught
social-emotional coping skills showed no change in social behavior compared to the group that received no lessons (32). Critical
for our theory, in the group that was taught the incremental theory of personality, the long-term effects were greatest among
those who had the most social difficulty. That is, students’ conduct problems were reduced the most among those who reported
they had been chronically victimized by peers (31).
Subsequent interventions to promote an incremental theory
have been more compact, involving a 30- to 45-minute selfadministered reading and writing exercise delivered on paper or
via the Internet. In experiments in high schools, adolescents
who received the incremental theory intervention coped with the
social difficulties of moving to high school more productively
than students who received a parallel control exercise. Treated
adolescents reported less overall stress and earned higher grades
during freshman year of high school, which can be a difficult
time socially (23, 33). In another study, entering ninth-graders
who took part in the incremental theory intervention showed
40% fewer depressive symptoms 8–9 months after the intervention, and the effect was more prominent for those who started
the year ascribing to an entity theory of personality (34, 35). In
a replication study, this effect on internalizing symptoms did not
generalize to a group of entering college students a month later

Child Development Perspectives, Volume 0, Number 0, 2017, Pages 1–6

Implicit Theories of Personality

(34), but in a different replication study, the effect on physiological reactivity that precedes internalizing symptoms generalized
to clinically referred adolescents (24). These initial results are
encouraging enough to continue replications, but the intervention is not ready to be implemented at full scale.
LOOKING AHEAD

Researchers can continue this work by focusing on several areas
and building on the unknown areas in the process model in Figure 1. First, can incremental theories of personality reduce bullying, not just responses to victimization and exclusion? Perhaps
those who ascribe to an entity theory—believing that any instance
of social failure would label them a loser forever—maintain a
keen vigilance to threats to status, and then attack others’ status
strategically and preemptively to preserve their own. If this is the
case, an incremental theory intervention might dampen adolescents’ urges to harm others’ reputations by bullying them.
Second, and relatedly, we know little about the behavioral and
environmental mediators of treatments involving the incremental
theory of personality. Do youth who take part in such interventions start making more friends, and do these stronger relationships with peers sustain the effects of the intervention (as
suggested in Figure 1; also cf. 36)? Or are the relevant mediators solely internal to a young person’s psychology? Schoolbased research that replicates implicit theories interventions
and assesses personal and situational moderators could address
these and other possibilities outlined in Figure 1.
Third, how can adults socialize young people to believe an
incremental theory of personality? In the intelligence domain,
telling children “You must be smart at that” communicated an
entity theory of intelligence (37). Providing comforting words
such as “It’s okay, not everybody can be good at math” encouraged hopelessness (38). In the personality domain, parents
sometimes use phrases that invite fixed explanations for differences among people (39, 40), such as “Don’t worry, they’re just
bullies” or “You’re a good person, they’re not.” This language
may not provide relief if it promotes fixed-trait thinking. Indeed,
in one study (41), a common message for LGBTQ youth who
were bullied—the “It gets better” social media campaign—was
that life improves because you can escape your hometown and
move to San Francisco or New York, cities with more tolerant
views of the LGBTQ community. This message increased despair for LGBTQ youth by implying that bullies can never
change. It was only when youth were told that “it gets better”
because society’s views can change over time and peer tormenters might become enlightened one day that LGBTQ youth
felt comforted (41).
CONCLUSION

Research on implicit theories, applied to the social lives of
adolescents, has helped explain differences in how adolescents

5

deal with peer victimization and exclusion, and has informed
interventions. The next phase of research will investigate additional mechanisms, antecedents, and effects at scale across
social contexts. Measures will hopefully improve. After this
research, interventions involving the incremental theory of personality may help ameliorate some of the internalizing and
externalizing consequences of social difficulty in adolescents.
REFERENCES
1. Reijntjes, A., Kamphuis, J. H., Prinzie, P., Boelen, P. A., Van
der Schoot, M., & Telch, M. J. (2011). Prospective linkages
between peer victimization and externalizing problems in children: A meta-analysis. Aggressive Behavior, 37, 215–222. doi:10.
1002/ab.20374
2. Reijntjes, A., Kamphuis, J. H., Prinzie, P., & Telch, M. J. (2010).
Peer victimization and internalizing problems in children: A metaanalysis of longitudinal studies. Child Abuse & Neglect, 34, 244–
252. doi:10.1016/j.chiabu.2009.07.009
3. Graham, S., & Juvonen, J. (1998). Self-blame and peer victimization
in middle school: An attributional analysis. Developmental Psychology, 34, 587–599. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.34.3.587
4. Yeager, D. S., Trzesniewski, K. H., Tirri, K., Nokelainen, P., &
Dweck, C. S. (2011). Adolescents’ implicit theories predict desire
for vengeance after peer conflicts: Correlational and experimental
evidence. Developmental Psychology, 47, 1090–1107. doi:10.1037/
a0023769
5. Gross, J. J. (2015). Emotion regulation: Current status and future
prospects. Psychological Inquiry, 26, 1–26. doi:10.1080/1047840X.
2014.940781
6. Dweck, C. S., Chiu, C., & Hong, Y. (1995). Implicit theories and
their role in judgments and reactions: A world from two perspectives. Psychological Inquiry, 6, 267–285. doi:10.1207/s15327965
pli0604_1
7. Molden, D. C., & Dweck, C. S. (2006). Finding “meaning” in psychology: A lay theories approach to self-regulation, social perception, and social development. American Psychologist, 61, 192–203.
doi:10.1037/0003-066X.61.3.192
8. Schroder, H. S., Dawood, S., Yalch, M. M., Donnellan, M. B., &
Moser, J. S. (2016). Evaluating the domain specificity of mental
health-related mind-sets. Social Psychological and Personality
Science, 7, 508–520. doi:10.1177/1948550616644657
9. Dweck, C. S., & Leggett, E. L. (1988). A social-cognitive approach
to motivation and personality. Psychological Review, 95, 256–273.
doi:10.1037/0033-295X.95.2.256
10. Erdley, C. A., Loomis, C. C., Cain, K. M., & Dumas-Hines, F.
(1997). Relations among children’s social goals, implicit personality
theories, and responses to social failure. Developmental Psychology,
33, 263–272. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.33.2.263
11. Rudolph, K. D. (2010). Implicit theories of peer relationships. Social
Development, 19, 113–129. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9507.2008.00534.x
12. Beer, J. S. (2002). Implicit self-theories of shyness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 1009–1024. doi:10.1037/00223514.83.4.1009
13. Rudolph, K. D., Abaied, J. L., Flynn, M., Sugimura, N., & Agoston,
A. M. (2011). Developing relationships, being cool, and not looking
like a loser: Social goal orientation predicts children’s responses to
peer aggression. Child Development, 82, 1518–1530. doi:10.1111/j.
1467-8624.2011.01631.x

Child Development Perspectives, Volume 0, Number 0, 2017, Pages 1–6

6

David S. Yeager

14. Chiu, C., Hong, Y., & Dweck, C. S. (1997). Lay dispositionism and
implicit theories of personality. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 73, 19–30. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.73.1.19
15. Gervey, B. M., Chiu, C. Y., Hong, Y. Y., & Dweck, C. S. (1999).
Differential use of person information in decisions about guilt versus
innocence: The role of implicit theories. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 17–27. doi:10.1177/0146167299025001002
16. Plaks, J. E., Stroessner, S. J., Dweck, C. S., & Sherman, J. W.
(2001). Person theories and attention allocation: Preferences for
stereotypic versus counterstereotypic information. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 876–893. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.
80.6.876
17. Lee, H. Y., Hooper, S. Y., & Yeager, D. S. (2017). Understanding
high school social aggression: Sensitivity to social status and the
beliefs that create it. Unpublished manuscript. University of Texas at
Austin.
18. Dodge, K. A., & Frame, C. L. (1982). Social cognitive biases and
deficits in aggressive boys. Child Development, 53, 620–635. doi:10.
2307/1129373
19. Yeager, D. S., Miu, A. S., Powers, J., & Dweck, C. S. (2013). Implicit theories of personality and attributions of hostile intent: A metaanalysis, an experiment, and a longitudinal intervention. Child
Development, 84, 1651–1667. doi:10.1111/cdev.12062
20. Williams, K. D., & Jarvis, B. (2006). Cyberball: A program for use
in research on interpersonal ostracism and acceptance. Behavior
Research Methods, 38, 174–180. doi:10.3758/BF03192765
21. Blascovich, J., & Mendes, W. B. (2010). Social psychophysiology
and embodiment. In S. T. Fiske, D. T. Gilbert, & G. Lindzey (Eds.),
Handbook of social psychology (pp. 194–227). New York, NY:
Wiley.
22. Jamieson, J. P., Hangen, E. J., Lee, H. Y., & Yeager, D. S. (in
press). Capitalizing on appraisal processes to improve affective
responses to social stress. Emotion Review. Advance online publication.
23. Yeager, D. S., Lee, H. Y., & Jamieson, J. P. (2016). How to improve
adolescent stress responses: Insights from integrating implicit theories of personality and biopsychosocial models. Psychological
Science, 27, 1078–1091. doi:10.1177/0956797616649604
24. Schleider, J. L., & Weisz, J. R. (2016). Reducing risk for anxiety
and depression in adolescents: Effects of a single-session intervention teaching that personality can change. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 87, 170–181. doi:10.1016/j.brat.2016.09.011
25. Tangney, J. P., Stuewig, J., & Mashek, D. J. (2007). Moral emotions
and moral behavior. Annual Review of Psychology, 58, 345–372.
doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.56.091103.070145
26. Halperin, E., Russell, A. G., Trzesniewski, K. H., Gross, J. J., &
Dweck, C. S. (2011). Promoting the Middle East peace process by
changing beliefs about group malleability. Science, 333, 1767–1769.
doi:10.1126/science.1202925
27. Schleider, J. L., Abel, M. R., & Weisz, J. R. (2015). Implicit theories and youth mental health problems: A random-effects meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 35, 1–9. doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2014.
11.001

28. Walton, G. M. (2014). The new science of wise psychological interventions. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 23, 73–82.
doi:10.1177/0963721413512856
29. Cialdini, R. B. (2003). Crafting normative messages to protect the
environment. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 12, 105–
109. doi:10.1111/1467-8721.01242
30. Aronson, E. (1999). The power of self-persuasion. American Psychologist, 54, 875–884. doi:10.1037/h0088188
31. Yeager, D. S., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2013). An
implicit theories of personality intervention reduces adolescent
aggression in response to victimization and exclusion. Child Development, 84, 970–988. doi:10.1111/cdev12003
32. Yeager, D. S., Fong, C. J., Lee, H. Y., & Espelage, D. L. (2015).
Declines in efficacy of anti-bullying programs among older adolescents: Theory and a three-level meta-analysis. Journal of Applied
Developmental Psychology, 37, 36–51. doi:10.1016/j.appdev.2014.
11.005
33. Yeager, D. S., Johnson, R., Spitzer, B. J., Trzesniewski, J. H., Powers, J., & Dweck, C. S. (2014). The far-reaching effects of believing
people can change: Implicit theories of personality shape stress,
health, and achievement during adolescence. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 106, 867–884. doi:10.1037/a0036335
34. Miu, A. S. (2016). The effects of mindsets on depression. Doctoral dissertation. Department of Psychology, Emory University. Retrieved
from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Database.
35. Miu, A. S., & Yeager, D. S. (2015). Preventing symptoms of depression by teaching adolescents that people can change: Effects of a
brief incremental theory of personality intervention at 9-month follow-up. Clinical Psychological Science, 3, 726–743. doi:10.1177/
2167702614548317
36. Yeager, D. S., Walton, G. M., Brady, S. T., Akcinar, E. N., Paunesku, D., Keane, L., . . . Dweck, C. S. (2016). Teaching a lay theory
before college narrows achievement gaps at scale. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
113, E3341–E3348. doi:10.1073/pnas.1524360113
37. Mueller, C. M., & Dweck, C. S. (1998). Praise for intelligence can
undermine children’s motivation and performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 33–52. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.
75.1.33
38. Rattan, A., Good, C., & Dweck, C. S. (2012). “It’s ok—not everyone
can be good at math”: Instructors with an entity theory comfort (and
demotivate) students. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
48, 731–737. doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2011.12.012
39. Cimpian, A., & Markman, E. M. (2011). The generic/nongeneric
distinction influences how children interpret new information about
social others. Child Development, 82, 471–492. doi:10.1111/j.14678624.2010.01525.x
40. Gelman, S. A. (2004). Psychological essentialism in children. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 404–409. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2004.07.001
41. Rattan, A., & Ambady, N. (2014). How “it gets better:” Effectively
communicating support to targets of prejudice. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 40, 555–566. doi:10.1177/
0146167213519480

Child Development Perspectives, Volume 0, Number 0, 2017, Pages 1–6

View publication stats

Educational Psychologist

ISSN: 0046-1520 (Print) 1532-6985 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/hedp20

Mindsets That Promote Resilience: When Students
Believe That Personal Characteristics Can Be
Developed
David Scott Yeager & Carol S. Dweck
To cite this article: David Scott Yeager & Carol S. Dweck (2012) Mindsets That Promote
Resilience: When Students Believe That Personal Characteristics Can Be Developed, Educational
Psychologist, 47:4, 302-314, DOI: 10.1080/00461520.2012.722805
To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00461520.2012.722805

Published online: 19 Oct 2012.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 21493

View related articles

Citing articles: 145 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hedp20
Download by: [University of Texas Libraries]

Date: 20 September 2017, At: 09:55

EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGIST, 47(4), 302–314, 2012
C Division 15, American Psychological Association
Copyright 
ISSN: 0046-1520 print / 1532-6985 online
DOI: 10.1080/00461520.2012.722805

Mindsets That Promote Resilience:
When Students Believe That Personal
Characteristics Can Be Developed

Downloaded by [University of Texas Libraries] at 09:55 20 September 2017

David Scott Yeager
Department of Psychology
University of Texas at Austin

Carol S. Dweck
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

Because challenges are ubiquitous, resilience is essential for success in school and in life.
In this article we review research demonstrating the impact of students’ mindsets on their
resilience in the face of academic and social challenges. We show that students who believe
(or are taught) that intellectual abilities are qualities that can be developed (as opposed to
qualities that are fixed) tend to show higher achievement across challenging school transitions
and greater course completion rates in challenging math courses. New research also shows
that believing (or being taught) that social attributes can be developed can lower adolescents’
aggression and stress in response to peer victimization or exclusion, and result in enhanced
school performance. We conclude by discussing why psychological interventions that change
students’ mindsets are effective and what educators can do to foster these mindsets and create
resilience in educational settings.

When students struggle with their schoolwork, what determines whether they give up or embrace the obstacle and
work to overcome it? And when students feel excluded or
victimized by peers, what determines whether they seek
revenge through aggression or seek more productive solutions? Resilience—or whether students respond positively to
challenges—is crucial for success in school and in life. Yet
what causes it? And what can be done to increase it?
In this article we demonstrate the impact of students’
mindsets—or implicit theories about the malleability of human characteristics—on their academic and social resilience
(Dweck, 2006; Dweck, Chiu, & Hong, 1995). We show how
mindsets can contribute to two of the most important issues currently facing educators: (a) academic underachievement and (b) the impact of peer exclusion and victimization.
Each of these problems is of great concern, yet each has
been frustratingly difficult to address. For example, many
of the large-scale interventions evaluated by the Institute of
Correspondence should be addressed to David Scott Yeager, Department
of Psychology, University of Texas at Austin, 108 E. Dean Keeton Stop
A8000, Austin, TX 78712-1043. E-mail: yeager@psy.utexas.edu

Education Sciences in recent years have failed to produce
significant gains in achievement beyond the treatment period (e.g., Garet et al., 2010; Glazerman et al., 2010; JamesBurdumy et al., 2010; Somers et al., 2010). Similarly, although whole-school antibullying interventions consistently
reduce aggression among elementary school students, among
adolescents even large, well-implemented interventions frequently have no effect (Karna et al., 2011; Silvia et al., 2011).
Those programs may have taught important skills or provided
key resources. Yet we show that attention must also be paid
to the psychology underlying adolescents’ resilient responses
to academic and social challenges.
Prominent in this underlying psychology are students’
implicit theories (Dweck, 2006; Dweck et al., 1995). For
example, our research shows how the theory that intelligence is fixed and unchangeable can lead students to interpret academic challenges as a sign that they may lack
intelligence—that they may be “dumb” or might be seen
as “dumb.” As we demonstrate, this way of thinking compromises resilience in academic settings, even among highachieving students (Blackwell, Trzesniewski, & Dweck,
2007; Hong, Chiu, Dweck, Lin, & Wan, 1999; Nussbaum

Downloaded by [University of Texas Libraries] at 09:55 20 September 2017

MINDSETS THAT PROMOTE RESILIENCE

& Dweck, 2008). In the same way, an implicit theory that
personality is unchangeable can lead adolescents to interpret peer victimization or exclusion as something that cannot
change (Yeager, Trzesniewski, Tirri, Nokelainen, & Dweck,
2011). It is clear how this can reduce resilience. In each case,
even when adolescents are taught the intellectual or social
skills they need to be resilient, they may not employ them
adequately unless their mindsets foster the idea that their
academic and social adversities have the potential to improve
(Blackwell et al., 2007; Yeager, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, in
press).
Our research also shows that students’ mindsets can be
changed and that doing so can promote resilience. Students
can be taught the science underlying people’s potential to
change their academically and socially relevant characteristics, and they can be shown how to apply these insights to
their own lives (Blackwell et al., 2007; Yeager, Trzesniewski,
et al., in press). When they are, it can have striking effects
on resilience. Thus, although we examine vulnerabilities, the
present article also provides cause for optimism.
We summarize what implicit theories are and how they
lead to resilience. We also review the effects of relatively brief
and psychologically precise school-based interventions that
shift adolescents’ implicit theories toward a malleable view.
We do so by first reviewing research on implicit theories of
intelligence and their effects on academic performance. We
then review new research on implicit theories of personality and their effects on aggression and stress. We also show
how promoting a malleable view of personality, by reducing
stress in school, can actually affect students’ achievement.
We end by addressing three important issues: (a) how efforts
to change mindsets can increase resilience even without removing the adversities students encounter in school, (b) what
parents and educators should say (or avoid saying) in order to
support students’ growth-oriented implicit theories in school,
and (c) how implicit theories interventions should be scaled
up (and how they should not be scaled up) to affect more
students.

WHAT IS RESILIENCE?
Resilience can be defined as “good outcomes in spite of serious threats to adaptation or development” (Masten, 2001,
p. 228). Within this broader definition, in the present article
we call “resilient” any behavioral, attributional, or emotional
response to an academic or social challenge that is positive and beneficial for development (such as seeking new
strategies, putting forth greater effort, or solving conflicts
peacefully), and we refer to any response to a challenge that
is negative or not beneficial for development (such as helplessness, giving up, cheating, or aggressive retaliation) as not
resilient. Many factors can influence a person’s resilience, including the environmental risks and assets that surround them
(Masten, 2001). At the same time, a premise of our research

303

is that it is not only the presence of social and academic
adversity that determines a person’s outcomes but also a person’s interpretations of those adversities (Olson & Dweck,
2008; for a classic formulation in the context of depression,
see Beck, 1967). As such, next we review research on the
mindsets that allow a given person to show more resilient
interpretations and reactions to a challenge.

WHAT ARE IMPLICIT THEORIES?
Implicit theories, in our research, are defined as core assumptions about the malleability of personal qualities (Dweck
et al., 1995; Dweck & Leggett, 1988; Molden & Dweck,
2006). They are called “implicit” because they are rarely
made explicit, and they are called “theories” because, like a
scientific theory, they create a framework for making predictions and judging the meaning of events in one’s world. Implicit theories are sometimes also called naı̈ve or “lay” theories because, unlike scientific theories, they refer to a person’s
commonsense explanations for everyday events (Molden &
Dweck, 2006). Although students can have implicit theories
about any personal attribute, in the present article we focus on two that are especially relevant to education: implicit
theories of intelligence and implicit theories of personality.
Students can vary in their implicit theories, from more of
a fixed or entity theory of intelligence or personality to more
of a malleable or incremental theory (Table 1). Students with
more of an entity theory of intelligence see intellectual ability as something of which people have a fixed, unchangeable
amount. On the other end of the spectrum, those with more of
an incremental theory of intelligence see intellectual ability
as something that can be grown or developed over time. In a
similar way, those with more of an entity theory of personality see people’s socially relevant traits as fixed, whereas those
with more of an incremental theory of personality view people’s traits as having the potential to change. It is important
to note that implicit theories of intelligence and of personality are distinct—it is possible for a student to believe that
TABLE 1
Academic Mindsets, for Those With More of an Entity
Versus Incremental Implicit Theory of Intelligence
Entity Theory
Goals
Value of effort, help,
and strategies?
Response to
challenge
Changes in grades
during times of
adversity

Incremental Theory

Look smart
Higher

Learn
Lower

Tendency to give up

Work harder and smarter

Decrease or remain
low

Increase

Downloaded by [University of Texas Libraries] at 09:55 20 September 2017

304

YEAGER AND DWECK

intelligence can be changed but that personality cannot, or
vice versa (see Dweck et al., 1995).1
How do implicit theories work? Because a given implicit
theory fosters particular judgments and reactions, it can lead
to relatively consistent patterns of vulnerability or resilience
over time (Dweck et al., 1995). For example, implicit theories
shape people’s causal attributions (Hong et al., 1999; see also
Blackwell et al., 2007; Robins & Pals, 2002; for a review of
research on causal attributions, see Weiner, 1986, 1995), and
it is well known that explaining personal adversities in terms
of fixed traits undermines resilience. As we illustrate next,
these fixed-trait attributions are more likely when people have
an entity theory, and they represent one pathway through
which implicit theories lead to differences in resilience (e.g.,
Blackwell et al., 2007; Yeager et al., 2011).

IMPLICIT THEORIES OF INTELLIGENCE AND
RESPONSES TO ACADEMIC ADVERSITIES
Why Do Implicit Theories of Intelligence Affect
Academic Resilience?
Students’ implicit theories of intelligence predict their academic performance over time, particularly when they face
challenging work (Blackwell et al., 2007). We review how
and why this happens.
The two implicit theories of intelligence—entity and
incremental—appear to create different psychological worlds
for students: one that promotes resilience and one that does
not (Dweck, 2006; Dweck et al., 1995). The entity theory
world is about measuring your ability, and everything (challenging tasks, effort, setbacks) measures your ability. It is a
world of threats and defenses. The incremental world is about
learning and growth, and everything (challenges, effort, setbacks) is seen as being helpful to learn and grow. It is a world
of opportunities to improve.
More precisely, an incremental versus entity theory shapes
students’ goals (whether they are eager to learn or instead
care mostly about looking smart and, perhaps even more important, not looking dumb), their beliefs about effort (whether
effort is a key to success and growth or whether it is a signal
that they lack natural talent), their attributions for their setbacks (whether a setback means that they need to work harder
and alter their strategies or whether it means they might be
“dumb”), and their learning strategies in the face of setbacks
1Of interest, research also shows it is possible within a given domain
for a person to have an even more specific implicit theory. For instance,
Good, Rattan, and Dweck (2012) and Rattan, Good, and Dweck (2012)
examined implicit theories about math ability rather than general theories
about intelligence. Beer (2002) investigated implicit theories about shyness
rather than general theories about personality. An important area for future
research will be to document the relative advantages for educational practice
of intervening to change a more general implicit theory versus a more
specific one.

(whether they work harder or whether they give up, consider
cheating, and/or become defensive). Blackwell et al. (2007)
showed that these are the variables that explain why students
with more of an incremental theory were more resilient and
earned higher grades when they confronted a challenging
school transition. Crucially, this process can play out both
for higher achieving and lower achieving students (Dweck
& Leggett, 1988); inevitably, academic standards rise, and
when they do, a person’s implicit theory of intelligence can
affect whether they respond resiliently.
Can Changes in Theories of Intelligence Affect
Academic Behavior Over Time?
Intervention experiments have shown that, indeed, changes
in theories of intelligence can affect academic behavior over
time (Aronson, Fried, & Good, 2002; Blackwell et al., 2007,
Study 2; Good, Aronson, & Inzlicht, 2003).
Aronson and colleagues (2002) changed college students’
theories of intelligence. In the incremental theory treatment
group, they first provided students with scientific information about the brain’s functioning and potential malleability.
Students were taught how, when learning, the brain grows
stronger and smarter by forming new connections between
neurons (a message that is scientifically accurate). Students
were also asked to picture their brain growing a denser network of neurons when they faced academic challenges. Next,
to make the message “stick,” Aronson et al. asked participants to write a few “pen pal” letters teaching this message
to a struggling middle school student. This treatment was
compared to a control group that was taught the idea that
different people have different intellectual strengths and that
therefore they should not worry if they do poorly in any
given area; control group students were also asked to write
pen pal letters to younger students explaining this idea. There
was also a second control group that was simply monitored
over time. For all groups, students’ grades were tracked until
the end of the year. Compared to both control groups, the
incremental theory group showed a significant increase in
overall grade point average at the end of the year of roughly
.23 grade points. The effects of learning that intelligence is
improvable were slightly greater for African American students, who may face greater challenges in college than White
students because of negative stereotypes about their group’s
intellectual ability (Steele, 1997).
Could implicit theories also increase academic resilience
among seventh-grade students in the midst of a difficult adolescent transition? Good et al. (2003) examined whether middle school students who received a series of weekly mentoring e-mails over the year explaining an incremental theory
would perform better on their statewide achievement tests at
the end of the year. They found that, compared to students
randomly assigned to a control group, students in the incremental group showed significantly higher math and verbal
achievement test scores. Especially large effects were found

Downloaded by [University of Texas Libraries] at 09:55 20 September 2017

MINDSETS THAT PROMOTE RESILIENCE

among middle school girls in math—students who may need
to be resilient in the face of negative stereotypes about girls’
quantitative ability (Spencer, Steele, & Quinn, 1999). These
girls’ test scores were improved by more than 1 SD compared
to the control group that did not learn an incremental theory of
intelligence.
These studies showed that implicit theories of intelligence
could be taught in school settings and that changing them
could affect academic behavior. Yet they did not address
whether implicit theories would have an impact relative to
an intervention that provided academic skills but did not
emphasize the potential for intelligence to grow and improve (e.g., the Good et al., 2003, control group taught an
antidrug message). To address this issue, Blackwell and colleagues (2007, Study 2) designed two different interventions
(an incremental theory intervention and a study skills intervention) and delivered each to predominately racial minority
seventh-grade students. Students were randomly assigned to
learn either useful study skills for eight sessions (the control group) or the incremental theory along with study skills
for the eight sessions (the treatment group). Results showed
that, as is common during the transition to middle school,
the math grades for students in the control group continued
to decline. But for students who learned the incremental theory, this downward trend was eliminated and reversed; in the
months after the treatment, they showed significantly greater
improvement in math grades relative to the control group,
nearly returning to the levels at the beginning of the year. At
year’s end, this corresponded to an estimated .30 grade point
difference between the two groups. Notably, the study skills
taught to the control group did not reverse the decline in students’ math scores; students also needed the resilience that
comes from an incremental theory to put their study skills
into practice.
Our more recent research has begun to use implicit theories interventions to address the extremely high failure rate
of community college students who are placed in remedial
or “developmental” math classes. By some estimates, nearly
half of college students in America are attending a community college (Kolesnikova, 2010), and roughly 65% of
them place into math classes that are precollege math—that
is, math at the middle school or high school level, such as
elementary algebra or even arithmetic (Center for Community College Student Success, 2011). Not surprisingly, this
poses a major obstacle to their prospects for graduation. Students in many cases must pass several of these developmental
courses and then college-level courses to graduate or transfer
to 4-year colleges. Sadly, only a small proportion of them do
so (roughly one third of those who take the classes in one
analysis by Bailey, Jeong, & Cho, 2010). Placement into remediation also has the potential to lead students to conclude
that math is a fixed ability that they do not possess. In fact, in
one survey of such developmental math students, more than
68% endorsed an entity theory about math ability (Yeager,
2012). In light of these challenges, these students may have

305

an especially great need for resilience in general and for an
incremental theory intervention in particular.
In this context, Paunesku, Yeager, Romero and Walton
(2012) built on the Blackwell et al. (2007) intervention to
create a revised reading and writing exercise that taught an
incremental theory to community college students in developmental mathematics courses. It employed many of the
same messages as the Blackwell et al. intervention, only
these messages were tailored based on interviews and focus
groups conducted with community college math students.
For instance, the article that taught the incremental theory
emphasized the malleability of adults’ brains, because in focus groups some students felt that their math ability had now
rigidified after a period of greater malleability in childhood.
Next, although the intervention taught a general incremental theory of intelligence, it also emphasized one’s potential
to improve math ability so that participants could understand
the specific applicability of the general theory. It said, “When
people learn and practice new ways of doing algebra or statistics, it can grow their brains—even if they haven’t done well
in math in the past.” In addition, our pilot work revealed that
attempting math problems that they did not know how to solve
could make students feel “dumb,” and so they avoided doing
challenging problems altogether and instead only worked the
“example” problems (or, even worse, only read the textbook
and did not work any problems at all until they felt comfortable with the content). We sought to counteract this lack of
resilience when facing novel problems. Therefore the article also emphasized the importance of switching strategies
and seeking out challenges in order to grow one’s brain. For
instance, in a section titled “A Formula for Growing Your
Brain: Effort + Good Strategies + Help From Others,” the
article stated,
It’s not just about effort. You also need to learn skills that let
you use your brain in a smarter way. . . . You actually have to
practice the right way . . . to get better at something. In fact,
scientists have found that the brain grows more when you
learn something new, and less when you practice things you
already know.

Paunesku et al. (2012) evaluated the efficacy of the new
intervention by delivering it via the Internet to a sample
of more than 200 community college students enrolled in
developmental math classes (see the Project for Education
Research That Scales, http://www.perts.net). They randomly
assigned students to read either the article that taught an
incremental theory or a similar control article that taught
about the brain but did not mention its potential to grow
and improve with learning. As in Aronson and colleagues’
(2002) research, participants in both conditions then wrote
mentoring letters to future students in which they explained
the key messages taught in their respective articles. Notably,
teachers at the college were unaware of students’ experimental condition and were not given any instruction or support

Downloaded by [University of Texas Libraries] at 09:55 20 September 2017

306

YEAGER AND DWECK

in reinforcing the treatment message. The exercise took, on
average, 30 min to complete.
At the end of the semester, several months later, students’
official records were obtained from their college registrar.
Preliminary analyses suggest the intervention’s effects were
substantial. Although roughly 20% of students in the control
group withdrew from their developmental math class, that
number was reduced to only about 9% in the incremental
theory treatment group—a significant difference (Paunesku
et al., 2012). Hence, this brief incremental theory exercise increased students’ resilience—it cut by more than half
the withdrawal rate of developmental math students several
months later, even with no explicit reinforcement from the
researchers or the instructors. In addition, among those who
remained in the course, treated students earned better grades
and were less likely to fail. This increase in resilience is
especially surprising given the nonsignificant effects on developmental course persistence found in major recent efforts to impact these students, such as learning communities
(Weiss, Visher, & Wathington, 2010), conditional cash transfers (Goldrick-Rab, Harris, Benson, & Kelchen, 2011), or
comprehensive college reform (Rutschow et al., 2011). We
believe the implicit theories intervention had its striking effects because it changed the meaning of challenges—instead
of challenges making students feel “dumb,” the challenges
offered a way to get smarter. This belief was crucial for promoting resilience.
Summary
Many educational reform efforts have focused on increasing rigor in curricula and instruction, but if they do not also
address resilience in the face of these more challenging standards, then making such improvements may be less effective
than hoped. Our research and that of our colleagues show
that if students can be redirected to see intellectual ability as
something that can be developed over time with effort, good
strategies, and help from others, then they are more resilient
when they encounter the rigorous learning opportunities presented to them.

IMPLICIT THEORIES OF PERSONALITY AND
REACTIONS TO PEER EXCLUSION AND
VICTIMIZATION
Performing academically is just one of the challenges adolescents face on a daily basis. Students are also highly concerned about their social competence, in particular whether
their peers include and respect them (Crosnoe, 2011; Wentzel
& Wigfield, 1998). When their social relationships are challenged, for instance by peer victimization or exclusion, students need to be able to respond resiliently.
Our research, described next, shows that implicit theories
of personality—or beliefs about whether people’s personal-

ity traits are fixed or are malleable (Chiu, Hong, et al., 1997;
Yeager et al., 2011)—can affect resilience following peer victimization or exclusion. We believed this would be especially
true among adolescents in high school, for several reasons.
The early years of high school are marked by an increased
concern about social labels (Brown, Mory, & Kinney, 1994;
Eccles & Barber, 1999) and by substantial adversities that
could threaten them with negative labels. For instance, high
school students at nearly every level of popularity are victimized at least somewhat by their peers (Faris & Felmlee,
2011). Even when students are not directly excluded, they
might still fear peer exclusion because of the instability of
social networks during the transition to high school (Cairns
& Cairns, 1994) and the frequent use of peer exclusion to
gain social status (Cohen & Prinstein, 2006).
At the same time, adolescents increasingly seem to believe that social labels, once acquired, are fixed entities that
cannot change (Birnbaum, Deeb, Segall, Ben-Eliyahu, &
Diesendruck, 2010; Diesendruck & haLevi, 2006; Killen,
Kelly, Richardson, & Jampol, 2010). In sum, adolescents are
increasingly attentive to their social labels, they are increasingly faced with the threat of negative labels, and they increasingly believe that those social labels refer to fixed traits.
As a result, we expected implicit theories of personality to
provide important leverage for understanding resilience in
this age group.
Peer victimization and exclusion can lead to a host of
negative outcomes, including aggressive retaliation (e.g., Ostrov, 2010; Reijntjes et al., 2010), greater stress (Klomek,
Marrocco, Kleinman, Schonfeld, & Gould, 2007), and even
academic underperformance (Crosnoe, 2011). Thus, next we
focus on the role of implicit theories of personality in shaping
each of these.
Aggressive Retaliation
Past research had shown that those with more of an entity
theory of personality are more likely to view their own and
others’ negative behaviors as stemming from fixed, personal
deficiencies (Chiu, Dweck, Tong, & Fu, 1997; Erdley, Cain,
Loomis, Dumas-Hines, & Dweck, 1997). As a result, they
tend to focus more on punishing others and less on educating or rehabilitating others (Erdley & Dweck, 1993; Gervey,
Chiu, Hong, & Dweck, 1999; Loeb & Dweck, 1994; also
see Giles, 2003). Yet previous research had not examined
whether implicit theories would affect high school adolescents’ aggressive retaliation.
Our research addressed this question (Yeager, Miu,
Powers, & Dweck, in press; Yeager et al., 2011; Yeager, Trzesniewski, et al., in press). We hypothesized that for adolescents
in an entity theory framework, victimization or exclusion
may be seen as being done by and to people whose traits cannot change—for example, by a “bully” to someone who is
considered a “loser.” Even more, the “bully” might be seen
as a permanently “bad person” who deserves to be punished,

MINDSETS THAT PROMOTE RESILIENCE

Downloaded by [University of Texas Libraries] at 09:55 20 September 2017

whereas they themselves may feel like “losers” who are permanently not likable. Under these conditions, harming the
transgressor who made them feel that way may seem more
satisfying. On the other hand, from the perspective of an
incremental theory, victimization may be thought of as being done by and to people who can change over time. Thus,
learning an incremental theory might reduce the desire for
aggressive retaliation by allowing adolescents to see their
future as more hopeful and by creating a greater desire to understand the motives of transgressors and, where appropriate,
to influence them (Yeager, Trzesniewski, et al., in press).

Do implicit theories of personality predict responses
to peer conflicts? Yeager et al. (2011) began by investigating whether adolescents who endorsed more of an entity
theory of personality would offer more vengeful responses
to peer conflicts. To measure an entity theory, Yeager et al.
(2011) asked high school students how much they agreed
with statements such as “Bullies and victims are types of
people that really can’t be changed.” Next, we asked adolescents to write about a time that a peer upset them, and
to rate their desire for vengeance—that is, how much they
felt like “hurting,” “getting back at,” or “wishing someone
would hurt” the peer. In a diverse sample of adolescents that
included students from urban America and from across the
nation of Finland, we found that those with more of an entity theory reported a significantly greater desire for revenge
following a peer conflict and a reduced desire to forgive the
peer (Yeager et al., 2011). What would those with more of
an incremental theory do? In subsequent research, we found
that those with more of an incremental theory were more
likely to say they would address a peer who had intentionally bullied them and try to productively educate them about
the harm their behaviors had caused (Yeager & Miu, 2011).
That is, those with an incremental theory were not passive
recipients of victimization. To the contrary, they sought out
positive solutions to proactively improve their situation; they
were more resilient.
Does teaching adolescents an incremental theory
of personality increase resilience following peer conflicts? In an initial experimental test of this question, Yeager et al. (2011, Study 3) temporarily oriented high school
students toward an incremental view. First, all participants
read a brief scenario about a student who was a victim of
bullying in school and were asked to imagine that they were
that victim. In the randomly assigned incremental condition, however, students learned from peers and adults that
people’s characteristics can be developed and are not fixed.
They read brief summaries of longitudinal, correlational and
experimental studies that showed that people’s personal characteristics could change. Students in the randomly assigned
control group read the same scenario without the incremental theory message. Then all students rated how they would
like to respond to the bullying peers in the scenario, in-

307

cluding how much they would desire vengeful aggression.
Yeager et al. (2011) showed that students in the incremental
theory group were significantly less likely to endorse aggressive, vengeful responses to the bullies. This finding has been
replicated in other studies conducted with students from both
high-income and low-income communities (e.g., Yeager &
Miu, 2011; Yeager, Miu, et al., in press). These results were
encouraging because they showed that adolescents are not
stuck in an entity way of thinking; they can be led to adopt
more of an incremental framework.

How do theories of personality lead to resilience?
Implicit theories of personality have their effects by fostering patterns of attributions and emotions about both the
transgressor and the self. For instance, after imagining being
the victim of bullying, those with more of an entity theory
are more likely to say that the peer is a “bad person” (Yeager
et al., 2011). Relatedly, after experiencing a peer conflict in
which the intention of the peer was ambiguous, those with
more of an entity theory were more likely to conclude that the
peer “did it on purpose in order to be mean” (Yeager, Miu,
et al., in press). Each of these attributions about the peer
can mediate the effect of implicit theories on a desire for
vengeance, and each can be reduced when adolescents are
experimentally led to adopt an incremental theory (Yeager
et al., 2011; Yeager, Miu, et al., in press).
The entity and incremental theories also produce differences in attributions about oneself. Those with more of
an entity theory attribute experiences of social exclusion to
their own traits—that “maybe I’m just not a likable person”
(Erdley et al., 1997). These self-blaming attributions can
give rise to feelings of shame (Tangney, Stuewig, & Mashek,
2007; cf. Graham & Juvonen, 1998), and in our data shame
is a strong predictor of both hatred for a peer and a desire
for revenge (Yeager et al., 2011). An incremental theory, on
the other hand, sets up a psychological world in which shame
is less likely as a response to social adversity. Our incremental theory manipulation reduced shame following a peer
conflict, and this reduction mediated in part the reduction in
desire for revenge (Yeager et al., 2011). In sum, when adolescents facing social adversities are taught to hold more of
an incremental theory of personality, they are less likely to
condemn global, stable personal traits; they report feeling
fewer negative emotions such as shame or hatred; as a result,
they are less likely to desire revenge.
Do implicit theories of personality affect real-world
aggression in urban high schools? In new research, we
tested the hypothesis that an incremental theory intervention
might, by changing the meaning of negative social events,
lead to reductions in retaliatory aggressive behavior even
in schools that have high levels of peer conflicts (Yeager,
Trzesniewski, et al., in press). For both theoretical and practical reasons it was important to conduct this research. As
noted, previous efforts to curb aggression have had limited

Downloaded by [University of Texas Libraries] at 09:55 20 September 2017

308

YEAGER AND DWECK

success in high school populations. Although it is easier
to reduce aggression among children using comprehensive
universal preventative interventions, analogous efforts
among adolescents in high school often show no significant
treatment effects (Karna et al., 2011; for narrative reviews
and meta-analyses, see Fossum, Handegård, Martinussen, &
Mørch, 2008; Merrell, Gueldner, Ross, & Isava, 2008; Smith,
Schneider, Smith, & Ananiadou, 2004; Vreeman & Carroll,
2007; Wilson & Lipsey, 2007). Thus, it was essential to come
to a greater understanding of the causes of adolescents’ aggressive retaliation and also, given the previously noted research suggesting that adolescents are coming to see social
traits are increasingly fixed, to develop effective interventions
to stem these causes.
Our research (Yeager, Trzesniewski, et al., in press) started
by creating a more extensive incremental theory of personality treatment than we employed in our previous brief experiments. Our new intervention involved six classroom sessions.
In the first two, building on the Blackwell et al. (2007) intervention, students learned about the anatomy and function
of the brain—for instance, that the brain thinks thoughts by
sending signals between neurons and that these signals cause
behavior. Students also learned about neuroplasticity and the
brain’s potential to change and reorganize itself when people learn and practice new ways of thinking. In the next two
sessions, students were taught the core of the incremental
theory of personality message: that people do not do things
because of their traits or labels, but because of thoughts and
feelings—thoughts and feelings that live in the brain and that
can be changed. It is important to note that students were
not taught that changing people was easy or guaranteed, or
even that one person can, on their own, change another person. Instead, the intervention emphasized the potential for
change throughout one’s lifetime, despite the difficulty and
uncertainty of it. In the final two sessions, students practiced applying these beliefs following peer conflicts through
small-group discussions, reading and writing exercises, and
role-playing.
In a double-blind randomized field experiment (Yeager,
Trzesnieski, et al., in press), we evaluated the new intervention with 230 students attending a high school with substantial levels of conflict. For instance, 40% of students in this
school said that they did not feel safe from threats, and many
students were aligned with one of two rival gangs.
We compared our incremental theory of personality intervention to a six-session intervention that taught extensive
social and emotional skills for coping with peer conflicts.
This control condition workshop was highly analogous to the
type of intervention that is often successful at reducing aggression among children and frequently attempted with high
school students. In the control group, students were taught
about positive and negative ways of coping with problems and
practiced those methods of coping through scenarios, skits,
and small-group discussion. Control group exercises and scenarios were for the most part identical to those used in the

incremental condition, were delivered by highly experienced
and trained teachers, and were rated as equally enjoyable and
informative. There was also a second, no-treatment control
group.
We first assessed the impact of the interventions on behavioral aggression 1 month after the workshops ended. We
did so through a standardized task in which students experienced exclusion during a virtual game of catch that they
believed they were playing with two peers (the “Cyberball”
paradigm; Williams & Jarvis, 2006). In fact, the other players were controlled by a computer. Students then had the
opportunity to retaliate by assigning to the peer who ostensibly excluded them a chosen amount of a food that the peer
did not like—in this case, uncomfortably spicy hot sauce (of
course, students later learned that no one actually ate the hot
sauce). Aggressive retaliation was indexed by how much of
the hot sauce was allocated. Students also had the opportunity
to take prosocial action; they were given the chance to write
an anonymous note to accompany the hot sauce that went to
the peer. This part of the experiment was conducted in the
school by different research assistants and was presented as
a separate study with no relation to the treatment or control
workshops. It was highly realistic. In fact, testifying to the
validity of our measure, the amount of hot sauce allocated
during this brief experience was significantly correlated with
students’ probability of having been suspended for fighting
in school.
Did learning the incremental theory make high school
students behave less aggressively (and more resiliently) in
response to exclusion? Yeager, Trzesniewski, et al. (in press)
found that students in the incremental treatment group—who
learned that people have the potential to change—showed far
less aggressive retaliation on the hot sauce task 1 month
postintervention. They allocated roughly 40% less hot sauce
to the peer who had excluded them than did students in the
control groups. They were also 3 times as likely to take prosocial action toward the peer who excluded them. That is, they
wrote notes that warned the peer about the spiciness of the
sauce and apologized for it, such as, “I tried to put only a
little bit of the sauce because you circled you disliked it. So
I hope it is not too much for you.” Students in the control
conditions, on the other hand, were more likely to write neutral or even menacing notes to the peer who excluded them
in Cyberball, such as, “I gave you a lot because you don’t
like spicy!!!” These results are particularly striking because
the coping-skills control group was explicitly taught 1 month
earlier how to think and respond positively following peer
conflicts, whereas the incremental theory group was only
told to recognize people’s potential for change. Yet the incremental group was the one that responded less aggressively
and more prosocially following peer exclusion.
Would the incremental theory alter more chronic behaviors in school, outside of this controlled provocation? At the
end of the school year, the students in the incremental theory
treatment group were more likely than those in the control

MINDSETS THAT PROMOTE RESILIENCE

Downloaded by [University of Texas Libraries] at 09:55 20 September 2017

groups to be nominated by teachers (who were blind to experimental condition and hypotheses) for improved conduct—in
terms of both aggression toward peers and conduct in the
classroom.
In sum, the incremental theory of personality intervention,
by leading students to hold a mindset in which people had
the potential to change, increased resilience among students
at a school with substantial levels of peer conflict. It reduced
aggressive retaliation and increased prosocial behavior following an experience of peer exclusion 1 month postintervention, and it improved overall conduct problems in school
as assessed 3 months postintervention (Yeager, Trzesniewski,
et al., in press).
Social Stress and Academic Performance
For many adolescents, the transition to high school is rocky.
One new freshman—a participant in one our studies—
described it this way:
Some people in school began treating their friends, including
me, in a way that showed we weren’t as close or not important
anymore. . . . This morning I was walking by and all the
person could do was act as if I weren’t there. Seeing them
and they just look you in the face without a “hi” or smile
makes me feel invisible.

Imagine the stress of this experience when seen through
the lens of an entity theory of personality. From that perspective, these early adversities are not seen as part of a normal
transition but rather as diagnostic information about one’s
(seemingly bleak) social future. Under these circumstances,
it is easy to see that an entity theory leads a student to experience greater stress following even minor instances of peer
exclusion or victimization. By the same token, a well-timed
nudge toward more of an incremental view—by emphasizing the potential for change—might substantially change the
meaning of these early negative social events and, by doing
so, might dramatically reduce stress and its consequences.
Thus, in some of our most recent research we have examined whether an incremental theory, by making victimization
and exclusion seem less permanent, could reduce adolescents’ stress following peer exclusion and perhaps even their
chronic stress (Yeager, Johnson, Spitzer, & Dweck, 2012).
We expected that if this were the case, then learning an incremental theory at a time filled with the potential for stress like
the transition to high school might lead to a change in socialstress-related outcomes, such as academic performance (see
Crosnoe, 2011).
To test this we had a new sample of high school freshmen (N = 78) complete a condensed version of our incremental theory of personality intervention in the 1st month
of high school (Yeager et al., 2012). This intervention consisted of a two activities, each lasting one class period. First,
both treatment and control groups attended an in-class work-

309

shop in which they were given an overview of how the brain
functions, to provide background for the incremental theory
message. Roughly 1 week later, students were given private envelopes with randomly assigned treatment or control
reading and writing activities. In the treatment group, this
activity first asked students to read a scientific article explaining the basis for the incremental theory of personality,
and then asked students to write a note to a future ninth-grade
student explaining how they can use that knowledge if they
feel rejected, victimized or left out (cf. Aronson et al., 2002).
The control group completed a highly similar activity that
was positive and optimistic but did not teach the idea that
people’s personality traits can change. Like previous implicit
theories interventions, this was a double-blind randomized
field experiment, meaning that teachers were unaware of the
treatment messages and students were unaware that they were
randomly assigned to condition or that the treatment was designed to be helpful for their stress or grades.
One to 2 days after students completed the intervention,
we assessed the level of stress they felt following social exclusion. To do so, we had students participate in the Cyberball
experience of exclusion (Williams & Jarvis, 2006), and they
rated their stress levels afterward. Did the incremental theory
intervention reduce stress? It did, substantially—by roughly
.5 SD.
We next examined whether these reports of stress after
an experience of exclusion could provide insight into students’ more chronic experiences of stress over time. We tested
whether overall life stress would be reduced in the treatment
group 8 months postintervention, at the end of their freshman
year. It was, by roughly the same amount—.5 SD. Moreover,
the effect on long-term stress was statistically mediated by
differences in acute stress measured after the Cyberball exclusion 8 months earlier. Thus, a relatively brief intervention
to teach an incremental theory of personality at the beginning
of the year appeared to buffer adolescents from individual instances of social stress and, over time, to lower their chronic
levels of stress.
If the intervention could reduce stress, could it also affect behaviors related to social stress in school, such as academic performance (Crosnoe, 2011)? We examined students’
grades in core classes (English and Math) over the 8-month
period following the incremental theory of personality intervention. We found that in the control group there was a steady
decline in grades over the year, which is common for students
who transition to high school (Benner, 2011). However, for
those in the incremental theory treatment group this decline
in grades was slowed substantially, resulting in a difference
in grades of roughly one third of a grade point between the incremental group and the control group over the year (Yeager
et al., 2012). This effect of the incremental theory treatment
on achievement was fully mediated by the difference in stress
between the two groups.
Hence, an incremental theory, in addition to reducing retaliatory aggression (Yeager, Trzesniewski, et al., in press),

310

YEAGER AND DWECK

can reduce perceptions that experiences of peer exclusion
are stressful (Yeager et al., 2012). Over time, this can add up
to long-term differences in both overall stress and academic
achievement.

Downloaded by [University of Texas Libraries] at 09:55 20 September 2017

Summary
Coping with peer victimization or exclusion can be challenging for any adolescent. This may be especially true if
these events happen during difficult transitions such as the
1st year at high school, as students are trying to form new
friendships, adopt new identities, and navigate the social labels given them by peers—labels that are not always to their
liking. Our research suggests that adolescents are more vulnerable to these social adversities when they hold a mindset
in which they and their peers are not likely to change. However, when adolescents have or are taught a mindset in which
people have the potential to change their socially relevant
traits—even if those traits are difficult to change—then they
can be more resilient in the face of victimization or exclusion.

QUESTIONS
These findings commonly raise (at least) three questions, and
we address them next.
1. How Can Changing Mindsets Improve School
Outcomes Without Removing the Objective
Adversities in Students’ Environments?
The intervention experiments previously described were designed to change students’ mindsets and, to test the effects
of doing only this, did not try to affect the objective school
environment. Teachers and parents were unaware of the incremental theory messages, and curricula and pedagogy were
unchanged. Yet the implicit theories interventions significantly improved adolescents’ functioning over time. How
can this be?
This is possible because, as noted earlier, a child’s interpretations of adversity can determine whether that adversity
affects a child’s outcomes (Beck, 1967; Olson & Dweck,
2008). The method to create resilience shown in this article relies on this idea and shows that one way to prevent an
adverse situation from worsening a child’s outcomes is to interrupt the child’s potentially negative interpretations of the
situation—in this case, by changing implicit theories toward
more of an incremental view. This approach does not deny the
profound impact of the environment on children (teachers,
peers, parents, neighborhoods, curricula), but it highlights
the psychological factors within the student that can be more
readily changed (Olson & Dweck, 2008).
Our approach is counterintuitive for those who may not
think of major school reform in terms of addressing the beliefs of the students. More often, school reform has attempted

to address structural factors such as the size of the school,
the quality of the teachers or the length of the school day,
or they have attempted to directly teach students skills for
studying or learning. These efforts are undoubtedly important. But they rest on the assumption that the reason students
are not learning or engaging is because students have not
been given the correct resources or skills. We propose that
this may not always be the case. Sometimes the forces in a
system are adequate to support learning, but students have
mindsets that prevent them from fully taking advantage of
those forces (Yeager & Walton, 2011; cf. Lewin, 1947). As a
result, a well-timed and psychologically precise intervention
to address those mindsets can unlock the latent effectiveness
of educational environments and lead to long-term effects on
students’ achievement (Yeager & Walton, 2011).
2. Can Messages From Adults Unintentionally
Create Mindsets That Undermine Resilience?
Students’ mindsets can be affected by the subtle messages
they receive from adults. Even seemingly positive teacher or
parent behaviors—such as praise or comfort for struggling
students—can lead students to adopt more of a fixed, entity
theory and by doing so unintentionally undermine resilience.
We review some of this evidence next.
In a series of studies, Mueller and Dweck (1998) showed
that praising students for being “smart” leads students to
endorse more of an entity theory and to respond with less
resilience following academic setbacks. To demonstrate this,
Mueller and Dweck gave fifth-grade students a set of logic
problems matched to their grade level. After completing
them, students were praised. Some children (randomly assigned) received intelligence praise (“That’s a really high
score; you must be smart at these problems”). Others received praise that focused more on process rather than ability (“That’s a really high score; you must have worked hard
at these problems”) or neutral praise (“That’s a really high
score”). Next, students were given an especially difficult set
of problems on which all students performed poorly. Finally,
students were given a crucial third set of problems equal in
difficulty to the first set. The type of praise had a substantial
effect on the students. The intelligence praise led students to
adopt more of an entity theory and led the majority of them
to say that they would only like to do easy problems, not
challenging ones. Strikingly, intelligence praise also compromised performance. Children who received intelligence
praise solved 30% fewer problems on the final trial relative
to the first trial. They were also more likely to misrepresent
their scores, claiming that they performed better than they
actually did. Students who received process praise, by contrast, did significantly better on the third trial than they had
done on the first trial, and they asked to do more challenging
problems in the future—they adopted the incremental theory.
What is surprising about Mueller and Dweck’s (1998) finding
is that many parents or educators might believe that praising

Downloaded by [University of Texas Libraries] at 09:55 20 September 2017

MINDSETS THAT PROMOTE RESILIENCE

students for being “smart” could buffer them from feeling
“dumb” when they encounter a setback. Ironically, however,
the opposite is true. Research on implicit theories shows we
should not praise children for being “smart” when they do
well, but rather, to promote resilience, praise them for the
process they engaged in—their effort, their strategies, their
focus, or their persistence.
How should we comfort students when they do not perform well? Parents and teachers may believe that when a
student struggles in a subject it is best to acknowledge that it
is not their fault—that it simply is not their “strength”—and
to encourage them to focus on their successes in other domains. However, new research shows that this strategy grows
out of an adult’s entity theory: The adult’s belief that a struggling student has low ability in that area and will never do
well in it. This, in turn, can create low confidence and poor
resilience in students. In a series of experiments, Rattan et al.
(2012, Studies 1–3) showed that teachers (or adults acting as
teachers) who held more of an entity theory were more likely
to say they would tell struggling students that they were just
“not a math person,” and then want to assign them less math
homework. Next, Rattan et al. (Study 4) showed that giving
this kind of feedback could affect students’ resilience. They
found that comforting students for not being a “math person” led to lower expectations of improvement on the part
of students and to lower expectations for their final grade in
the course. This was true even though students in all experimental conditions were also told the teacher viewed them
as having high overall ability in other areas; this “positive
buffer” did not neutralize the negative effect of the entity
feedback. Hence, entity “comfort” is not in fact comforting
from the perspective of the student. Of importance, Rattan
et al. showed that there is a better way to provide feedback
when students do not perform well: help them see that they
need better strategies. When a teacher said that they needed
to meet with a tutor to improve their strategies, they viewed
their teacher as having more of an incremental theory of
math, and the students had higher expectations for their own
performance in the future. Hence, as in Mueller and Dweck’s
(1998) research, focusing more on process than on ability
can put students in a mindset that helps them respond to
challenges resiliently.
Future research might investigate whether a similar effect holds for implicit theories of personality. For instance,
in an effort to comfort adolescents who experience peer exclusion or bullying, parents or teachers may use (or imply)
fixed labels (e.g., “They’re just bullies,” “They’re bad people
and you’re not”). These labels, though designed to help a
victim cope, may be creating a mindset in which a peer is
seen as unable to change. And, as we now know, these judgments produce more vengeful responses to social conflicts
(e.g., Yeager, Miu, et al., in press). Notably, it is possible
to comfort children without implying that the aggressor will
always be a “bad person.” A parent might acknowledge the
injustice of being bullied, but also point to the situational or

311

psychological causes of the peers’ behavior, rather than to
fundamentally flawed—and fixed—character traits. Perhaps
designating a behavior as bad—but not the transgressor himself or herself as unchangeably bad—may also be effective.
These are potential ways to deflect self-blame, and to acknowledge the difficulty of being bullied without fueling a
desire for revenge (Yeager, Miu, et al., in press).
3. How Should Incremental Theory Interventions
Be Scaled Up to Affect More Students?
A final question involves how to use these psychological strategies to affect resilience on a broader scale. As
Yeager and Walton (2011) have argued, scaling up socialpsychological interventions is not as simple as delivering
the same worksheets and workshops to more students. Incremental theory interventions have their effects because they
(a) include messages that precisely target the way an entity
theory is affecting students in a given context and (b) are
delivered using methods that lead students to quickly internalize those messages (Yeager & Walton, 2011). If attempted
at a larger scale, implicit theories interventions will need to
retain each of these features.
To do so, sometimes implicit theories interventions will
need to be customized for a given population. The Blackwell
et al. (2007) and Good et al. (2003) interventions affected
middle school students’ psychology by focusing on the idea
that putting forth greater effort in the service of learning
could strengthen students’ brains. But through interviews,
focus groups, and national surveys with community college
students in remedial math classes, Yeager (2012) found that
community college math students frequently put forth great
effort but use very poor strategies and do not ask for help.
Although strategy use and help-seeking were certainly embedded in the Blackwell et al. (2007) intervention, they were
brought to the fore for the community college intervention
(Paunesku et al., 2012). In the revised incremental theory
intervention, the “formula” for success was “Effort + Strategies + Help From Others.” And, as the reader may recall,
this intervention had striking effects on course completion
several months later.
All customization is not guaranteed to be effective, however. There is the potential to lose sight of the core message
and focus instead on scaling up the superficially related but
psychologically “inert” portions of the intervention. For instance, a tempting (but ineffective) implementation of an
implicit theories intervention would be to provide students
with extended lectures about the brain’s structure and function but not to pay sufficient attention to the brain’s potential
to change or to the idea that struggling grows new neural connections rather than meaning you are “dumb.” The neuroscientific information undoubtedly facilitates the incremental
theory treatment effect—not only is neuroscience intrinsically interesting, but experiments show that psychological
arguments are more compelling when they are accompanied

Downloaded by [University of Texas Libraries] at 09:55 20 September 2017

312

YEAGER AND DWECK

by neuroscientific data (Weisberg, Keil, Goodstein, Rawson,
& Gray, 2008). However, the neuroscientific information is
not, in and of itself, the intervention. An incremental theory
message must convey to adolescents that people’s characteristics, which are based in the brain, have the potential to
be developed. In fact, the Paunesku et al. (2012), Blackwell
et al. (2007), and Yeager, Trzesniewski, et al. (in press) studies
were direct tests of this proposition; the control conditions
also taught about the parts and functions of the brain, yet
only the incremental theory conditions, which taught about
the potential to develop personal qualities, led to increased
levels of resilience.
Thus, occasionally implicit theories interventions need to
be customized to address the mindsets of students of a given
age and in a given context. At the same time, we do not
believe that this should be done without deep knowledge of
the underlying psychology that the interventions are trying
to instill. For this reason, collaborative partnerships between
researchers, practitioners, and students may be necessary to
engineer interventions that will work at scale (Yeager & Walton, 2011).
A final question for bringing interventions to scale involves context-specificity, or whether an implicit theory
learned in one context (such as during school) will or can
be made to transfer to another context (such as out-of-school
activities or at home). Indeed, the question of knowledge
transfer is a vibrant and contentious one in the cognitive
psychology of learning (Day & Goldstone, 2012; Schwartz,
Chase, & Bransford, 2012). Although, in general, transfer
has been elusive, some recent research has documented effective methods for promoting transfer of scientific theories
across contexts (Schwartz, Chase, Oppezzo, & Chin, 2011).
Hence, an important question is the extent to which implicit theories taught in one context tend to transfer across
contexts and whether novel intervention methods that draw
on insights from cognitive psychology might facilitate such
transfer.
Implicit Theories and Resilience
In this article we have shown that students’ implicit theories about the potential for personal characteristics to be developed can affect resilience following academic and social
adversities. As we have demonstrated, the different implicit
theories—entity and incremental—create distinct psychological lenses that filter people’s experiences of these adversities
and, by doing so, lead to different patterns of vulnerability
or resilience. On a broader theoretical level, we have provided evidence that resilience is not exclusively a quality of
a person or of a context, but rather it can also be the consequence of a person’s interpretations of the adversities they
are facing. It is important to note that this analysis provides
great promise for the development of brief but powerful interventions to change students’ interpretations and to address,
at least partially, some of the most critical social problems

facing students: underachievement and responses to peer
victimization.
That improving resilience was possible even among students who may have had a lifetime of unproductive beliefs
about personal characteristics—for instance, adults taking
remedial math in college (Paunesku et al., 2012) and adolescents attending high schools with high levels of aggression (Yeager, Miu, et al., in press; Yeager, Trzesniewski,
et al., in press)—reinforces the notion that it is crucial that
researchers and educators continue to pay attention to unproductive mindsets. Of course, problems such as academic
achievement and responses to peer victimization are complex and multidetermined. As such, they are likely best addressed by also continuing efforts to provide students with the
skills, resources, and beneficial environments they require to
thrive.

CONCLUSION
As students move through our educational system, all of them
will face adversity at one time or another, whether it is social or academic in nature. Thus, a central task for parents
and educators is to prepare students to respond resiliently
when these inevitable challenges arise. Although educators
and parents have intuitive strategies for doing so, many of
these strategies may be ill-advised, such as praising students
for being “smart” to boost their self-esteem or condemning those who behave aggressively as evil bullies. This is
why we need scientifically tested methods to tell us how to
truly promote resilience. Our research has looked at these
adversities through the eyes of students to try to capture the
underlying psychology of what causes some students to feel
vulnerable, discouraged, or stressed when they face challenges. We have found that what students need the most is
not self-esteem boosting or trait labeling; instead, they need
mindsets that represent challenges as things that they can
take on and overcome over time with effort, new strategies,
learning, help from others, and patience. When we emphasize people’s potential to change, we prepare our students to
face life’s challenges resiliently.

REFERENCES
Aronson, J., Fried, C., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the effects of stereotype threat on African American college students by shaping theories of
intelligence. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 113–125.
Bailey, T., Jeong, D. W., & Cho, S. (2010). Referral, enrollment, and completion in developmental education sequences in community college. Economics of Education Review, 29, 255–270.
Beck, A.T. (1967). Depression: Clinical, experimental and theoretical aspects. New York, NY: Hoeber Medical Division, Harper & Row.
Beer, J. S. (2002). Implicit self-theories of shyness. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 83, 1009–1024.
Benner, A. D. (2011). The transition to high school: Current knowledge,
future directions. Educational Psychology Review, 23, 299–328.

Downloaded by [University of Texas Libraries] at 09:55 20 September 2017

MINDSETS THAT PROMOTE RESILIENCE

Birnbaum, D., Deeb, I., Segall, G., Ben-Eliyahu, A., & Diesendruck, G.
(2010). The development of social essentialism: The case of Israeli children’s inferences about Jews and Arabs. Child Development, 81, 757–777.
Blackwell, L. A., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Theories of
intelligence and achievement across the junior high school transition: A
longitudinal study and an intervention. Child Development, 78, 246–263.
Brown, B. B., Mory, M. S., & Kinney, D. (1994). Casting adolescent
crowd in a relational perspective: Caricature, channel, and context. In
R. Montemayor, G. R. Adams, & T. P. Gullota (Eds.), Advances in adolescent development: Vol. 5. Personal relationships during adolescence
(pp. 123–167). Newbury Park, CA: Sage
Cairns, R. B., & Cairns, B. D. (1994). Lifelines and risks: Pathways of youth
in our time. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Center for Community College Student Success. (2011). Benchmarking &
Benchmarks: Effective Practice with Entering Students. Austin, TX: The
University of Texas at Austin, Community College Leadership Program.
Chiu, C., Dweck, C. S., Tong, J. Y., & Fu, J. H. (1997). Implicit theories and
conceptions of morality. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
73, 923–940.
Chiu, C., Hong, Y., & Dweck, C. S. (1997). Lay dispositionism and implicit
theories of personality. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73,
19–30.
Cohen, G. L., & Prinstein, M. J. (2006). Peer contagion of aggression and
health-risk behavior among adolescent males: An experimental investigation of effects on public conduct and private attitudes. Child Development,
77, 967–983.
Crosnoe, R., (2011). Fitting in, standing out: Navigating the social challenges of high school to get an education. New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
Day, S. B., & Goldstone, R. L. (2012). The import of knowledge export:
Connecting findings and theories of transfer of learning. Educational
Psychologist, 47, 153–176.
Diesendruck, G., & haLevi, H. (2006). The role of language, appearance, and
culture in children’s social category based induction. Child Development,
77, 539–553.
Dweck, C. S. (2006). Mindset. New York, NY: Random House
Dweck, C. S., Chiu, C., & Hong, Y. (1995). Implicit theories and their role in
judgments and reactions: A world from two perspectives. Psychological
Inquiry, 6, 267–285.
Dweck, C. S., & Leggett, E. L. (1988). A social-cognitive approach to
motivation and personality. Psychological Review, 95, 256–273.
Eccles, J. S., & Barber, B. L. (1999). Student council, volunteering, basketball, or marching band: What kind of extracurricular involvement matters?
Journal of Adolescent Research, 14, 10–43.
Erdley, C., Cain, K., Loomis, C., Dumas-Hines, F., & Dweck, C. S. (1997).
The relations among children’s social goals, implicit personality theories
and response to social failure. Developmental Psychology, 33, 263–272.
Erdley, C., & Dweck, C. S. (1993). Children’s implicit theories as predictors
of their social judgments. Child Development, 64, 863–878.
Faris, R., & Felmlee, D. (2011). Status struggles: Network centrality and
gender segregation in same- and cross-gender aggression. American Sociological Review, 76, 48–73.
Fossum, S., Handegård, B. H., Martinussen, M., & Mørch, W. T. (2008).
Psychosocial interventions for disruptive and aggressive behaviour in
children and adolescents: A meta-analysis. European Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 17, 438–451.
Garet, M., Wayne, A., Stancavage, F., Taylor, J., Walters, K., Song, M.,
. . . Doolittle, F. (2010). Middle school mathematics professional development impact study: Findings after the first year of implementation (NCEE 2010–4010). Retrieved from http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/pubs/
20104009/pdf/20104010.pdf
Gervey, B., Chiu, C., Hong, Y., & Dweck, C. S. (1999). Differential use
of person information in decision-making about guilt vs. innocence: The
role of implicit theories. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25,
17–27.

313

Giles, J. W. (2003). Children’s essentialist beliefs about aggression. Developmental Review, 23, 413–443.
Glazerman, S., Isenberg, E., Dolfin, S., Bleeker, M., Johnson, A., Grider,
M., & Jacobus, M. (2010). Impacts of comprehensive teacher induction:
Final results from a randomized controlled study (NCEE 2010 4028).
Retrieved from http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/pubs/20104027/ pdf/20104027.pdf
Goldrick-Rab, S., Harris, D., Benson, J., & Kelchen, R. (2011). Conditional
cash transfers and college persistence: Evidence from a randomized needbased grant program (Institute for Research on Poverty Discussion Paper,
no. 1393-11).
Good, C., Aronson, J., & Inzlicht, M. (2003). Improving adolescents’ standardized test performance: An intervention to reduce the effects of stereotype threat. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 24, 645–662.
Good, C., Rattan, A., & Dweck, C. S. (2012). Why do women opt out?
Sense of belonging and women’s representation in mathematics. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 102, 700–717.
Graham, S., & Juvonen, J. (1998). Self-blame and peer victimization in
middle school: An attributional analysis. Developmental Psychology, 34,
587–599.
Hong, Y., Chiu, C., Dweck, C. S., Lin, D., & Wan, W. (1999) Implicit
theories, attributions, and coping: A meaning system approach. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 588–599.
James-Burdumy, S., Deke, J., Lugo-Gil, J., Carey, N., Hershey, A., Gersten,
R., . . . Faddis, B. (2010). Effectiveness of selected supplemental reading
comprehension interventions: Findings From two student cohorts (NCEE
2010–4016). Retrieved from http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/pubs/20104015/
pdf/20104016.pdf
Karna, A., Voeten, M., Little, T. D., Poskiparta, E., Alanen, E., & Salmivalli,
C. (2011). Going to scale: A nonrandomized nationwide trial of the KiVa
antibullying program for Grades 1–9. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 79, 796–805.
Killen, M., Kelly, M. C., Richardson, C., & Jampol, N. S. (2010). Attributions of intentions and fairness judgments regarding interracial peer
encounters. Developmental Psychology, 46, 1206–1213.
Klomek, A. B., Marrocco, F., Kleinman, M., Schonfeld, I. S., & Gould, M.
S. (2007). Bullying, depression, and suicidality in adolescents. Journal of
the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 46, 40–49.
Kolesnikova, N. (2010). Community colleges and economic mobility. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 92, 27–53.
Lewin, K. (1947). Group decision and social change. In T. M. Newcomb &
E. L. Hartley (Eds.), Readings in social psychology (pp. 459–473). New
York, NY: Holt.
Loeb, I., & Dweck, C. S. (1994, June). Beliefs about human nature as predictors of reactions to victimization. Paper presented at the Sixth Annual
Convention of the American Psychological Society, Washington DC.
Masten, A. (2001). Ordinary magic: Resilience processes in development.
American Psychologist, 56, 227–238.
Merrell, K. W., Gueldner, B. A., Ross, S. W., & Isava, D. M. (2008). How
effective are school bullying intervention programs? A meta-analysis of
intervention research. School Psychology Quarterly, 23, 26–42.
Molden, D. C., & Dweck, C. S. (2006). Finding “meaning” in psychology:
A lay theories approach to self-regulation, social perception, and social
development. American Psychologist, 61, 192–203.
Mueller, C. M., & Dweck, C. S. (1998). Praise for intelligence can undermine
children’s motivation and performance. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 75, 33–52.
Nussbaum, A. D., & Dweck, C. S. (2008). Defensiveness vs. remediation:
Self-theories and modes of self-esteem maintenance. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 34, 127–134.
Olson, K., & Dweck, C.S. (2008). A blueprint for social cognitive development. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 3, 193–202.
Ostrov, J. M. (2010). Prospective associations between peer victimization
and aggression. Child Development, 81, 1670–1677.
Paunesku, D., Yeager, D. S., Romero, C., & Walton, G. (2012). A brief growth
mindset intervention improves academic outcomes of community college

Downloaded by [University of Texas Libraries] at 09:55 20 September 2017

314

YEAGER AND DWECK

students enrolled in developmental mathematics courses. Unpublished
manuscript, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
Rattan, A., Good, C., & Dweck, C. S. (2012). “It’s ok — Not everyone can be
good at math”: Instructors with an entity theory comfort (and demotivate)
students. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48, 731–737.
Reijntjes, A., Thomaes, S., Bushman, B. J., Boelen, P. A., Orobio de Castro,
B., & Telch, M. J. (2010). The outcast lash-out effect in youth: Alienation
increases aggression following peer rejection. Psychological Science, 21,
1394–1398.
Robins, R. W., & Pals, J. L. (2002). Implicit self-theories in the academic
domain: Implications for goal orientation, attributions, affect, and selfesteem change. Self and Identity, 1, 313–336.
Rutschow, E. Z., Lashawn, R-H., Brock, T., Orr, G., Cerna, O., Cullinan,
D., . . . Martin, K., (2011). Turning the tide: Five years of Achieving the
Dream in community colleges. Retrieved from http://www.mdrc.org
Schwartz, D. L., Chase, C. C., & Bransford, J. D. (2012). Resisting overzealous transfer: Coordinating previously successful routines with needs for
new learning. Educational Psychologist, 47, 204–214.
Schwartz, D. L., Chase, C. C., Oppezzo, M. A., & Chin, D. B. (2011).
Practicing versus inventing with contrasting cases: The effects of telling
first on learning and transfer. Journal of Educational Psychology, 103,
759–775.
Silvia, S., Blitstein, J., Williams, J., Ringwalt, C., RTI International,
Dusenbury, L., & Hansen, W. (2011). Impacts of a violence prevention program for middle schools: Findings after three years of
implementation–Executive Summary (NCEE 2011–0418). Washington,
DC: Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education.
Smith, J. D., Schneider, B. H., Smith, P. K., & Ananiadou, K. (2004). The
effectiveness of whole-school antibullying programs: A synthesis of evaluation research. School Psychology Review, 33, 547–560.
Somers, M.-A., Corrin, W., Sepanik, S., Salinger T., Levin, J., &
Zmach, C. (2010). The Enhanced Reading Opportunities Study Final Report: The Impact of Supplemental Literacy Courses for Struggling Ninth-Grade Readers (NCEE 2010–4022). Retrieved from
http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/pubs/20104021/pdf/20104021.pdf
Spencer, S. J., Steele, C. M., & Quinn, D. M. (1999). Stereotype threat and
women’s math performance. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
35, 4–28.
Steele, C. M. (1997). A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape intellectual
identity and performance. American Psychologist, 52, 613–629.
Tangney, J. P., Stuewig, J., & Mashek, D. J. (2007). Moral emotions
and moral behavior. Annual Review of Psychology, 58, 345–372.
doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.56.091103.070145
Vreeman, R. C., & Carroll, A. E. (2007). A systematic review of schoolbased interventions to prevent bullying. Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, 161, 78–88.

Weiner, B. (1986). An attributional theory of motivation and emotion. New
York, NY: Springer-Verlag.
Weiner, B. (1995). Judgments of responsibility: A foundation for a theory of
social conduct. New York, NY: Guilford.
Weisberg, D. S., Keil, F. C., Goodstein, J., Rawson, E., & Gray, J. R. (2008).
The seductive allure of neuroscience explanations. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 20, 470–477.
Weiss, M., Visher, M., & Wathington, H. (2010). Learning communities
for students in developmental reading: An impact study at Hillsborough
Community College. Retrieved from http://www.mdrc.org
Wentzel, K. R., & Wigfield, A. (1998). Academic and social motivational
influences on students’ academic performance. Educational Psychology
Review, 10, 155–175.
Williams, K. D., & Jarvis, B. (2006). Cyberball: A program for use in
research on ostracism and interpersonal acceptance. Behavior Research
Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 38, 174–180.
Wilson, S. J., & Lipsey, M. W. (2007). School-based interventions for aggressive and disruptive behavior: Update of a meta-analysis. American
Journal of Preventive Medicine, 33, 130–143.
Yeager, D. S. (2012, April). Productive persistence: A practical theory of community college student success. Paper presented at
the 2012 Annual Meeting for the American Educational Research
Association.
Yeager, D. S., Johnson, R., Spitzer, B., & Dweck, C. S. (2012). Implicit theories of personality and the transition to high school: Longitudinal effects
on stress, health and academic performance. Unpublished manuscript,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
Yeager, D. S., & Miu, A. (2011). Implicit theories of personality predict
motivation to use prosocial coping strategies after bullying in high school.
In E. Frydenberg & G. Reevy (Eds.), Personality, stress and coping:
Implications for education (pp. 47–62). Charlotte, NC: Information Age.
Yeager, D. S., Miu, A., Powers, J., & Dweck, C. S. (in press). Implicit theories of personality and attributions of hostile intent: A
meta-analysis, an experiment, and a longitudinal intervention. Child
Development.
Yeager, D. S., Trzesniewski, K., Tirri, K., Nokelainen, P., & Dweck,
C. S. (2011). Adolescents’ implicit theories predict desire for
vengeance after remembered and hypothetical peer conflicts: Correlational and experimental evidence. Developmental Psychology, 47, 1090–
1107.
Yeager, D. S., Trzesniewski, K., & Dweck, C. S. (in press). An implicit theories of personality intervention reduces adolescent aggression in response
to victimization and exclusion. Child Development.
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. (2011). Social-psychological interventions
in education: They’re not magic. Review of Educational Research, 81,
267–301.

ATTITUDES AND SOCIAL COGNITION

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Boring but Important: A Self-Transcendent Purpose for Learning Fosters
Academic Self-Regulation
David S. Yeager and Marlone D. Henderson

David Paunesku and Gregory M. Walton

University of Texas at Austin

Stanford University

Sidney D’Mello

Brian J. Spitzer

University of Notre Dame

New York University

Angela Lee Duckworth
University of Pennsylvania
Many important learning tasks feel uninteresting and tedious to learners. This research proposed that
promoting a prosocial, self-transcendent purpose could improve academic self-regulation on such
tasks. This proposal was supported in 4 studies with over 2,000 adolescents and young adults. Study
1 documented a correlation between a self-transcendent purpose for learning and self-reported trait
measures of academic self-regulation. Those with more of a purpose for learning also persisted
longer on a boring task rather than giving in to a tempting alternative and, many months later, were
less likely to drop out of college. Study 2 addressed causality. It showed that a brief, one-time
psychological intervention promoting a self-transcendent purpose for learning could improve high
school science and math grade point average (GPA) over several months. Studies 3 and 4 were
short-term experiments that explored possible mechanisms. They showed that the self-transcendent
purpose manipulation could increase deeper learning behavior on tedious test review materials
(Study 3), and sustain self-regulation over the course of an increasingly boring task (Study 4). More
self-oriented motives for learning—such as the desire to have an interesting or enjoyable career—
did not, on their own, consistently produce these benefits (Studies 1 and 4).
Keywords: self-regulation, motivation, purpose, meaning, psychological intervention
Supplemental materials: http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0037637.supp

Many of the tasks that contribute most to the development of
valuable skills are also, unfortunately, commonly experienced as

tedious and unpleasant (Duckworth, Kirby, Tsukayama, Berstein,
& Ericsson, 2011; also see Ericsson, 2006, 2007, 2009; Ericsson &
Ward, 2007; Ericsson, Krampe, & Tesch-Romer, 1993). For example, skills in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) are in high demand, and, according to some estimates, jobs
in the STEM sector will grow by more than 20% in the next few
decades (U.S. Congress Joint Economic Committee, 2012). Yet in a

David S. Yeager and Marlone D. Henderson, Department of Psychology,
University of Texas at Austin; David Paunesku and Gregory M. Walton,
Department of Psychology, Stanford University; Sidney D’Mello, Department of Psychology and Department of Computer Science, University of
Notre Dame; Brian J. Spitzer, Department of Applied Psychology, New
York University; Angela Lee Duckworth, Department of Psychology,
University of Pennsylvania.
This research was supported by funding from the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation, the Raikes Foundation, the National Science Foundation
(HCC 0834847, DRL 1235958, to Sidney D’Mello), the National Institutes
of Health (5-K01-AG033182-02, to Angela Lee Duckworth), the New
Paths to Purpose project at the Booth Center for Decision Research, and a

University of Texas Summer Research Assignment grant. Any opinions,
findings and conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this article are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the funding
agencies. The ideas in this research benefitted from discussions with
Matthew Andrews and Matthew Bundick. The authors are grateful to the
students, teachers, and school administrators who participated in this
research. We are also grateful to Bill Swann, Christopher Hulleman, Judy
Harackiewicz, Robin Vallacher, Geoffrey Cohen, and Carol Dweck for
their helpful feedback. Any remaining errors are the authors’.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to David S.
Yeager, 108 East Dean Keeton, Stop A8000, Austin, TX 78712-104.
E-mail: dyeager@utexas.edu

It’s only when you hitch your wagon to something larger than yourself
that you realize your true potential and discover the role that you’ll
play in writing the next great chapter in the American story.
—President Barack Obama, Wesleyan University
Commencement Speech, 2008

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2014, Vol. 107, No. 4, 559 –580
© 2014 American Psychological Association 0022-3514/14/$12.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0037637

559

YEAGER ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

560

representative sample survey, over half of middle school students said
they would rather eat broccoli than do their math homework; 44%
would rather take out the trash (Raytheon Company, 2012).
To achieve longer-term aims, learners must sometimes regulate
attention, emotion, and behavior in the face of tempting alternatives
(Duckworth & Carlson, 2013; Fujita, 2011; Mischel, Shoda, & Rodriguez, 1989). Indeed, individual differences in factors such as “grit”
and self-control are predictive of eventual skill acquisition and expert
performance, controlling for cognitive ability (Duckworth, Peterson,
Matthews, & Kelly, 2007; Duckworth, Tsukayama, & Kirby, 2013;
Moffitt et al., 2011). Where do these factors come from? Individuals
are known to marshal self-discipline more when they are pursuing
personally meaningful goals (see Fishbach & Trope, 2005; Fishbach,
Zhang, & Trope, 2010; Loewenstein, 1996; Mischel, Cantor, & Feldman, 1996; Rachlin, Brown, & Cross, 2000; Thaler & Shefrin, 1981;
Trope & Fishbach, 2000; also see Eccles, 2009; Marshall, 2001). In
the present research we propose that what has been called a purpose
for learning (Andrews, 2011; Yeager, Bundick, & Johnson, 2012) can
foster greater meaning in schoolwork and promote academic selfregulation as students take on tedious learning tasks.

Defining a “Purpose for Learning”
An enormous amount of research has focused on the wide variety
of possible motives for engaging in and succeeding at learning tasks
(e.g., Ames, 1992; Atkinson, 1957; Carver & Scheier, 1981; Eccles &
Wigfield, 2002; Elliot, Conroy, Barron, & Murayama, 2010; Emmons, 1986; Ford & Nichols, 1987; Harackiewicz & Sansone, 1991;
Higgins, 2005; Lepper, Corpus, & Iyengar, 2005; Little, 1983;
Markus & Nurius, 1986; Nicholls, 1984; Oyserman & Destin, 2010;
Ryan & Deci, 2000). Here we focus on only one distinction—that
between self-interest and self-transcendence. Learners may view a
task as likely to benefit the self, believing it will be intrinsically
enjoyable or lead to a personally fulfilling career (see Eccles &
Wigfield, 1995). Learners may also have motives that transcend
self-interest. These may involve service to other individuals, to an
ideal, to a social justice cause, or to a spiritual entity (Damon, Menon,
& Bronk, 2003; Frankl, 1963; Koltko-Rivera, 2006; Maslow, 1969;
Schwartz, 1992; also see Eccles, 2009).
We define a purpose for learning as a goal that is motivated
both by an opportunity to benefit the self and by the potential to
have some effect on or connection to the world beyond the self
(Yeager & Bundick, 2009; Yeager et al., 2012; see Burrow & Hill,
2011; Damon et al., 2003). Embedded in this definition is a focus
on the motive or rationale for the goal (e.g., “helping people”)
rather than on content of a goal (e.g., “being an engineer”; Massey,
Gebhardt, & Garnefski, 2008). For example, a purpose for learning
in a high school science class might be that a student would one
day like to use the acquired knowledge to build bridges that help
people (a self-transcendent component). The same student might
also believe that engineering would be a fulfilling, interesting, and
enjoyable career (a self-oriented component). Both of these types
of motives—self-oriented and self-transcendent— can be important for learners and can motivate task persistence (Eccles, 2009;
Eccles & Wigfield, 2002). These different motives also frequently
coexist (Batson, 1998; also see Feiler, Tost, & Grant, 2012). In
fact, in a series of qualitative interviews conducted with a diverse
group of high school adolescents, it was common for teens to pair
self-transcendent motives with self-oriented motives—much more

common in fact than having only a self-transcendent motive (Yeager & Bundick, 2009; Yeager et al., 2012). Here we examine
whether adding self-transcendent motives to self-oriented ones—
what we call a “purpose for learning”— could produce benefits
that self-oriented motives alone could not achieve.

Purpose, Meaning, and Persistence
There is good reason to believe that a purpose for learning could
promote the view that a task is personally meaningful (e.g., Grant,
2007, 2013; Olivola & Shafir, 2013; also see Duffy & Dik, 2009;
Steger, 2012; Steger, Kashdan, & Oishi, 2008).1 A classic example
comes from Viktor Frankl (1963). In writing about the psychology
of surviving a concentration camp, he describes how a selftranscendent purpose in life creates a feeling that one’s actions are
important for the world, empowering a person to persist even in the
most appalling circumstances. He wrote “A [person] who becomes
conscious of the responsibility he bears toward a human being who
affectionately waits for him, or to an unfinished work, will never
be able to throw away his life” (p. 80). Channeling Neitzche,
Frankl stated “He knows the ‘why’ for his existence and will be
able to bear almost any ‘how’” (1963, p. 80).
Further support comes from observational research of people
working in “dirty” jobs—jobs with low status and requiring extremely repetitive tasks (e.g., trash collectors, hospital orderlies,
prison guards). Individuals with these jobs find their work more
meaningful and carry it out more effectively when they focus on
the benefit of these tasks for helping others or society at large
(Ashforth & Kreiner, 1999; Hughes, 1958, 1962; also see Dutton,
Roberts, & Bednar, 2010; Wrzesniewski, Dutton, & Debebe, 2003;
cf. Olivola & Shafir, 2013). Altogether, highly aversive experiences may become more bearable when they are viewed as having
consequences that transcend the self.
More directly relevant, Yeager et al. (2012) found that some high
school-aged adolescents spontaneously generated a purpose for learning during interviews—mentioning both a self-transcendent motive
and an intrinsic, self-oriented motive for their future work, such as
“being a doctor to help people and because it would be enjoyable.”
Students with a purpose rated their schoolwork in general as more
personally meaningful than adolescents with no career goal or only
extrinsic motives (making money, gaining respect), even at a
2-year follow-up (also see Lepper et al., 2005; Ryan & Deci,
2000). Other high school students discussed only typical interestbased, self-oriented motives. This group rated their schoolwork as
no more meaningful compared to students with no future work
goals or only extrinsic motives (Yeager et al., 2012). However, this
study was limited in that it did not directly assess perceptions of
tedious, skill-building tasks. Nor did it assess behavior or address
causality with experimental designs. These limitations are addressed in the present research.
Some past experiments have linked prosocial, selftranscendent motives to behavioral persistence on tasks at work,
not school. For example, telemarketers raised more money
1
A purpose is distinct from but related to personal meaning. The former
includes a person’s goal and his or her motives for pursuing it. The latter
refers to the sense that something matters and makes sense in the context
of one’s life or worldview (Steger, Kashdan, & Oishi, 2008; Yeager &
Bundick, 2009).

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION

when they were asked to focus on the benefits of their efforts
for poor children compared to benefits for the self, while
medical professionals were more likely to stop and wash their
hands when they focused on others’ health as opposed to their
own health (Grant, 2008; Grant & Hofmann, 2011; also see
Feiler et al., 2012; for findings from other workplaces see,
Grant & Rothbard, 2013; cf. Sansone, Weir, Harpster, & Morgan, 1992). Note that a self-transcendent motive makes aversive
experiences more bearable, not more enjoyable; prosocial motives diminish the correlation between feeling bad during a task
and the reduced motivation to complete it (Grant & Sonnentag,
2010; also see Grant & Campbell, 2007). Prosocial trash men do
not find trash more appealing, but they collect it more effectively (Hughes, 1958, 1962).
The present research is among the first to test whether students with more of a self-transcendent purpose for learning can
show greater persistence even on tedious learning activities that
provide a foundation for uncertain future contributions to the
world beyond the self (see Harackiewicz & Sansone, 1991).
Some past studies investigated, for instance, raising money for
poor children (Grant, 2008; also see Dunn, Aknin, & Norton,
2008) or preventing infection (Grant & Hofmann, 2011). It is
easy to see how these actions help others. But when high school
students engage in a learning task such as factoring trinomials
in algebra, or balancing stoichiometric equations in chemistry,
it can be difficult to see the steps through which deeply learning
from these tasks can help them benefit others. That is, raising
money for poor people is directly prosocial, but learning fractions must be construed as such.
Other past research has found that providing intrinsic versus
extrinsic motives for learning tasks (e.g., becoming healthy vs.
looking physically attractive) can lead to greater task persistence and deeper processing of information (e.g., Vansteenkiste, Simons, Lens, Sheldon, & Deci, 2004; also see Jang, 2008;
for a review, see Vansteenkiste, Lens, & Deci, 2006, or Patall,
Cooper, & Robinson, 2008). Similarly, some research has found
that asking students to generate reasons why a learning task
could be relevant to their daily lives and future goals could
improve course performance among low-performers, by enhancing the perceived utility value of a task (Hulleman, Godes,
Hendricks, & Harackiewicz, 2010; Hulleman & Harackiewicz,
2009). These studies were foundational to the present research.
However they were not designed to distinguish the intended
beneficiary of the learning—the self versus something that
transcends the self—as the present research seeks to do.
In addition, past studies have focused on the perceived prosocial value of completing a given task or learning objective
(Eccles & Wigfield, 1995)—for instance, learning about correlation coefficients to interpret education research (Jang, 2008),
or using the week’s science class lessons to help out on the
family farm (Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009; see Eccles,
2009; Eccles et al., 1983). However, an important skill for
self-regulation is to abstract up a level from the task at hand to
one’s motives for being involved in an educational enterprise
more generally— e.g., “science” or “math” or even “school.” It
is often uncertain whether or how one will use the knowledge
gained from a given learning objective or task. Indeed, teachers
very rarely provide any rationale for mastering a learning objective
(Stipek, 2004; also see Eccles, 2009), let alone a self-transcendent ratio-

561

nale. This is especially true in STEM courses, where many tasks are
unexplained (Carnevale & Desrochers, 2003; also see Diekman, Clark,
Johnston, Brown, & Steinberg, 2011). It may be helpful to reconstrue a
foundational task—such as practicing math facts—more generally in
terms of their relation to one’s broader, self-transcendent motives for
working hard in school or in a subject area.

The Present Research
Four studies investigated the hypothesis that a higher order,
self-transcendent purpose for learning in school would promote
academic self-regulation on tedious schoolwork. In Study 1 we
hypothesized that a self-transcendent purpose for learning would
be correlated with indicators of academic self-regulation both at
the trait level (self-reported grit and self-control) and at the behavioral level (short-term persistence on a boring math task and
longitudinal persistence in college). We further hypothesized that
these relations would be found above and beyond the effects of
more intrinsic, self-oriented motives (e.g., following one’s intellectual interests), and of cognitive ability.
Study 2 examined a possible causal effect of a self-transcendent
purpose for learning. In order to do so it was necessary to create an
exercise to adjust adolescents’ purposes for learning, which past
research has had difficulty doing (Dik, Steger, Gibson, & Peisner,
2011). Indeed, a purpose is likely to be highly personal and represent
the product of a large number of influences in life, including teachers,
parents, friends and the media, perhaps making it difficult to manipulate (e.g., Damon, 2008; Harackiewicz, Rozek, Hulleman, & Hydes,
2012; Moran, Bundick, Malin, & Reilly, 2013; Steger, Bundick, &
Yeager, 2012). Yet advances have been made in recent years in the
optimal design of psychological interventions in educational settings
(e.g., Blackwell, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2007; G. L. Cohen &
Sherman, 2014; Garcia & Cohen, 2012; Hulleman & Harackiewicz,
2009; Walton & Cohen, 2011; also see Walton, 2014; Wilson &
Linville, 1982). We were informed by these. We hypothesized that a
novel self-transcendent purpose for learning intervention could improve grades in subject areas likely to be seen as tedious, such as high
school math and science classes.
Studies 3 and 4 examined potential behavioral antecedents to
the outcomes studies in Studies 1 and 2. Specifically, Study 3
examined effects of the novel intervention on behavior on a
shorter time-course, testing the hypothesis that a selftranscendent purpose for learning could lead students to learn
more deeply from an immediate, real-world academic task.
Study 4 sought to isolate the effect of a purpose for learning
manipulation on self-regulation more precisely by administering a dependent measure that pitted a boring math activity
directly against tempting alternatives.

Study 1: An Initial Correlational Investigation
Study 1 was a correlational study among a low socioeconomic status (SES) group of high school seniors. Based on prior
research, they might have significant difficulty regulating immediate motivations in the service of long-term goals (Evans &
Rosenbaum, 2008; Vohs, 2013). We hypothesized that in this
population a self-transcendent purpose would correlate with
indicators of self-discipline— both self-reported and behavioral—assessed at the same measurement time. We further hypoth-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

562

YEAGER ET AL.

esized that, in a multiple regression controlling for more selforiented motives— even intrinsic-interest-focused ones—a
purpose for learning would continue to predict greater success
at self-regulation.
We also examined longitudinal relations with goal persistence.
This was done by collecting data on whether students were enrolled in college in the Fall semester following high school graduation, as they intended to do. Low-income students of color more
commonly drop out of the college pipeline in the summer after
college or during their first Fall semester, even when they have
successfully graduated high school and been admitted to a college
of their choice (Ryu, 2012). We hypothesized that a selftranscendent purpose would predict college persistence over
time—a potential indicator of successfully regulating competing
demands for time and attention in this low-income population. We
also hypothesized that this relation would be found when controlling for self-oriented motives in a multiple regression.

Method
Participants. Participants were N ⫽ 1,364 seniors in their
final semester at one of 17 participating urban public high schools
(eight charters and two district schools). Ninety-nine percent said
that they had applied for college and were planning on attending
college in the Fall semester. They were located in Los Angeles,
CA; Oakland, CA; New York, NY; Austin, TX; Houston, TX; or
Little Rock, AR. They were from low socioeconomic backgrounds: over 90% received free or reduced-price lunch, a measure
of low socioeconomic status, and only 9% had one parent who had
completed a 2 or 4-year degree; by contrast, 25% of parents did not
have a high school diploma. The sample overall was nearly evenly
split on gender (57% female) and had a large proportion of
students that are typically underrepresented in higher education in
the United States, 38% African American, 48% Hispanic/Latino,
5% Asian, 4% White. Some participants did not provide data on
some measures, and so degrees of freedom varied across analyses.
No other participants were excluded from analyses. There was no
stopping rule for data collection because all college-going students
in each school were invited to participate.
Procedures. Participants completed a web-based survey in the
school’s computer lab during the school day in the Spring semester
(February to May) of senior year. Teachers directed students to a
website (http://www.perts.net) that delivered the survey session,
which lasted one class period. Many months later, toward the end of
what was the Fall semester for students in college, college persistence
data were collected from the National Student Clearinghouse (NSC).
Measures.
Motives for going to college. The primary predictor variables
were self-transcendent motives, intrinsic self-oriented motives,
and extrinsic self-oriented motives. The preface for the items
assessing these motives was: “How true for you personally are
each of the following reasons for going to college?” Each was
rated on a 5-point scale (1 ⫽ Not at all true, 2 ⫽ Slightly true, 3 ⫽
Somewhat true, 4 ⫽ Very true, 5 ⫽ Completely true).
Self-transcendent motives (purpose for learning). We averaged
across the following three items to assess students’ self-transcendent
motives for going to college (a purpose for learning), operationalized
as a personally relevant desire to learn in order to make a contribution
to the world beyond the self: “I want to learn things that will help me

make a positive impact on the world,” “I want to gain skills that I can
use in a job that help others,” and “I want to become an educated
citizen that can contribute to society” (␣ ⫽ .75).
Self-oriented motives. We averaged across the following three
items adapted from Stephens, Fryberg, Markus, Johnson, and
Covarrubias’s (2012) assessment of self-oriented, interest-driven
motives for going to college: “I want to expand my knowledge of
the world,” “I want to become an independent thinker,” and “I
want to learn more about my interests” (␣ ⫽ .70). Note that these
are still personally important intrinsic motives for learning, and
might be expected to predict greater self-regulation, thus providing
a high standard of comparison for the self-transcendent motives.
Extrinsic motives. Finally, we measured typical extrinsic, selforiented motives for going to college: “I want to get a good job,”
“I want to leave my parents’ house,” “I want to earn more money,”
and “I want to have fun and make new friends.” We wrote these
items in collaboration with college counselors at the participating
high schools. They were designed to reflect the counselors’ perceptions of why students want to go to college. Although the
internal consistency reliability for these items was somewhat low
(␣ ⫽ .50), they were face-valid. Below we show that a composite
of these items produced relations with each of the constructs
measured that replicates past research (Lee, McInerney, Liem, &
Ortiga, 2010), supporting the validity of the composite despite low
internal consistency. The same findings emerged when analyzing
these items separately.
Meaningfulness of schoolwork. To assess individual differences in the meaningfulness of everyday academic tasks, we
adapted a measure commonly used in research on actionidentification theory: the Behavioral Identification Form (BIF;
Vallacher & Wegner, 1989). The standard BIF asks participants to
view a task and choose a description of it that either aligns with
personally meaningful values or goals, or with concrete actions
required to complete the task. In the present research, we treat the
choice of the former, more goal-directed description as an indication that a person is viewing it more meaningfully. Indeed, Michaels, Parkin, and Vallacher (2013) stated that “people take
meaning from their goals and values rather than the details of their
actions” (p. 109).
We created a four-item version of the BIF that was tailored to
assess whether students chronically make meaning out of boring
and uninteresting everyday academic tasks in high school. See
Figure 1 for an example. The measure presented participants with
a description of each behavior, accompanied by a picture, and
asked participants to select which of two action identifications best
matched how they thought about the behavior. The four behaviors
were “Taking the SAT,” “Doing your math homework,” “Writing
an essay,” and “Using a planner to record upcoming tasks” (for
pictures and response options, see the online supplement). In
pretesting focus groups with high school students, all four behaviors were evaluated as very tedious and very common. For each of
the behaviors (e.g., taking the SAT), we asked students whether a
2
Pilot research confirmed that the present measure indicated greater
personal meaning as expected by theory (Michaels, Parkin, & Vallacher,
2013). In a pilot survey with N ⫽ 151 high school students, our measure
correlated with the presence of meaning in life scale (e.g., “I have a good
sense of what makes my life meaningful”; Steger, Frazier, Oishi, & Kaler,
2006) at r ⫽ .30, p ⬍ .001.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION

563

Figure 1. Sample item for assessing the meaningfulness of schoolwork. Image from “File:Ti83plus.jpg,” by
Westernelectric555, 2008 (http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ti83plus.jpg). In the public domain. See the
online article for the color version of this figure.

more concrete, lower level statement (a description that emphasizes the means by which the action is performed, e.g., “Filling out
bubbles on the SAT”) or a more goal-directed, personally meaningful statement (a description emphasizing the meaning the action
can have for a person’s pursuits in life, e.g., “Taking steps toward
a college degree”) best described that behavior. The latter was our
operationalization of whether the task was seen as more personally
meaningful. We summed across the items, so that higher values
corresponded to a greater tendency to see schoolwork as meaningful (Range: 0 to 4).2
Grit scale. Participants completed an abbreviated version of
the validated grit scale (Duckworth & Quinn, 2009), a measure
that signals strong self-regulation in a number of past studies. The
scale includes the following: “I finish whatever I begin”; “I work
very hard. I keep working when others stop to take a break”; “I
stay interested in my goals, even if they take a long time (months
or years) to complete”; and “I am diligent. I never give up.”
Participants answered all items on 5-point fully labeled scales (1 ⫽
Not at all like me, 2 ⫽ Not much like me, 3 ⫽ Somewhat like me,
4 ⫽ Mostly like me, 5 ⫽ Very much like me). We averaged across
the responses, with higher values corresponding to higher levels of
grit (␣ ⫽ .78).
Self-control scale. Participants completed a validated measure of self-control when completing academic work (Patrick &
Duckworth, 2013; Tsukayama, Duckworth, & Kim, 2013).
Items were “I come to class prepared,” “I pay attention and
resist distractions in class,” “I remember and follow directions,”
and “I get to work right away rather than procrastinating” (1 ⫽
Not at all like me, 2 ⫽ Not much like me, 3 ⫽ Somewhat like me,
4 ⫽ Mostly like me, 5 ⫽ Very much like me). We averaged
across these items, with higher values corresponding to greater
academic self-control (␣ ⫽ .71). Past research has shown that

these items are correlated with other measures of self-regulation
(such as grit; e.g., Table 1) but demonstrate divergent validity
from them (Duckworth et al., 2007).
The “diligence task”: A behavioral measure of academic
self-regulation. At the end of the survey, participants completed
a novel standardized behavioral measure of self-regulation, called
“the diligence task” (Galla et al., 2014). This task was designed to
mirror the real-world choices students confront when completing
homework and being tempted by the distractions of the digital age.
Specifically, this task involved the choice of completing boring
math problems (single-digit subtraction) or consuming captivating
but time-wasting media (watching one or several entertaining,
brief, viral videos [lasting 20 – 60 s] or playing the video game
Tetris). At any time, participants could click on the left side of the
screen and complete math problems (“Do Math”) or click on the
right side of the screen and consume media (“Play game or watch
movie”). Participants were told there were no negative consequences for their choices and that they could do whatever they
preferred. See Figure 2. The software (unknown to the participant)
tracked the number of math problems completed successfully,
producing our focal dependent measure.
To make the math problems potentially meaningful in students’
eyes—and worth completing—we told participants that successfully completing the tasks could possibly help them sharpen their
math skills and stay prepared for their future careers. As a part of
this cover story, we presented participants with summaries of
actual scientific studies showing that increasingly as people rely on
technology to do simple tasks, their grasp of basic skills can
atrophy. As a result, all participants could plausibly see the successful completion of boring math problems as preparatory for a
future career, if they so desired.

YEAGER ET AL.

564
Table 1
Zero-Order Correlations for Study 1 Measures
Variable

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Self-transcendent motives
(“Purpose for learning”)
Self-oriented, intrinsic motives
Extrinsic motives
Meaningfulness of schoolwork
Self-reported grit
Self-reported self-control
No. of boring math problems solved
during the diligence task
ⴱ

p ⬍ .05.

ⴱⴱ

p ⬍ .01.

ⴱⴱⴱ

Self-transcendent motives
(“Purpose for learning”)

Self-oriented,
intrinsic motives

—
.66ⴱⴱⴱ
.61ⴱⴱⴱ
.23ⴱⴱⴱ
.39ⴱⴱⴱ
.33ⴱⴱⴱ

—
.48ⴱⴱⴱ
.20ⴱⴱⴱ
.32ⴱⴱⴱ
.26ⴱⴱⴱ

.09ⴱⴱ

.04

Extrinsic
motives

—
.19ⴱⴱⴱ
.32ⴱⴱⴱ
.21ⴱⴱⴱ
⫺.09ⴱⴱ

Meaningfulness
of schoolwork

Self-reported
grit

Self-reported
self-control

—
.26ⴱⴱⴱ
.22ⴱⴱⴱ

—
.58ⴱⴱⴱ

—

.09ⴱⴱ

.07ⴱ

.16ⴱⴱⴱ

p ⬍ .001.

The task itself involved three blocks. Block 0 was a warm-up
block to become familiar with the layout of the task. It involved a
brief (1-min) set of math problems, but without the option to play
videos or video games. It is not discussed further. Blocks 1 and 2
lasted 4 min each and involved the key behavioral choice: toggling
between the math problems and the media (videos or Tetris). See
Figure 2. We totaled the number of correct math responses in each
block. In a separate validation study, five blocks were administered and boredom was assessed after each. A large increase in
self-reported boredom occurred between the first block and the
second, a significant difference, t(1019) ⫽ 4.69, p ⬍ .001, and
boredom appeared to level-off after that. Therefore in the present
study, values from Block 2, the more boring of the two blocks,
were used in analyses. The same overall pattern of results and level
of statistical significance was found when Blocks 1 and 2 were
averaged and analyzed as a single metric.3
Finally, to ensure that the task elicited boredom as expected, one
question assessed boredom on the math problems, immediately
after Block 2: “How bored were you when working on the math
problems?” (1 ⫽ Not bored at all, 2 ⫽ A little bored, 3 ⫽
Somewhat bored, 4 ⫽ Very bored, 5 ⫽ Extremely bored).
College persistence. College enrollment data were obtained
from the NSC, which is a nonprofit database that reports on
students receiving financial aid to both private and federal loan
providers (Dynarski, Scott-Clayton, & Wiederspan, 2013). Colleges submit student names to this database, and so it allows for
objective, longitudinal assessment of student behavior with little or
no missing data. In the present study, a value of 1 indicates that
students were still enrolled at a 4-year college during the Fall of
2013 after the “census date” (the date after which students owe
tuition, normally 4 – 8 weeks into the term). A value of 0 means
that they did not have an official enrollment value in the database
at that time. Possible reasons for not being enrolled in the Fall
include students who were admitted to a college but did not ever
appear at their college in the Fall, or students who appeared at their
college but withdrew during the semester.4
Initial analyses support the interpretation that college persistence was indeed meaningfully affected by self-regulation. The
number of boring math problems solved during the diligence task
positively predicted college persistence six to 10 months later
(odds ratio [OR] ⫽ 1.006, Z ⫽ 4.05, p ⬍ .001, r ⫽ .14), and the
number of tempting videos or games consumed negatively did so
(OR ⫽ .91, Z ⫽ 2.09, p ⫽ .036, r ⫽ ⫺.08). This was true even

controlling for cognitive ability (measure described below). Thus
college persistence was at least one informative variable for assessing theory regarding longitudinal behavioral self-regulation.
Cognitive ability. To rule out the alternative hypothesis that
observed correlations between variables were due to shared variance in cognitive ability, we administered a brief (10-item) set of
moderately challenging problems from Raven’s progressive matrices (Raven, Raven, & Court, 1998). We used a subset of items
rather than the full battery due to time limitations in the school
setting. Although brief, this set of items showed substantial convergent validity with other measures of cognitive ability in a
validation study that administered a full battery of IQ measures to
a subsample of the present study’s participants (see online supplemental materials).

Results
Our primary hypothesis was that a greater endorsement of
self-transcendent motives for going to college would predict (a)
the tendency to view tedious academic tasks in a more personally
meaningful fashion and (b) the tendency to display greater academic self-regulation. Analyses focus first on the concurrently
measured variables, followed by the analysis of the longitudinal
3
There were some missing data for Block 2 because some participants
(10%) did not even begin the block and instead waited for the browser to
advance, without playing games or watching videos. Reports from teachers
administering the task suggested that this was likely because students found
Block 1 so aversive that they gave up on the task. Thus, rather than treating
these participants’ performance on Block 2 as missing data— effectively
dropping participants—they were instead coded as having completed zero
problems. We found that doing this and retaining all participants for analysis
did not sacrifice validity—for instance, the correlation of boring math problems solved and self-reported trait self-control was r ⫽ .15, p ⬍ .001, both
when we counted these students’ Block 2 performance as missing data and
when we counted the students as having completed zero problems. All conclusions about the significance of the predictors of diligence task data remained the same regardless of the missing data technique.
4
The large majority of students said that their goal was to attend and
graduate from a 4-year college (85%), while the remaining students said their
goal was to attend a 2-year college. Interestingly, many students who said in
May they would attend a 2-year college ended up at a 4-year college in the
Fall, and so, to be conservative, our primary analyses included all participants
regardless of their stated goal during senior year. However, we conducted
supplemental analyses of the college persistence outcomes that were limited
only to the subgroup who said they were planning on attending a 4-year
college. The significance tests for the focal variables were no different.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION

565

Figure 2. The “diligence task”: a behavioral measure of academic self-regulation. See the online article for the
color version of this figure.

behavioral outcome: college persistence. Our secondary hypothesis was whether individual differences in the endorsement of the
self-oriented motives showed the same pattern as the selftranscendent motives.
Concurrent measures. When inspecting zero-order correlations (Table 1), students who reported more of a selftranscendent purpose for learning also scored higher on the
meaningfulness of schoolwork measure (r ⫽ .23, p ⬍ .001),
conceptually replicating past research (Yeager & Bundick,
2009) but with a novel and more theoretically precise measure.
A self-transcendent purpose for learning also predicted more
grit (r ⫽ .39, p ⬍ .001) and more academic self-control (r ⫽
.33, p ⬍ .001) and showed a modest correlation with a greater
number of boring math problems solved in the face of tempting
media (r ⫽ .09, p ⬍ .01).
Supplemental analyses of survey questions asked after the diligence task help clarify those results. Students who endorsed a
self-transcendent purpose for learning did not perceive the single-

digit subtraction problems as less boring (r ⫽ ⫺.02, p ⫽ .47).
Furthermore, 91% of participants reported at least some boredom,
and 72% were “Extremely,” “Very,” or “Somewhat” bored. Thus
the task was indeed boring. Yet those with more of a purpose
solved somewhat more math problems despite the boredom (also
see Grant & Sonnentag, 2010).
The overall correlations with measures of self-regulation
were maintained when controlling for potential confounding
variables in a multiple regression: self-oriented, intrinsic motives for learning (e.g., exploring your interests), extrinsic motives for going to college (e.g., making more money), as well as
sex, race and ethnicity, and cognitive ability. Regression models are shown in Table 2. Inspecting the standardized regression
coefficients in Table 2 shows that a self-transcendent purpose
for learning predicted greater personal meaningfulness of⬎
schoolwork (␤ ⫽ .15, p ⬍ .001), grit (␤ ⫽ .27, p ⬍ .001),
academic self-control (␤ ⫽ .29, p ⬍ .001), and the number of
correctly solved boring math problems (␤ ⫽ .09, p ⫽ .01). In

Table 2
Ordinary Least Squares Regressions Predicting Construal and Academic Self-Regulation in Study 1
Dependent measure
Meaningfulness of
schoolwork

Grit

No. of boring math
problems solved during
the diligence task

Self-control

Predictor

␤

t

p

␤

t

p

␤

t

p

␤

t

p

Self-transcendent motives
(“Purpose for learning”)
Self-oriented, intrinsic motives
Extrinsic motives
Cognitive ability
Sex
Ethnicity
Adjusted R2
N

.15
.09
⫺.10
⫺.07
⫺.02
⫺.07

4.06
2.74
⫺3.50
2.78
⫺.76
⫺2.61
.07
1,360

.00
.01
.00
.01
.45
.01

.27
.10
⫺.09
⫺.10
⫺.10
⫺.11

7.04
2.63
⫺3.04
⫺2.49
⫺4.25
⫺4.21
.20
1,358

.00
.01
.00
.01
.00
.00

.29
.09
⫺.10
⫺.02
⫺.05
⫺.10

7.05
2.45
⫺3.47
⫺0.34
⫺1.87
⫺3.75
.13
1,358

.00
.01
.00
.73
.06
.00

.09
.01
⫺.11
⫺.02
⫺.05
⫺.10

2.59
0.41
⫺3.58
⫺0.34
⫺1.87
⫺3.75
.09
1,234

.01
.68
.00
.73
.06
.00

Note.

␤ ⫽ standardized regression coefficient. Sex: 1 ⫽ female, 0 ⫽ male. Ethnicity: 1 ⫽ Hispanic/Latino, 0 ⫽ non-Hispanic.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

566

YEAGER ET AL.

this multiple regression, a self-oriented, intrinsic motive for
learning did not significantly predict number of math problems
solved (see Row 2 in Table 2), and it was a significantly weaker
predictor of reported grit and self-control compared to a purpose for learning, Wald test of equality of coefficients, F(1,
1349) ⫽ 4.74, p ⫽ .03.
Note that these analyses do not show that self-oriented motives are unimportant. Almost all participants who reported at
least some self-transcendent motives (e.g., at or above the scale
midpoint) also expressed at least modest levels of intrinsic,
self-oriented motives (also at or above the scale midpoint; also
see Yeager et al. 2012). Nevertheless, more strongly endorsing
a self-oriented motive was not related to individual differences
self-regulation. By contrast, in a sample of adolescents with at
least some level of self-oriented motivation, greater endorsement of self-transcendent motives consistently predicted greater
self-regulation.
Finally, zero-order correlations showed that intuitively appealing extrinsic self-oriented motives such as making money in a
future job were significant positive predictors of meaningfulness
of schoolwork and trait-level self-regulation (Table 1). However,
this appeared to be due to shared variance with the other motives.
The extrinsic self-oriented items include variance both due to a
general motivation to go to college—which would be shared with
the purpose items—as well as variance due to more specific
extrinsic motives (making money, getting out of the house), which
might not be. In regression analyses that presumably remove the
former source of variance, extrinsic motives were in every case
strong negative predictors of both personal meaningfulness of
schoolwork and academic self-regulation (see Row 3 in Table 2).
That is, wanting to go to college in order to make money or get out
of the house predicted significantly worse academic selfregulation, net of other motives to go to college.
Longitudinal measure: College persistence. Many factors
are likely to affect whether high-school graduates follow through
with their college aspirations. These include academic preparation
or the need for financial aid. Yet students also face barriers that
require self-regulation, such as navigating the bureaucratic difficulties of completing the paperwork for enrollment, housing,
course and major selection, etc., as well as the need to take
entry-level, sometimes-tedious or disconnected introductory
courses (Ryu, 2012). College students also have more freedom
with their time compared to high school students, and they must
freely choose to work in service of their long-term goals even as
they face daily temptations to engage in social activities or consume entertaining media. Because self-regulation, in theory,
should help students complete these tasks and therefore persist in
college—and recall that diligence task behavior predicted college
enrollment—we hypothesized that a purpose for learning might
predict goal persistence across the socially, academically, and
bureaucratically difficult transition to college.
Consistent with this theoretical expectation, in a logistic regression with no covariates, a self-transcendent purpose for learning
significantly predicted college enrollment (OR ⫽ 1.40, Z ⫽ 4.82,
p ⬍ .001). Controlling for sex, race and ethnicity, cognitive ability,
as well as cumulative high school grade point average (GPA), did
not diminish this relation (OR ⫽ 1.40, Z ⫽ 4.62, p ⬍ .001).
Estimated values from this model are depicted in Figure 3. This
figure shows that for students with responses at the bottom of the

Figure 3. A self-transcendent purpose for learning predicts long-term
persistence toward an academic goal (enrollment at a 4-year college 6 –10
months postassessment, among college-going high school graduates) in
Study 1. Predicted values that adjusted for cognitive ability, gender, racial
minority status, and high school grade point average are depicted. All
participants were high school graduates who stated that their goal was to
graduate from college.

purpose scale (the lowest two out of five points), only 30% of
students were still enrolled at college in the Fall immediately
following high school graduation. Among students at the midpoint
of the purpose scale, 57% were still enrolled in college. For
students at the highest two out of five scale points, this number was
even greater: 64%.5 Controlling for self-oriented, intrinsic motives
for learning as well as extrinsic motives for going to college did
not diminish the significant relation between a purpose for learning
and college enrollment (OR ⫽ 1.34, Z ⫽ 2.77, p ⫽ .006).6 These
additional motives did not significantly predict college enrollment:
self-oriented, intrinsic motives (OR ⫽ 1.10, Z ⫽ .85, p ⫽ .40), and
extrinsic motives (OR ⫽ 1.11, Z ⫽ 1.05, p ⫽ .30). Wald tests
comparing the sizes of these coefficients to a self-transcendent
purpose for learning failed to reach statistical significance (ps ⫽
.35 and .22, respectively). Altogether, a self-transcendent purpose
for learning predicted persistence toward the eventual goal of
college graduation. In the full regression model, other, more selforiented motives did not.

Discussion
This research was conducted with a large sample of low-income,
mostly racial minority students, many of whom would be the first
in their families to graduate from college. In this sample, those
who expressed more of a self-transcendent purpose for learning as
they were leaving high school also viewed tedious academic
activities as more personally meaningful and both reported and
behaviorally displayed greater academic self-regulation. They
5
The relation was not exclusively driven by the low-purpose individuals. When reconducting analyses only with the sample at or above the
midpoint of the purpose scale (3, 4, or 5, excluding 1 and 2; see Figure 3),
a self-transcendent purpose for learning remained a significant predictor of
college enrollment (OR ⫽ 1.32, Z ⫽ 2.77, p ⫽ .006).
6
For a subset of students, we were able to obtain college-admissions test
scores (SATs and ACTs). When reconducting analyses with test scores as
covariates, all conclusions about the significance of each of the motives
(self-oriented and self-transcendent) were unchanged (ps ⬍ .05).

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION

were also more likely to continue toward their stated goal of
persisting in college. These effects were independent of cognitive
ability. In addition, stronger endorsement of more typical selforiented motives did not as consistently predict greater selfregulation, suggesting that there is a unique contribution of adding
more self-transcendent motives.
More generally, the results of Study 1 raise the intriguing
possibility that an intervention designed to promote a selftranscendent purpose for learning might improve adolescents’ academic performance over time. We tested this in Study 2.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Study 2: A Longitudinal Intervention Experiment
Study 1 was the first to show that a self-transcendent purpose for
learning could predict a tendency to display greater diligence and
self-regulation on academic activities as well as greater college
persistence. Although encouraging support for our theory, these
correlational analyses are limited in their ability to isolate causal
processes. We therefore created a novel purpose for learning
intervention and assessed its effects on behavior over time. This
was informed most directly by pioneering research by Hulleman
and Harackiewicz (2009; also see Hulleman, Durik, Schweigert, &
Harackiewicz, 2008; Hulleman, Godes, Hendricks, & Harackiewicz, 2010). It was also informed by past studies showing that
even brief persuasive messages that alter students’ appraisals of
recurring events in school can improve student achievement
months or years later (Aronson, Fried, & Good, 2002; Blackwell et
al., 2007; G. L. Cohen, Garcia, Purdie-Vaughns, Apfel, & Brzustoski, 2009; Sherman, Hartson, Binning, Purdie-Vaughns, Garcia,
Taborsky-Barba, Tomassetti, & Cohen, 2013; Walton & Cohen,
2011; see Garcia & Cohen, 2012; Yeager & Walton, 2011). Building on this, a one-time purpose intervention might produce a shift
in students’ thinking that buffers them from a loss in selfregulation when confronted with uninteresting tasks on a daily
basis (cf. Grant & Sonnentag, 2010). Specifically, we hypothesized that an intervention promoting a self-transcendent purpose
for learning could improve GPA in STEM courses several months
later, compared to a control group that completed a neutral exercise.

Method
Participants. Participants were 338 ninth grade students at a
middle class suburban high school in the Bay Area of Northern
California. Exactly half were male and half were female; 60%
were Asian, 28% were White, 9% were Hispanic/Latino, and 1%
were African American. The present study’s population adds to
Study 1’s, which showed the importance of a purpose for learning
among predominately low-income students of color attending urban public schools. In the present study, poverty and poor quality
instruction were not common barriers for students; only 8% percent were eligible for free or reduced-price lunch and over 85%
were considered proficient in math and science on state tests. Thus
it was possible to examine whether the effects of a selftranscendent purpose could generalize beyond the type of sample
employed in Study 1. There was no stopping rule for data collection in the present study because all students in the school were
invited to participate.
Procedures. The intervention was delivered in the school’s
computer lab during the school day. Teachers directed students to

567

a website (http://www.perts.net) that delivered the session via a
computer. All that was required of the teachers was to keep the
class orderly. The materials took less than one class period (20 –30
min) to complete.
The school has four grading periods in the year, each producing
independent grades, and each lasting one fourth of the school year.
In the first week of the fourth grading period of the year (in
March), students completed Study 2’s web-based self-transcendent
purpose intervention or a control intervention (see below). This
allowed for a test of the intervention on grades in the final quarter
of the year, controlling for prior grades in the third quarter.
The intervention was delivered during an elective period, not in
a math or science class. This provides a strict test of the hypothesis
that students themselves could create a purposeful framework that
they could apply even with no explicit associations between the
intervention content and STEM course learning objectives. We
made no mention to students that the purpose intervention was
designed to affect their thinking or behavior—instead, it was a
framed as a student survey requiring their input. No teacher at the
school had access to the intervention materials (so they could not
reinforce it knowingly), and they were unaware of treatment and
control assignments.
Purpose for learning intervention. A number of insights informed our intervention design. First, in past qualitative research
(Moran et al., 2013; Yeager & Bundick, 2009; Yeager et al., 2012)
many high school students spontaneously named both self-oriented
motives and self-transcendent motives. Students who did so
showed the greatest improvements in terms of the meaning of their
schoolwork over a 2-year period (Yeager et al., 2012; for analogous research in the workplace, see Grant, 2008). Almost no
adolescents (8%), however, mentioned only self-transcendent motives. We therefore expected that teens would find it implausible to
only focus on the world beyond the self, especially because high
school is transparently a preparation for one’s future personal
academic and professional goals. Therefore the intervention asked
students to connect self-transcendent aims to self-relevant reasons
for learning, rather than asking them to be completely altruistic.
Next, a premise of our approach is that it is either not possible
or extremely difficult to tell a teenager what his or her purpose for
learning should be. Doing this could threaten autonomy, a key
concern for adolescents (Erikson, 1968; Hasebe, Nucci, & Nucci,
2004; Nucci, 1996). Indeed, teens commonly express reactance in
response to adults’ attempts to influence their personal goals
(Brehm, 1966; Erikson, 1968), rejecting adult’s suggestions— or
even endorsing their opposite—to reassert autonomy (see Lapsley
& Yeager, in press). Furthermore, Vansteenkiste et al. (2004)
showed that autonomy-supportive framing was especially important when providing intrinsic motives for a learning task. At the
same time, it may be possible to lead a teenager to reflect on and
construct motives in a certain direction, in a way that leads them
to develop their own self-transcendent purposes for learning (see
Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009). In past research on service
learning activities with adolescents, reflecting on the personal
meaning of one’s past prosocial behaviors led to changes in
beliefs, attitudes, and thinking styles (Eyler, 2002; Eyler & Giles,
1999). Informed by these insights, our intervention did not seek to
give a personally relevant, self-transcendent purpose to a student.
Instead it sought to serve as an “enzyme” to catalyze students’

568

YEAGER ET AL.

reflections about their own self-transcendent purposes for learning
and facilitate connections to self-oriented motives.
More concretely, the intervention first primed students’ selftranscendent thoughts by asking them to write an open-ended
essay response to a question about social injustices they found
particularly egregious. The prompt was,

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

How could the world be a better place? Sometimes the world isn’t fair,
and so everyone thinks it could be better in one way or another. Some
people want there to be less hunger, some want less prejudice, and
others want less violence or disease. Other people want lots of other
changes. What are some ways that you think the world could be a
better place?

Student responses dealt with issues such as war, poverty, or
politics. Some examples were “Without discrimination, there
would be much less violence and war in this world” or “The
hunger problem can be solved if we have proper energy sources.”
With those prosocial concerns in mind, students next completed a
structured reading and writing exercise.
In doing so, the intervention drew on a variety of strategies
designed to be maximally persuasive without threatening autonomy (Yeager & Walton, 2011; see Aronson et al., 2002; Walton &
Cohen, 2011). The intervention conveyed the social norm that
“many students like you” have a self-transcendent purpose for
learning. Such descriptive norms can motivate behavior change
(Cialdini, Reno, & Kallgren, 1990; Goldstein, Cialdini, &
Griskevicius, 2008; see Cialdini, 2003), especially during adolescence (G. L. Cohen & Prinstein, 2006). To create a descriptive
norm, we presented results of a survey that communicated that, in
addition to common motives like making money or having freedom, most students also (sometimes secretly) are motivated to do
well in school in order to gain skills that can be used for prosocial
ends. Survey statistics presented to participants indicated that most
students were motivated to do well in high school at least in part
“to gain knowledge so that they can have a career that they
personally enjoy” and “to learn so they can make a positive
contribution to the world.” These statistics were also designed to
counteract pluralistic ignorance about the norm that people are
purely self-interested (also see Grant & Patil, 2012; Miller, 1999).
As in similar social-psychological interventions (e.g., Walton &
Cohen, 2011), summary statistics were accompanied by representative quotes purportedly from upperclassmen at the school that
reinforced the focal message. One such quote stated,
For me, getting an education is all about learning things that will help
me do something I can feel good about, something that matters for the
world. I used to do my schoolwork just to earn a better grade and look
smart. I still think doing well in school is important, but for me it’s
definitely not just about a grade anymore. I’m growing up, and doing
well in school is all about preparing myself to do something that
matters, something that I care about.

Finally, building on self-perception and cognitive dissonance
(Bem, 1972; Festinger, 1957), past research finds that when a
person freely chooses to advocate for a message this can lead a
person to internalize it (Aronson, 1999; Aronson et al., 2002).
Therefore, students next wrote brief testimonials to future students
about their reasons for learning. Specifically, students explained
how learning in high school would help them be the kind of person
they want to be or help them make the kind of impact they want

on the people around them or society in general. Participants on
average wrote two to four sentences. In this way, rather than being
passive recipients of the intervention, students themselves authored it. This allowed students to make the message both personal
and persuasive to the self (Yeager & Walton, 2011).
We conducted a pilot experiment to confirm that the selftranscendent purpose intervention could indeed promote personal
meaning in school as expected by theory (Yeager & Bundick,
2009; also see Study 1). This pilot involved N ⫽ 451 high school
students from 13 different high schools across the United States
(extensive detail is presented in the online supplemental material).
In the pilot, students were randomized to the purpose intervention
or a neutral control activity (see below). Students then completed
a more extended version of the Study 1 meaningfulness of schoolwork measure—the academically oriented BIF (Figure 1; cf. Vallacher & Wegner, 1989). As expected, in this pilot the purpose
manipulation led to greater personal meaningfulness of tedious
academic tasks compared to a neutral control, t(446) ⫽ 2.67, p ⫽
.007, d ⫽ 0.25 (Control raw M ⫽ 4.78, SD ⫽ 2.53 vs. Purpose raw
M ⫽ 5.39, SD ⫽ 2.41). This confirms that the purpose intervention
can operate as expected, at least in the short term in the pilot
sample.
Control exercise. In a control condition, participants read
about and then explained how high school was different from
middle school. As in the purpose condition, participants saw
summary statistics, read messages purportedly from helpful upperclassman (e.g., statements discussing the differences in the number
of teachers or difficulty of time management), and wrote essays
about how their lives were different now compared to when they
were in middle school. Thus the control exercise was ageappropriate, social, and engaging but was devoid of the focus on
motives for learning. It primarily rules out the alternative explanation that any positive and friendly message about school from
older students could create a sense of connection with others and
facilitate prosocial motivation.
Measures.
STEM GPA. The primary dependent variable was grades in
STEM courses (math and science) for the fourth grading period of
the year. As is common, we scored grades from individual courses
on a 4-point GPA scale (i.e., A ⫽ 4, A⫺ ⫽ 3.67, B⫹ ⫽ 3.33, etc.)
and then averaged them. We did the same for the preintervention
grading periods. Math courses were Algebra 1, Algebra 2, or
geometry (depending on where guidance counselors placed students); all students took biology, although some students were in
more advanced biology classes than others.

Results
Preliminary analyses. The two conditions did not differ in
terms of word count of their written responses, t(319) ⫽ ⫺0.10,
p ⫽ .92, suggesting that, at least along this index, the two interventions elicited similar levels of engagement with the activity.
Next, students successfully responded to the prompt. Some examples for the purpose intervention condition were:
I would like to get a job as some sort of genetic researcher. I would
use this job to help improve the world by possibly engineering crops
to produce more food, or something like that.

or

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION
I believe learning in school will give me the rudimentary skills to
survive in the world. Science will give me a good base for my career
in environmental engineering. I want to be able to solve our energy
problems.

or

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

I think that having an education allows you to understand the world
around you. It also allows me to form well-supported, well-thought
opinions about the world. I will not be able to help anyone without
first going to school.

GPA analyses. Did the purpose intervention improve overall
grades in STEM-related courses (math and science)? It did, as
shown in Figure 4. In an OLS regression, there was a full-sample
effect of the one-time intervention on STEM-course GPA in the
months following the experiment (Control covariate-adjusted M ⫽
2.93, SD ⫽ 1.03; Purpose covariate-adjusted M ⫽ 3.04, SD ⫽
0.89), t(337) ⫽ 3.20, p ⫽ .001, d ⫽ 0.11.7 As is standard procedure in analyses of psychological intervention effects on GPA
(Blackwell et al., 2007; G. L. Cohen et al., 2009; Walton & Cohen,
2011; Yeager et al., 2014), this analysis was conducted controlling
for prior performance (in the present case, third grading period
grades; the same findings emerged controlling for all prior grading
periods). Indeed, doing so reduced the standard errors associated
with the condition variable, allowing for more precise estimates of
treatment effects and maximization of statistical power.8 Additional models that added controls for race, gender, age and level of
math course did not change the finding of a main effect of
condition on GPA (p ⫽ .001). These control variables also did not
moderate treatment effects (all interaction effect ps ⬎ .15).9
Under the assumption that low-achieving math and science
students might be more likely to be disinterested (see, e.g., Skinner, Kindermann, & Furrer, 2009; also see Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009), we tested whether the purpose for learning would
have the greatest effect on students who were earning the lowest
math and science grades preintervention. Indeed, there was a
significant Purpose Intervention ⫻ Preintervention GPA interaction, t(338) ⫽ ⫺2.92, p ⫽ .004, such that lower performing
students benefitted more. To illustrate this interaction, which was
tested using the continuous preintervention GPA variable, it is

569

possible to examine simple effects within meaningful subgroups of
lower performers (students with a GPA ⬍ 3.0) and higher performers (GPA of 3.0 or higher). A cut-point of a GPA of 3.0 was
selected for this illustration because an analysis of high school
transcripts and college enrollment statistics identified this as the
best GPA threshold for college readiness (Roderick, Nagaoka, &
Allensworth, 2006). Among lower performers, who are typically
less likely to successfully complete college on the basis of their
high school GPAs, there was a significant treatment effect of 0.2
grade points, t(119) ⫽ 2.90, p ⫽ .005, d ⫽ 0.21. This is shown in
Figure 4. Among higher performers, there was a nonsignificant
effect of 0.05 grade points, t(207) ⫽ 1.38, p ⫽ .17, d ⫽ 0.06.
Thus, the self-transcendent purpose for learning increased
STEM-course grades for students overall, but especially so for
low-performers who were on track for being underprepared for
higher education. This result mirrors past intervention studies,
which have found that lower performing students tend to benefit
most from activities that redirect their thinking about academic
work in a positive way (e.g., G. L. Cohen et al., 2009; Hulleman
& Harackiewicz, 2009; also see Wilson & Linville, 1982). It is of
course possible that this moderation by baseline grades is a statistical issue; indeed, A, A⫺, and B ⫹ students have less room to
improve. At the same time, to the extent that lower grades could be
caused by disinterest and disengagement (see, e.g., Skinner et al.,
2009), the present moderation is consistent with the theory that the
purpose intervention would confer the greatest benefits when
disinterest and disengagement are greatest.

Discussion
Extending the Study 1 correlational findings, Study 2 showed
that a self-transcendent purpose intervention could affect overall
achievement in STEM courses several months into the future. How
could a brief purpose intervention increase official GPA? In the
next two studies we sought to illuminate some of the behavioral
processes that might be set in motion by the self-transcendent
purpose manipulation.

Study 3: Deeper Learning During Tedious
Multiple-Choice Questions
Study 2 was a contribution in showing a causal effect of a
one-time self-transcendent purpose intervention on accumulated
behavior over time—specifically, GPA in high school STEM
classes. It provides causal evidence for the kinds of achievement
effects that may have produced the Study 1 correlational finding
that purpose for learning predicted college persistence. However, a

Figure 4. A self-transcendent purpose for learning intervention raises
grades in math and science for all students but especially for poor performers in Study 2 (students with a GPA below 3.0 in the preintervention
quarter). Error bars indicate 1 standard error. STEM ⫽ science, technology, engineering, and mathematics.

7
Cohen’s d effect sizes were calculated by dividing the covariateadjusted treatment effect by the raw, pooled standard deviation.
8
Even without controlling for baseline performance—which reduced the
standard error for the treatment effect by more than 250%—the treatment
effect on final grades was marginally significant (p ⫽ .06).
9
While our primary focus was on STEM course GPA, the participating
school also provided students’ English grades. Supplemental analyses
showed that there was a full-sample effect of the purpose intervention on
fourth grading period English grades of .15 grade points, t(329) ⫽ 2.18,
p ⫽ .03, including the same covariates noted above. Perhaps this was
because students found freshman year English to be boring, or perhaps this
is because the intervention led to a general increase in engagement in
school that spilled over to English class.

YEAGER ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

570

number of issues remain. Study 2 did not document which shortterm behaviors were affected by the intervention and that subsequently added up to the long-term treatment effect. For instance,
we do not know if a self-transcendent purpose increased overall
grades by making students more likely to truly learn from their
academic experiences, as opposed to moving as quickly as possible
through their academic work without trying to retain the information for future use (see Jang, 2008).
Study 3 was a naturalistic field experiment conducted among
undergraduates preparing for one of their final exams in their
psychology course. A few days before the exam, the instructor
e-mailed students a survey link that randomized them to a purpose
intervention or a control exercise. The survey then directed students to complete a tedious (⬎100-question) web-based test review. Our hypothesis was that the self-transcendent purpose intervention would increase students’ attempts to seriously review the
material, operationalized as the average amount of time spent on
each question. Notably, the materials were presented as an actual
extra-credit exercise, not as a study, in order to more closely
recreate the real-world choices students might have been making
in Study 2.

Method
Participants. A total of 89 second- through fifth-year students
in an undergraduate psychology course received an e-mail inviting
them to access a test review and receive extra credit. A total of 71
(80%) completed the intervention materials and provided any data
on dependent measures. Of these, 78% were women. There was no
stopping rule because all students in the class were invited. No data
were excluded.
Note that in this study (and Study 4), participants are college
students, not high school students. In part this is because of our
interest in understanding the processes that lead to the attainment
of long-term educational goals such as college graduation (e.g.,
Study 1). This sample was also convenient. This difference in
sample provides the benefit of possibly generalizing the prior
results. It would be informative if a self-transcendent purpose for
learning intervention produced analogous effects among high
school freshmen (Study 2), high school seniors (Study 1), and
college students (Studies 3 and 4).
Procedure. Near the end of the term, students completed the
online purpose intervention and exam review activity. During the
review activity, the survey software tracked students’ behavior
(e.g., time spent on each practice problem), and this constituted the
primary dependent measure.
More specifically, 2 days before an exam, students were sent the
following e-mail from their professor:
Hello class. I’m currently working on an online activity to help the
students in my class do better. This online activity involves two
things. First, it helps you think about how our psychology class fits
into the context of your lives. Second, I’ve created an online activity
to help you study the course material and prepare for your next exam,
which involves showing you several sample multiple-choice questions
that are similar to the kinds of questions that you will be tested on
during EXAM 3. Since this online tool is still a work in progress, I’m
offering you 2 points extra credit (to be applied to your lowest exam
score) if you decide to go through it and help refine it. . . . [It] will take
as long as you’d like–you can answer as many or as few questions as
you want.

Purpose and control exercises. The self-transcendent purpose
materials were highly similar to those used in Study 2. They were
edited slightly to refer to reasons for learning psychology, so that
the materials could conceivably be seen as related to the psychology course. The normative quotes were also framed as coming
from former students in the course, as opposed to upperclassmen
in general. The control exercise was highly similar to the Study 2
control group, only it discussed how learning in college is different
from learning in high school. Both of these changes were made
because the experiment was conducted as institutional research,
which means that the goal of the study was to improve instructional practice, although the data could also be used for generalizable knowledge. And in fact the review boosted grades, dramatically so for the lowest performers across conditions (see online
supplemental materials). This ethics arrangement also had implications for random assignment. Because the research team already
possessed evidence that the intervention could benefit students
(e.g., Study 2) and because there were real-world grades at stake
for students, for ethical reasons 75% of students received the
purpose intervention and 25% received the control. Furthermore,
no self-report attitudes or other psychological measures were assessed. Only students’ postmanipulation behaviors on the review
materials were measured.
Measures. As a dependent measure, we created a situation
that was tedious: reviewing for a test by answering over 100
multiple-choice questions. We then measured behavior that could
signify an intention to truly learn from it: time spent on each
review question. All questions were taken from a psychology test
bank. On average, students answered 90 questions and spent 40
min doing so. Review questions were programmed so that students
could not proceed to the next question until they answered it
correctly, and task instructions clearly stated that spending more
time on each question—rather than just guessing randomly until
they got it right and could move on—signaled a desire for deeper
learning. The instructions were,
IMPORTANT: HOW TO ACTUALLY LEARN FROM THESE
QUESTIONS
New cognitive psychology research shows that simply guessing on
multiple-choice questions does not promote deep learning on the
activity, because it doesn’t force you to retrieve the information. . . .
So, if you want to deeply learn from this activity, it is best to look
through your notes and the textbook and try to recall the information
while answering the questions, as if you were really taking an important exam.

Students were also given web links to actual published empirical
articles showing that memory is improved only by earnest retrieval
behaviors. Thus, we created a situation in which the longer students thought about each question before trying to answer it, and
the longer they spent clarifying their understanding before moving
on, the more they were choosing to “learn deeply” from the
activity. We conducted a number of additional analyses to confirm
this theoretical interpretation of the data, and they are reported in
the online supplement.
The survey software recorded the number of milliseconds that
each question was displayed before students ultimately submitted
a correct answer. These values were summed and then divided by
the number of questions attempted, to produce an average time per

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION

question per person. Treatment versus control students did not
differ in terms of the number of questions students completed (p ⫽
.38), but the effect was in the direction of treated students completing more problems (see online). As is common in analyses of
time, our measure showed significant skew and kurtosis (joint test
p ⬍ .00001). We therefore conducted a “ladder of powers” analysis (Tukey, 1977) to identify the transformation that best reduced
deviation from normality (it was one divided by the square root of
the number of seconds). The ladder analysis and subsequent transformation were done blind to the effect of the transformations on
the significance of the intervention effect. The transformed measure had no significant skew or kurtosis (joint test p ⫽ .90). Time
was ultimately coded so that higher numbers corresponded to more
time on average on each page, and then z-scored to have a mean of
zero and a standard deviation of 1. All analyses are from regressions that control for prior test performance, which significantly
predicted time per page and reduced standard errors associated
with treatment effects.

Results
Results showed that a self-transcendent purpose for learning
increased the tendency to attempt to deeply learn from the tedious
academic task. Students who completed the self-transcendent purpose intervention spent more time working on each review question (Z-scored time per question: Control M ⫽ ⫺0.43, SD ⫽ 1.11;
Purpose M ⫽ 0.13, SD ⫽ 0.93), t(69) ⫽ 2.11, p ⫽ .038, d ⫽ 0.56.
In the untransformed data, this corresponded to spending roughly
twice as much time on each question (Control M ⫽ 25 s per
question vs. Treatment M ⫽ 49 s per question).10

Discussion
Study 3 investigated one of the short-term behaviors that might
have led to the long-term effects of a purpose in Study 2: deeper
learning on a tedious exam review. Students spent twice as long on
their review questions when they had just written about how truly
understanding the subject area could allow them to contribute to
the world beyond the self, compared to controls. Importantly, this
was done in a naturalistic setting—that is, looking at real world
student behavior on an authentic examination review. Perhaps the
purpose intervention increased grades over time in Study 2 because it led students to complete their academic work in a qualitatively distinct fashion— one that privileged learning and retention over “getting through it.”

Study 4: Working Hard in the Face of Temptations
The findings from Study 3 suggest one way in which a one-time
self-transcendent purpose intervention might have increased overall grades in STEM courses in Study 2: deeper learning during
review activities. However we have not shown that the purpose
manipulation altered students’ abilities to regulate their competing
desires. That is, we have not shown effects in situations that clearly
require self-regulation. To begin to answer this, a more precise
behavioral test is required— one that pits the desire to meet one’s
learning goals against the desire to give up and engage in a
tempting alternative.
Therefore Study 4 examined behavior on the “diligence task”
described in Study 1 (also see Figure 2). This task simulates a

571

common experience for students: having to complete problem sets
for math and science classes while being tempted to consume
entertaining media on the Internet. Thus, the present study allowed
for a face-valid test of our hypothesis that a self-transcendent
purpose for learning could lead students to continue to solve math
problems and eschew tempting alternatives even as boredom is
increasing.
Second, it would be helpful to know if a self-transcendent
purpose could benefit all learners, but especially when a task is
most uninteresting. Therefore, instead of examining betweenperson differences that might moderate treatment effects, as in
Study 2, Study 4 focused on within-person differences. That is,
Study 4 examined whether the purpose manipulation would lead to
more math problems solved on the later trials of the diligence task,
when boredom is greatest.
Study 4 was primarily designed to address these two research
questions. However a third objective was to test whether simply
emphasizing the self-oriented benefits of learning in school
would be sufficient to promote academic self-regulation. Recall
that Studies 2 and 3 compared the purpose manipulation to a
neutral control exercise, something that has often been done in
many past social-psychological interventions that have affected
long-term educational outcomes (e.g., Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009; Walton & Cohen, 2011). Yet it is unknown whether
an analogous self-oriented manipulation would show the same
benefits as the purpose manipulation. While Study 1 is helpful
in showing the unique correlational effect of a self-transcendent
purpose, an analogous experimental study has not been conducted. To address this, in the second of the two samples
included in the present study we added a self-oriented condition, making it a three-cell design. We hypothesized that the
self-oriented condition would not be sufficient to lead to higher
numbers of math problems solved when boredom was greatest,
compared to controls. We did not have a strong prediction about
the comparison between the self-oriented condition and the
purpose condition, however, because the former was intentionally designed to share much of the same content, and because
past research has found these two groups do not differ significantly (Yeager et al., 2012; also recall the inconsistent Wald
test results in Study 1).

Method
Participants. Participants (total N ⫽ 429) were two samples
of students taking introductory psychology at the University of
Texas at Austin in consecutive semesters. They participated in
exchange for partial course credit. Forty-eight percent were male,
and 52% were female. Race and ethnicity information was not
collected from these students; however, the freshmen cohort at the
university (which historically closely mirrors introductory psychology) is 57% White, 18% Asian, 17% Hispanic/Latino, and 5%
African American. Students were predominately first- or secondyear students: 37% were 18 years old, 36% were 19 years old, and
10
It was also possible to explore treatment effects on actual scores on
the final exam administered a few days after the study. Exploratory
analyses found that the large majority of students showed greater improvement in test scores in the purpose condition compared to the control.
Analyses are presented in the online supplemental materials.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

572

YEAGER ET AL.

15% were 20 years old. Data were collected during daytime hours
in the last few days of the semester, a time when self-regulation
might have been precarious due to final exams.
Sample 1 had no stopping rule. We sought to collect as much
data as possible (final n ⫽ 117) before the end of the term, and data
were not analyzed until after the term was over. Sample 2 was
collected the following semester and so it was possible to conduct
a power analysis based on the results of Sample 1 before collecting
data. This led to a target sample size of 300 for Sample 2, because
a power analysis revealed that roughly 95 participants per cell
would be required to have 80% power to detect an effect of d ⫽
0.41 between any two conditions (the effect size estimate for the
purpose intervention from Sample 1). Ultimately Sample 2 involved usable data from a maximum of n ⫽ 312 students (data
collection was stopped at the end of the first day on which more
than 300 complete responses had been collected). Some students
did not provide data for some measures, and so degrees of freedom
varied across analyses. No data were excluded except for those
mentioned here or in the online supplement.
Procedures. The intervention procedures were nearly identical to those used in Study 3. Immediately after completing the
intervention materials, participants completed the diligence task as
described in Study 1.
Purpose and control exercises. These were nearly identical to
those used in Study 2.
Self-oriented control exercise. Sample 2 had a three-cell design that added a self-oriented (and intrinsic) condition to the
control and self-transcendent purpose conditions. The self-oriented
manipulation was similar to the purpose manipulation in nearly
every way except for the elimination of self-transcendent prompts
in the stimuli. It was future-oriented, goal-directed, and highly
focused on learning and on developing skills—all things expected
by theory to promote a commitment to learning (e.g., Lepper et al.,
2005; Ryan & Deci, 2000; Vansteenkiste et al., 2006). This is a
highly conservative test in that the manipulations shared much of
the same content—approximately 90% of the text was the same.
Also recall that Study 1 indicated that self-transcendent and selforiented motives were strongly correlated (r ⫽ .66). The present
self-oriented control group was designed to rule out the alternative
explanation that any manipulation involving reading and writing
about intrinsic personal motives for learning would be sufficient to
lead to greater self-regulation on an uninteresting task.
In the self-oriented exercise, an initial essay question asked
about changes in the world. This held time-perspective and counterfactual thinking constant, both shown to affect level of construal, which could promote self-regulation (Trope & Liberman,
2010, 2011). However, this prompt asked how the world might be
changed to benefit the self, rather than to address an injustice in the
world:
How could the world be better for you? Sometimes the world isn’t
what you want it to be, and so everyone thinks it could be better for
them in one way or another. Some people want more fun, some want
it to be less stressful, and others want to be more interested in what
they’re doing. Other people want lots of other changes. What are some
ways that you think the world could be better for you?

All but one of the summary statistics and all but one of the
representative quotes were identical across conditions. For the one
quote that was not the same, we removed self-transcendent infor-

mation without sacrificing a focus on building skills, so that it
read,
For me, getting an education is all about learning things that will help
me do something I can be good at—something that I can be the best
at. I used to do my homework just to earn a better grade and look
smart. I still think doing well in school is important, but for me it’s
definitely not just about a grade anymore. I’m growing up, and doing
well in school is all about preparing myself to do a job that I can be
good at. That seems really rewarding to me— knowing that at the end
of the day you completed an important job, and you did an awesome
job at it. [Differences from the quotation in Study 2 shown in italics.]

Next, participants were asked to share their own testimonials.
The prompt closely mirrored the purpose condition and strongly
emphasized the acquisition of skills (rather than the accumulation
of extrinsic benefits). It asked “Why is learning important to your
goals,” and “How will learning in school help you be the kind of
person you want to be and help you have a career in life that you
enjoy or are interested in?” It was designed to promote a suite of
self-oriented motives, including task value (i.e., personal interest)
and utility value (i.e., gaining a fulfilling career; Eccles & Wigfield, 1995, 2002). Supplementing this was a clear invocation of
mastery goals for learning (Elliot & McGregor, 2001). All of these
motives, on their own, might be expected to promote persistence.
Yet this manipulation lacks explicit mention of the potential to use
that mastery to benefit others, allowing for a test of our theory
regarding the benefits of adding self-transcendent motives, above
and beyond this suite of more self-oriented motives.
Measures. Participants completed the same behavioral measure of academic self-regulation (i.e., the diligence task) that was
used in Study 1 (see Figure 2). As in Study 1, we analyzed the total
number of correct math responses.11 Performance on each of the
two blocks was analyzed separately to allow for a test of whether
self-regulatory benefits would be greatest when boredom had
increased. To verify the extent to which the task was boring for
participants in all conditions, at the end we asked participants
whether the task was in fact boring, using the same item described
in Study 1.

Results
Analytic plan. The primary theoretical interest was in
whether the purpose for learning condition differed from the
control condition in terms of behavior on the diligence task.
Because, as will be shown, this focal comparison was significant
independently within Samples 1 and 2, we primarily analyze a
stacked data set and in statistical models we include a dummy
variable for sample (and of course the self-oriented condition data
are excluded in those analyses).
A secondary question was whether the self-oriented manipulation produced the same or a different pattern of results as the
purpose for learning manipulation. Therefore we next conducted
analyses of the self-oriented manipulation using only data from
Sample 2. We hypothesized that the self-oriented condition would
11
As in Study 1, we treated people who stopped the task altogether after
the first block as a “0,” as in Study 1, to avoid dropping data. The statistical
significance levels of the focal analyses (Block 2 math problems successfully answered) were no different when omitting participants who did not
begin Block 2.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION

not differ from controls. We did not have strong hypotheses about
differences from the purpose condition, given the overlap between
the two manipulations and the strong endorsement of learning
goals in the self-oriented condition.
Preliminary analyses. The experimental manipulations again
appeared to elicit similar levels of thinking and writing about their
respective topics; there were no differences across conditions in
terms of the word count on the open-ended essay prompts: Sample
1 t(116) ⫽ 0.50, ns; Sample 2 F(2, 282) ⫽ 0.13, ns. Next, the
diligence task was experienced as truly boring. Fully 73% of
participants said they were “Extremely,” “Very” or “Somewhat”
bored when working on the math problems, while only 4% said
they were “not bored at all.” Ratings of boredom did not differ by
condition: Sample 1 t(116) ⫽ 0.47, ns; Sample 2: F(2, 282) ⫽
1.27, ns. Thus, this study was a test of whether participants would
display greater self-regulation on a task that was experienced as
equally boring across conditions.
Primary analyses. Did the self-transcendent purpose manipulation affect the number of math problems correctly solved? On
the first block in the stacked data set, the purpose manipulation had
no effect compared to the control, t(310) ⫽ 0.18, p ⫽ .86 (or in
either sample): Sample 1 t(116) ⫽ 0.19, p ⫽ .85; Sample 2 F(2,
283) ⫽ 0.57, p ⫽ .56). However recall from the methods of Study
1 that the second block in the diligence task is experienced as
much more tedious and aversive compared to the first block (and
significantly so). Therefore differences were predicted to emerge
precisely when participants became most bored, in Block 2.
This is what the data showed, as depicted in Figure 5. Specifically, for participants in the control condition, the number of math
problems solved dropped precipitously from the first to the second
block. Control participants completed 44% fewer problems in
Block 2 compared to Block 1 (Control Block 1 raw M ⫽ 66.47,
SD ⫽ 46.29; Control Block 2 raw M ⫽ 37.12, SD ⫽ 45.10), a
significant difference, paired t(164) ⫽ 7.51, p ⬍ .001, d ⫽ 0.65.
However, for participants who completed the purpose manipulation, the drop in math problems solved from the first to the second
block was mitigated. Purpose condition participants completed
only 26% fewer problems in Block 2 (Purpose Block 1 M ⫽ 68.62,
SD ⫽ 45.11; Purpose Block 2 M ⫽ 50.56, SD ⫽ 49.00), still a
significant difference, paired t(165) ⫽ 4.21, p ⬍ .001, d ⫽ 0.38.
Importantly, an OLS regression analysis comparing difference
scores (Block 2 problems solved minus Block 1 problems solved,
by condition) showed that the decline experienced by the purpose

573

condition was significantly smaller than that experienced by participants in the control condition, b ⫽ 12.45, t(309) ⫽ 2.10, p ⫽
.03, d ⫽ 0.28. Thus, by the second block, there was a significant
effect of the purpose manipulation compared to the control,
t(309) ⫽ 2.81, p ⫽ .005, d ⫽ 0.32, such that purpose condition
participants completed 36% more boring math problems compared
to controls in the second block. This condition difference in Block
2 was significant independently within Sample 1, t(115) ⫽ 2.14,
p ⫽ .03, d ⫽ 0.40, and Sample 2, t(192) ⫽ 2.13, p ⫽ .03, d ⫽ 0.31,
and did not differ across samples, interaction t(308) ⫽ 0.11, p ⫽
.90. Hence, it was a reproducible finding (see Figure 5).
Comparison to the self-oriented control group. By contrast,
the highly similar self-oriented control group— emphasizing intrinsic motives for learning— did not appear to improve selfregulation on the boring math task compared to controls. Recall
that these analyses could only be conducted with data from Sample
2, which is the sample that involved the three-cell experiment. The
self-oriented condition did not differ from the control in terms of
number of math problems solved, either in Block 1, t(287) ⫽ 0.90,
p ⫽ .39, d ⫽ 0.11, or Block 2, t(287) ⫽ 0.92, p ⫽ .38, d ⫽ 0.11,
although comparisons were in the direction of more math problems
solved for the self-oriented group versus the control. Note that this
nonsignificant difference is not likely due to limited statistical
power; the purpose condition showed a significant difference from
control on Block 2 in Sample 2 (see Figure 5). The self-oriented
condition did not differ from the purpose condition in either block,
Block 1, t(285) ⫽ 1.37, p ⫽ .17, d ⫽ 0.16, Block 2,
t(285) ⫽ ⫺0.99, p ⫽ .32, d ⫽ 0.11.
Also informative is an analysis of changes across blocks. Participants in the self-oriented condition showed a decline in the
number of math problems solved that mirrored the control condition, as shown in Figure 5. Participants in the self-oriented manipulation condition solved 32% fewer problems in Block 2 than in
Block 1 (Self-oriented Block 1 M ⫽ 82.43, SD ⫽ 73.52; Block 2
M ⫽ 55.63, SD ⫽ 45.65), t(86) ⫽ 6.00, p ⬍ .001, d ⫽ 0.45. An
analysis of difference scores found that this change across blocks
did not differ from the same changes seen in the control condition,
t(286) ⫽ 0.35, p ⫽ .73. However the change score did differ
significantly from the changes seen in the purpose condition,
t(286) ⫽ ⫺2.17, p ⫽ .03, d ⫽ 0.26, showing that the purpose
manipulation was significantly better at warding off a decline in
math problems solved across blocks compared to the highly similar self-oriented manipulation.

Figure 5. A self-transcendent purpose for learning intervention sustains self-regulation on the “diligence task”
in Study 4. Error bars indicate 1 standard error.

YEAGER ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

574

Inspecting Figure 5, it is interesting that students in the selforiented manipulation condition showed an initial, nonsignificant
boost in Block 1 problems solved compared to controls. This may
have been contributing to the significant comparison between the
purpose and self-oriented conditions in terms of difference scores
across blocks. It is possible that the self-oriented manipulation led
individuals to try harder initially, on Block 1, but this effort sapped
their self-regulatory ability on the subsequent trial, Block 2. This
will be important to investigate in future research. Regardless,
simply reading and writing about intrinsic self-relevant motives for
learning did not lead to significant differences from controls when
the task became most boring. By contrast, a highly similar activity
that added self-transcendent motives was effective at sustaining
self-regulation.

Discussion
Study 4 extended the evidence about the effects of a selftranscendent purpose on academic self-regulation. It put learners in
a situation in which they were asked to complete a tedious,
low-level task that had only a tenuous relationship to future work
goals, and they were told they could quit at any time and entertain
themselves online. In many regards this is the modern dilemma:
With ubiquitous entertainment at our fingertips, learners must
exercise self-discipline even when they do not know whether they
themselves or someone else will benefit from their hard work in
the long term. We showed that learners could be helped in such
situations when they reflected on how their future role in society
might contribute in some ways to the world beyond the self. These
individuals were better able to maintain their level of persistence
and overcome temptation even when boredom was growing.

General Discussion
Many repetitive, foundational, skill-building math and science
tasks are experienced as tedious or boring (Raytheon Company,
2012; Stigler & Hiebert, 1999). Our research found that when it is
difficult to make a task interesting it can be helpful to focus on
creating personal meaning by promoting a prosocial, selftranscendent purpose for learning (see Brophy, 2008).
In correlational, experimental, and longitudinal studies involving roughly 2,000 high school and college students, a purpose for
learning predicted or caused more effective academic selfregulation in the immediate term and over time. A selftranscendent purpose was correlated with more diligence in the
face of tempting alternatives and also greater college persistence
rates among low-income, urban, predominantly minority students
(Study 1). A brief experimental intervention to promote a selftranscendent purpose increased overall STEM-course grades several months later (Study 2). Studies 3 and 4 clarified the nearerterm effects of this manipulation. A self-transcendent purpose
doubled the amount of time students spent on tedious exam review
questions (Study 3) and increased by 35% the number of boring
math problems students solved compared to controls, even when
they had the option to consume entertaining Internet media at any
time (Study 4). Adolescents with more of a self-transcendent
purpose for learning also literally saw learning tasks differently.
They were more likely to say that pictures and descriptions of
quotidian academic tasks were linked to important and personally

meaningful academic goals (Study 1; for causal evidence, also see
the pilot randomized experiment reported in the online supplement
and referenced in Study 2). All told, it seems that when adolescents
had a personally important and self-transcendent “why” for learning they were able to bear even a tedious and unpleasant “how” (cf.
Frankl, 1963).
Previous research has shown that having a prosocial, selftranscendent motive for engaging in a behavior can lead to
greater persistence on repetitive and uninteresting tasks at work
(see Grant, 2007, 2013). The present research extended this by
examining situations in which a person was completing skillbuilding tasks that have no immediate payoff for others but may
prepare one to make a contribution in the future—such as doing
single-digit subtraction or completing tedious multiple-choice
questions. We found that a self-transcendent purpose for learning could alter a person’s self-regulation in such circumstances.
This type of result might well generalize to nonschool settings. Do armed forces cadets engage in more vigorous physical
exercise when they see themselves as preparing to protect
civilians from harm versus protecting themselves from harm?
Do computer hackers spend more hours learning syntax when
they anticipate using it to resist an oppressive government
versus stealing money or content for personal consumption? We
believe the findings here might offer a perspective on the causes
of persistence on foundational skill-development tasks in a
number of settings.
The present research is also an advance because it documents
the development of a new research tool to examine the causal
impact of a self-transcendent purpose for learning. Unlike research
that has developed psychological interventions to undo the belief
that academic struggle might mean you are “dumb” (Aronson et
al., 2002; Blackwell et al., 2007; Wilson & Linville, 1982), or that
you might not belong or be valued in a setting (G. L. Cohen et al.,
2009; G. L. Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Harackiewicz et al., 2014;
Walton & Cohen, 2011), research on youth purpose has to date
been limited mostly to correlational survey analyses or qualitative
interviews, preventing strong causal inferences (Bronk, 2012; Burrow & Hill, 2011; Yeager & Bundick, 2009; see Hill, Burrow, &
Sumner, 2013; but see Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009). The
intervention developed here has the advantage of web-based scalability and replicable effects in different populations using different outcomes. It will hopefully spawn future experimental investigations on the effect of a purpose for learning and perhaps,
eventually, improvements to educational practice.
Another innovation of this research stems from the fact that the
self-transcendent purpose predicted or affected consequential educational behaviors, even among disengaged students or students
attending urban public high schools. Behavioral economic strategies to reduce inequality such as paying low-income students for
completing their homework have been applied broadly and found
to have no consistent positive effects on overall achievement
(Fryer, 2011). Yet a free, roughly 20-min, web-based intervention
led students to choose to persist on unpleasant academic tasks and
also earn higher grades. This is a testament to the power of
psychological theory (e.g., Damon et al., 2003; Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009), to lead to behavior change in situations where
more traditional economic efforts fail (also see Ross & Nisbett,
1991). Furthermore, this research counteracts potential stereotypes
about how to motivate low-income students attending urban public

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION

schools. Many of the students in Study 1 said that they wanted to
contribute to the world beyond themselves, not just make money.
And when they said this, they were more likely to demonstrate
self-control and make progress toward long-term goals. This suggests that telling these students to focus on how they can make
more money if they go to college may not give them the motives
they need to actually make it to college graduation. Instead,
perhaps cultivating motives that transcend the self could provide
them with the personal meaning they need to sustain selfregulation.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Understanding Long-Term Effects
Social psychology has a long history of documenting counterintuitive but reproducible effects of brief interventions that affect
health, stress, or achievement months or years later, even though
the mechanisms for these effects have remained obscure (e.g.,
G. L. Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Wilson & Linville, 1982; see
Pennebaker, 2004). In these past studies and in the present research, it is often easier to understand why a manipulation would
affect immediate outcomes than it is to understand why the intervention would “stick” over time, resulting in effects on overall
GPA (G. L. Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Yeager & Walton, 2011).
High school students undoubtedly receive many messages from
valued adults entreating them to pay greater attention to their
schoolwork. Why would the brief message delivered over the
Internet in Study 2 stand out?
Extant theory and some of the present data speak to this issue,
but more research is needed. Specifically, theory has pointed to the
fact that school is an environment in which recursive processes
abound. Later knowledge builds on prior knowledge, later interactions with peers or teachers depend on relationships and reputations built in prior interactions, and later self-views and goals
depend on prior thoughts and experiences (G. L. Cohen et al.,
2009; G. L. Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Yeager & Walton, 2011).
When a social-psychological intervention redirects a key motive
for doing well in school, then it is possible for a “virtuous cycle”
to gain momentum and affect diverse outcomes. A social psychological intervention might add up to accumulated effects via small
adjustments in the probabilities of exerting self-control or deeply
learning during tedious tasks (Abelson, 1985; also see G. L. Cohen
& Sherman, 2014; Garcia & Cohen, 2012; Walton, 2014). Studies
3 and 4 speak to this possibility directly, but the full mediational
process remains undocumented.

Limitations and Future Directions
One limitation of our research is that we did not investigate
participants’ strategies for self-regulation. Did participants with
more of a self-transcendent purpose engage in mental actions to
make uninteresting tasks more appealing or were they simply
better at suppressing the urge to quit and engage in the tempting
alternative? Past research suggests that both are possible (e.g.,
Fishbach & Shah, 2006; Fishbach et al., 2010; Fishbach, Zhang, &
Koo, 2009). For instance, Sansone et al. (1992) showed that when
participants were asked to complete an uninteresting task and were
given a rationale for why it might be personally important, participants implemented ways to make it feel subjectively more interesting. They randomly varied their method of completing the task

575

(also see Sansone, Wiebe, & Morgan, 1999). Meanwhile, Mischel,
Ebbensen, and Zeiss (1972) found that self-regulation on a delay of
gratification task was facilitated through cognitive strategies to
mentally transform the tempting alternative into something that
felt less appealing. Unpacking which of these alternative strategies
emerge from the self-transcendent purpose for learning could shed
light on the underlying psychological processes in the present
research.
A crucial caveat is that our research does not definitively
show that intrinsic interest-driven motives are unimportant for
self-regulation. Instead, what we showed was that with the same
statistical power the self-transcendent purpose manipulation—
which also invoked self-oriented motives–was more reliably
different from the control manipulation that focuses exclusively
on self-oriented motives (Study 4; also see the Study 2 pilot
reported in the online supplement). Self-transcendent motives
were sometimes but not always stronger predictors than selforiented ones in a multiple regression (Study 1). The finding
that the intrinsic-interest-driven motives were “in the middle”
mirrors past longitudinal research (Yeager et al., 2012) and has
some intuitive appeal. If learners are seeking tasks that interest
them or have some other intrinsic benefit to them, then they
may show a general boost in motivation on school-related tasks.
However, those only seeking benefits for the self may not
persist on aversively tedious, low-level learning tasks in the
face of alternatives that more readily satisfy their desire for
interesting activities.
The present research has focused on the role of a purpose for
learning in skill-building activities. However when expert performance is of interest, then the belief that others are counting on you
to perform well may not be beneficial. Such worries may interfere
with working memory and increase the chance that a person will
“choke” due to heightened anxiety (Beilock, 2011). Indeed, experimental procedures designed to induce anxiety and undermine
performance sometimes explicitly involve telling participants that
others’ outcomes will be negatively affected if they fail (e.g., see
Beilock, Kulp, Holt, & Carr, 2004). Perhaps a self-transcendent
purpose would undermine high-stakes performance. Thus, an important avenue for future research will be to illuminate whether a
self-transcendent purpose is as effective in performance contexts
as it appears to be in learning contexts.
Finally, it is crucial to underscore that the self-transcendent
purpose intervention is not a “magic bullet” for underachievement.
Rather, it is a context-dependent solution to a particular psychological barrier (G. L. Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Yeager & Walton,
2011)—in this case, the feeling that tedious academic tasks are
meaningless and school has no connection to one’s purposes in
life. In settings or among individuals where this belief is not
prominent— or in settings that are not quite as recursive—then the
type of intervention tested here would not be predicted to have a
lasting effect. We think of the present results as an existence proof,
not a guaranteed effect size across all settings. Research designed
to understand the moderating mechanisms of brief interventions
and likely boundary conditions for them is a high priority in social
and developmental psychology (G. L. Cohen & Sherman, 2014;
Garcia & Cohen, 2012; Walton, 2014; Yeager & Walton, 2011;
also see Wilson, 2011).

YEAGER ET AL.

576

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Conclusion
In a recent nationally representative survey, 69% of American
K–12 teachers reported that students’ lack of interest in learning
was a problem in their classrooms. In fact, this was the classroom
problem most frequently cited by teachers (Bridgeland, Bruce, &
Hariharan, 2013). Of course, sometimes low motivation can be
addressed by simply making coursework more interesting. Yet not
all assignments can be made interesting at all times. If a teacher
connects the day’s lesson to the idiosyncratic interest of one
student (e.g., emphasizing the relevance of math for understanding
sports) it may disengage another student (e.g., a student who does
not like sports). Even when relevant connections can be made for
large groups of students, it can be difficult, logistically and convincingly, to do this for all tasks every day.
In such instances a higher order, self-transcendent purpose for
working hard and learning in school might effectively lead to
self-regulation. Strikingly, however, there is little or no focus on
promoting self-transcendent aims in expert guides for educational
practitioners (e.g., Mitchell et al., 2005; National Research Council, 2000; National Research Council & the Institute of Medicine,
2004; Pintrich & Schunk, 2002). We hope the present experimental interventions, combined with past experimental research (e.g.,
Grant, 2007, 2013), can begin to encourage a shift in thinking
toward beyond-the-self aims. Of course, encouraging a selftranscendent motive is not a replacement for other motivational
strategies, especially not self-oriented, interest-based ones. But the
data presented here show that a self-transcendent motive can in
some cases serve as an important addition to interest-based approaches.

References
Abelson, R. P. (1985). A variance explanation paradox: When a little is a
lot. Psychological Bulletin, 97, 129 –133. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.97.1
.129
Ames, C. (1992). Classrooms: Goals, structures, and student motivation.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 84, 261–271. doi:10.1037/00220663.84.3.261
Andrews, M. C. (2011). Meaningful engagement in educational activity
and purposes for learning (Doctoral dissertation, Stanford University).
Retrieved from https://stacks.stanford.edu/file/druid:qp476bx9339/
Andrews_PurposesforLearning_6-1-11-augmented.pdf
Aronson, E. (1999). The power of self-persuasion. American Psychologist,
54, 875– 884. doi:10.1037/h0088188
Aronson, J., Fried, C., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the effects of stereotype threat on African American college students by shaping theories of
intelligence. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 113–125.
doi:10.1006/jesp.2001.1491
Ashforth, B. E., & Kreiner, G. E. (1999). “How can you do it?” Dirty work
and the challenge of constructing a positive identity. Academy of Management Review, 24, 413– 434. doi:10.5465/AMR.1999.2202129
Atkinson, J. W. (1957). Motivational determinants of risk taking behavior.
Psychological Review, 64, 359 –372. doi:10.1037/h0043445
Batson, C. D. (1998). Altruism and prosocial behavior. In D. T. Gilbert,
S. T. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), The handbook of social psychology
(4th ed., Vol. 2, pp. 282–316). Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill.
Beilock, S. (2011). Choke: What the secrets of the brain reveal about
getting it right when you have to. New York, NY: Free Press.
Beilock, S. L., Kulp, C. A., Holt, L. E., & Carr, T. H. (2004). More on the
fragility of performance: Choking under pressure in mathematical prob-

lem solving. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 133, 584 –
600. doi:10.1037/0096-3445.133.4.584
Bem, D. J. (1972). Self-perception theory. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances
in experimental social psychology (Vol. 6, pp. 1– 62). New York, NY:
Academic Press.
Blackwell, L., Trzesniewski, K., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Implicit theories
of intelligence predict achievement across an adolescent transition: A
longitudinal study and an intervention. Child Development, 78, 246 –
263. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2007.00995.x
Brehm, J. W. (1966). A theory of psychological reactance. In W. W. Burke,
D. G. Lake, & W. Paine (Eds.), Organization change: A comprehensive
reader (pp. 337–390). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Bridgeland, J., Bruce, M., & Hariharan, A. (2013). The missing piece: A
national teacher survey on how social and emotional learning can
empower children and transform schools. Retrieved from http://
www.civicenterprises.net/MediaLibrary/Docs/CASEL-Report-lowres-FINAL.pdf
Bronk, K. C. (2012). A grounded theory of youth purpose. Journal of
Adolescent Research, 27, 78 –109. doi:10.1177/0743558411412958
Brophy, J. (2008). Developing students’ appreciation for what is taught
in school. Educational Psychologist, 43, 132–141. doi:10.1080/
00461520701756511
Buhrmester, M., Kwang, T., & Gosling, S. D. (2011). Amazon’s Mechanical Turk: A new source of inexpensive, yet high-quality, data? Perspectives on Psychological Science, 6, 3–5. doi:10.1177/
1745691610393980
Burrow, A. L., & Hill, P. L. (2011). Purpose as a form of identity capital
for positive youth adjustment. Developmental Psychology, 47, 1196 –
1206. doi:10.1037/a0023818
Carnevale, A. P., & Desrochers, D. M. (2003). Standards for what? The
economic roots of K–16 reform. Princeton, NJ: Communication and
Public Affairs, Office of Assessment, Equity, and Careers, Educational
Testing Service.
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (1981). Attention and self-regulation: A
control-theory approach to human behavior. New York, NY: SpringerVerlag. doi:10.1007/978-1-4612-5887-2
Cialdini, R. B. (2003). Crafting normative messages to protect the environment. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 12, 105–109.
doi:10.1111/1467-8721.01242
Cialdini, R. B., Reno, R. R., & Kallgren, C. A. (1990). A focus theory of
normative conduct: Recycling the concept of norms to reduce littering in
public places. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 1015–
1026. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.58.6.1015
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Apfel, N., & Brzustoski, P.
(2009). Recursive processes in self-affirmation: Intervening to close the
minority achievement gap. Science, 324, 400 – 403. doi:10.1126/science
.1170769
Cohen, G. L., & Prinstein, M. J. (2006). Peer contagion of aggression and
health risk behavior among adolescent males: An experimental investigation of effects on public conduct and private attitudes. Child Development, 77, 967–983. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2006.00913.x
Cohen, G. L., & Sherman, D. (2014). The psychology of change: Selfaffirmation and social psychological intervention. Annual Review of
Psychology, 65, 333–371. doi:10.1146/annurev-psych-010213-115137
Cohen, J., Cohen, P., West, S. G., & Aiken, L. S. (2003). Applied multiple
regression/correlation analysis for the behavioral sciences (3rd ed.).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Damon, W. (2008). The path to purpose: Helping our children find their
calling in life. New York, NY: Free Press.
Damon, W., Menon, J., & Bronk, K. C. (2003). The development of
purpose during adolescence. Applied Developmental Science, 7, 119 –
128. doi:10.1207/S1532480XADS0703_2
Diekman, A. B., Clark, E. K., Johnston, A. M., Brown, E. R., & Steinberg,
M. (2011). Malleability in communal goals and beliefs influences at-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION
traction to stem careers: Evidence for a goal congruity perspective.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 101, 902–918. doi:
10.1037/a0025199
Dik, B. J., Steger, M. F., Gibson, A., & Peisner, W. (2011). Make your
work matter: Development and pilot evaluation of a purpose-centered
career education intervention. New Directions for Youth Development,
2011, 59 –73. doi:10.1002/yd.428
Duckworth, A. L., & Carlson, S. M. (2013). Self-regulation and school
success. In B. W. Sokol, F. M. E. Grouzet, & U. Müller (Eds.), Selfregulation and autonomy: Social and developmental dimensions of
human conduct (pp. 208 –230). New York, NY: Cambridge University
Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139152198.015
Duckworth, A., Kirby, T., Tsukayama, E., Berstein, H., & Ericsson, K.
(2011). Deliberate practice spells success: Why grittier competitors
triumph at the National Spelling Bee. Social Psychological and Personality Science, 2, 174 –181. doi:10.1177/1948550610385872
Duckworth, A. L., Peterson, C., Matthews, M. D., & Kelly, D. R. (2007).
Grit: Perseverance and passion for long-term goals. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 1087–1101. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.92
.6.1087
Duckworth, A. L., & Quinn, P. D. (2009). Development and validation of
the Short Grit Scale (GRIT–S). Journal of Personality Assessment, 91,
166 –174. doi:10.1080/00223890802634290
Duckworth, A. L., Tsukayama, E., & Kirby, T. (2013). Is it really selfcontrol? Examining the predictive power of the delay of gratification
task. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 39, 843– 855. doi:
10.1177/0146167213482589
Duffy, R. D., & Dik, B. J. (2009). Beyond the self: External influences in
the career development process. The Career Development Quarterly, 58,
29 – 43. doi:10.1002/j.2161-0045.2009.tb00171.x
Dunn, E. W., Aknin, L. B., & Norton, M. I. (2008). Spending money on
others promotes happiness. Science, 319, 1687–1688. doi:10.1126/
science.1150952
Dutton, J. E., Roberts, L. M., & Bednar, J. (2010). Pathways for positive
identity construction at work: Four types of positive identity and the
building of social resources. The Academy of Management Review, 35,
265–293. doi:10.5465/AMR.2010.48463334
Dynarski, S., Scott-Clayton, J., & Wiederspan, M. (2013). Simplifying tax
incentives and aid for college: Progress and prospects. In J. R. Brown
(Ed.), Tax policy and the economy (Vol. 27, pp. 161–202). Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press. doi:10.1086/671247
Eccles, J. S. (2009). Who am I and what am I going to do with my life?
Personal and collective identities as motivators of action. Educational
Psychologist, 44, 78 – 89. doi:10.1080/00461520902832368
Eccles, J. S., Adler, T. F., Futterman, R., Goff, S. B., Kaczala, C. M.,
Meece, J. L., & Midgley, C. (1983). Expectancies, values, and academic
behaviors. In J. T. Spence (Ed.), Achievement and achievement motivation (pp. 75–146). San Francisco, CA: Freeman.
Eccles, J. S., & Wigfield, A. (1995). In the mind of the actor: The structure
of adolescents’ achievement task values and expectancy-related beliefs.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 21, 215–225. doi:10.1177/
0146167295213003
Eccles, J. S., & Wigfield, A. (2002). Motivational beliefs, values, and
goals. Annual Review of Psychology, 53, 109 –132. doi:10.1146/annurev
.psych.53.100901.135153
Elliot, A. J., Conroy, D. E., Barron, K. E., & Murayama, K. (2010).
Achievement motives and goals: A developmental analysis. In R. M.
Lerner, M. E. Lamb, & A. M. Freund (Eds.), The handbook of life-span
development (Vol. 2, pp. 474 –510). New York, NY: Wiley. doi:
10.1002/9780470880166.hlsd002013
Elliot, A. J., & McGregor, H. A. (2001). A 2 ⫻ 2 achievement goal
framework. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 501–519.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.80.3.501

577

Emmons, R. A. (1986). Personal strivings: An approach to personality and
subjective well-being. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51,
1058 –1068. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.51.5.1058
Ericsson, K. A. (2006). The influence of experience and deliberate
practice on the development of superior expert performance. In K. A.
Ericsson, N. Charness, P. J. Feltovich, & R. R. Hoffman (Eds.), The
Cambridge handbook of expertise and expert performance (pp. 683–
704). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/
CBO9780511816796.038
Ericsson, K. A. (2007). An expert-performance perspective of research on
medical expertise: The study of clinical performance. Medical Education, 41, 1124 –1130. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2923.2007.02946.x
Ericsson, K. A. (Ed.). (2009). Development of professional expertise:
Toward measurement of expert performance and design of optimal
learning environments. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511609817
Ericsson, K. A., Krampe, R. T., & Tesch-Römer, C. (1993). The role of
deliberate practice in the acquisition of expert performance. Psychological Review, 100, 363– 406. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.100.3.363
Ericsson, K. A., & Ward, P. (2007). Capturing the naturally occurring
superior performance of experts in the laboratory toward a science of
expert and exceptional performance. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 16, 346 –350. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8721.2007.00533.x
Erikson, E. H. (1968). Identity: Youth and crisis. New York, NY: Norton.
Evans, G. W., & Rosenbaum, J. (2008). Self-regulation and the incomeachievement gap. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 23, 504 –514.
doi:10.1016/j.ecresq.2008.07.002
Eyler, J. (2002). Reflection: Linking service and learning-linking students
and communities. Journal of Social Issues, 58, 517–534. doi:10.1111/
1540-4560.00274
Eyler, J., & Giles, D. E., Jr. (1999). Where’s the learning in servicelearning? San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Feiler, D. C., Tost, L. P., & Grant, A. M. (2012). Mixed reasons, missed
givings: The costs of blending egoistic and altruistic reasons in donation
requests. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48, 1322–1328.
doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2012.05.014
Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Fishbach, A., & Shah, J. Y. (2006). Self-control in action: Implicit dispositions toward goals and away from temptations. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 90, 820 – 832. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.90.5.820
Fishbach, A., & Trope, Y. (2005). The substitutability of external control
and self-control. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 41, 256 –
270. doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2004.07.002
Fishbach, A., Zhang, Y., & Koo, M. (2009). The dynamics of selfregulation. European Review of Social Psychology, 20, 315–344. doi:
10.1080/10463280903275375
Fishbach, A., Zhang, Y., & Trope, Y. (2010). Counteractive evaluation:
Asymmetric shifts in the implicit value of conflicting motivations.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 29 –38. doi:10.1016/j
.jesp.2009.09.008
Ford, M. E., & Nichols, C. W. (1987). A taxonomy of human goals and
some possible applications. In M. E. Ford & D. H. Ford (Eds.), Humans
as self-constructing living systems: Putting the framework to work (pp.
289 –311). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Frankl, V. E. (1963). Man’s search for meaning. New York, NY: Washington Square Press.
Fryer, R. G. (2011). Financial incentives and student achievement: Evidence from randomized trials. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126,
1755–1798. doi:10.1093/qje/qjr045
Fujita, K. (2011). On conceptualizing self-control as more than the effortful
inhibition of impulses. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 15,
352–366. doi:10.1177/1088868311411165

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

578

YEAGER ET AL.

Galla, B., Plummer, B., White, R., Meketon, D., D’Mello, S. K., &
Duckworth, A. (2014). Development and validation of the diligence
task: A behavioral measure of individual differences in academic diligence. Unpublished manuscript, Department of Psychology, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (2012). A social-psychological approach to
educational intervention. In E. Shafir (Ed.), Behavioral foundations of
policy (pp. 329 –350). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Goldstein, N. J., Cialdini, R. B., & Griskevicius, V. (2008). A room with
a viewpoint: Using social norms to motivate environmental conservation
in hotels. Journal of Consumer Research, 35, 472– 482. doi:10.1086/
586910
Grant, A. M. (2007). Relational job design and the motivation to make a
prosocial difference. The Academy of Management Review, 32, 393–
417. doi:10.5465/AMR.2007.24351328
Grant, A. M. (2008). Does intrinsic motivation fuel the prosocial fire?
Motivational synergy in predicting persistence, performance, and productivity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 93, 48 –58. doi:10.1037/00219010.93.1.48
Grant, A. M. (2013). Rethinking the extraverted sales ideal: The ambivert
advantage. Psychological Science, 24, 1024 –1030. doi:10.1177/
0956797612463706
Grant, A. M., & Campbell, E. M. (2007). Doing good, doing harm, being
well and burning out: The interactions of perceived prosocial and antisocial impact in service work. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 80, 665– 691. doi:10.1348/096317906X169553
Grant, A. M., & Hofmann, D. A. (2011). It’s not all about me: Motivating
hospital hand hygiene by focusing on patients. Psychological Science,
22, 1494 –1499. doi:10.1177/0956797611419172
Grant, A. M., & Patil, S. V. (2012). Challenging the norm of self-interest:
Minority influence and transitions to helping norms in work units. The
Academy of Management Review, 37, 547–568. doi:10.5465/amr.2010
.0437
Grant, A. M., & Rothbard, N. P. (2013). When in doubt, seize the day?
Security values, prosocial values, and proactivity under ambiguity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 98, 810 – 819. doi:10.1037/a0032873
Grant, A. M., & Sonnentag, S. (2010). Doing good buffers against feeling
bad: Prosocial impact compensates for negative task and selfevaluations. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
111, 13–22. doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2009.07.003
Harackiewicz, J. M., Canning, E. A., Tibbetts, Y., Giffen, C. J., Blair, S. S.,
Rouse, D. I., & Hyde, J. S. (2014). Closing the social class achievement
gap for first-generation students in undergraduate biology. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 106, 375–389. doi:10.1037/a0034679
Harackiewicz, J. M., Rozek, C. R., Hulleman, C. S., & Hydes, J. S. (2012).
Helping parents to motivate adolescents in mathematics and science: An
experimental test of a utility-value intervention. Psychological Science,
23, 899 –906. doi:10.1177/0956797611435530
Harackiewicz, J. M., & Sansone, C. (1991). Goals and intrinsic motivation:
You can get there from here. In M. L. Maehr & P. R. Pintrich (Eds.),
Advances in motivation and achievement: Goals and self-regulatory
processes (Vol. 7, pp. 21– 45). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Hasebe, Y., Nucci, L., & Nucci, M. S. (2004). Parental control of the
personal domain and adolescent symptoms of psychopathology: A crossnational study in the United States and Japan. Child Development, 75,
815– 828. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2004.00708.x
Higgins, E. T. (2005). Value from regulatory fit. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 14, 209 –213. doi:10.1111/j.0963-7214.2005
.00366.x
Hill, P. L., Burrow, A. L., & Sumner, R. (2013). Addressing important
questions in the field of adolescent purpose. Child Development Perspectives, 7, 232–236. doi:10.1111/cdep.12048
Hughes, E. C. (1958). Men and their work. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.

Hughes, E. C. (1962). Good people and dirty work. Social Problems, 10,
3–11. doi:10.2307/799402
Hulleman, C. S., Durik, A. M., Schweigert, S. B., & Harackiewicz, J. M.
(2008). Task values, achievement goals, and interest: An integrative
analysis. Journal of Educational Psychology, 100, 398 – 416. doi:
10.1037/0022-0663.100.2.398
Hulleman, C. S., Godes, O., Hendricks, B. L., & Harackiewicz, J. M.
(2010). Enhancing interest and performance with a utility value intervention. Journal of Educational Psychology, 102, 880 – 895. doi:
10.1037/a0019506
Hulleman, C. S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2009). Promoting interest and
performance in high school science classes. Science, 326, 1410 –1412.
doi:10.1126/science.1177067
Jang, H. (2008). Supporting students’ motivation, engagement, and learning during an uninteresting activity. Journal of Educational Psychology,
100, 798 – 811. doi:10.1037/a0012841
Kane, M. J., Hambrick, D. Z., Tuholski, S. W., Wilhelm, O., Payne, T. W.,
& Engle, R. W. (2004). The generality of working memory capacity: A
latent variable approach to verbal and visuospatial memory span and
reasoning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 133, 189 –
217. doi:10.1037/0096-3445.133.2.189
Kaufman, A. S., & Kaufman, N. L. (1990). Manual for the Kaufman Brief
Intelligence Test. Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service.
Koltko-Rivera, M. E. (2006). Rediscovering the later version of Maslow’s
hierarchy of needs: Self-transcendence and opportunities for theory,
research, and unification. Review of General Psychology, 10, 302–317.
doi:10.1037/1089-2680.10.4.302
Lapsley, D., & Yeager, D. (in press). Moral-character education. In I.
Weiner (Ed.), Handbook of psychology (pp. 1– 42). New York, NY:
Wiley.
Lee, J. Q., McInerney, D. M., Liem, G. A. D., & Ortiga, Y. P. (2010). The
relationships between future goals and achievement goal orientations:
An intrinsic-extrinsic motivation perspective. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 35, 264 –279. doi:10.1016/j.cedpsych.2010.04.004
Lepper, M. R., Corpus, J. H., & Iyengar, S. S. (2005). Intrinsic and
extrinsic motivational orientations in the classroom: Age differences and
academic correlates. Journal of Educational Psychology, 97, 184 –196.
doi:10.1037/0022-0663.97.2.184
Little, B. (1983). Personal projects: A rationale and method for investigation. Environment and Behavior, 15, 273–309. doi:10.1177/
0013916583153002
Loewenstein, G. (1996). Out of control: Visceral influences on behavior.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 65, 272–292.
doi:10.1006/obhd.1996.0028
Markus, H., & Nurius, P. (1986). Possible selves. American Psychologist,
41, 954 –969. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.41.9.954
Marshall, S. K. (2001). Do I matter? Construct validation of adolescents’
perceived mattering to parents and friends. Journal of Adolescence, 24,
473– 490. doi:10.1006/jado.2001.0384
Maslow, A. H. (1969). The farther reaches of human nature. Journal of
Transpersonal Psychology, 1, 1–9.
Massey, E. K., Gebhardt, W. A., & Garnefski, N. (2008). Adolescent goal
content and pursuit: A review of the literature from the past 16 years.
Developmental Review, 28, 421– 460. doi:10.1016/j.dr.2008.03.002
Michaels, J. L., Parkin, S. S., & Vallacher, R. R. (2013). Destiny is in the
details: Action identification in the construction and destruction of
meaning. In J. Hicks & C. Routledge (Eds.), The experience of meaning
in life: Emerging themes and controversies (pp. 103–115). New York,
NY: Springer Press. doi:10.1007/978-94-007-6527-6_8
Miller, D. T. (1999). The norm of self-interest. American Psychologist, 54,
1053–1060. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.54.12.1053
Mischel, W., Cantor, N., & Feldman, S. (1996). Principles of self-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

PURPOSE AND SELF-REGULATION
regulation: The nature of willpower and self-control. In E. T. Higgins &
A. W. Kruglanski (Eds.), Social psychology: Handbook of basic principles (pp. 329 –360). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Mischel, W., Ebbensen, E. B., & Zeiss, A. R. (1972). Cognitive and
attentional mechanisms in delay of gratification. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 21, 204 –218. doi:10.1037/h0032198
Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., & Rodriguez, M. L. (1989). Delay of gratification
in children. Science, 244, 933–938. doi:10.1126/science.2658056
Mitchell, K., Shkolnik, J., Song, M., Uekawa, K., Murphy, R., Garet, M.,
& Means, B. (2005). Rigor, relevance and results: The quality of teacher
assignments and student work in new and conventional high schools.
Washington, DC: American Institute for Research.
Moffitt, T. E., Arseneault, L., Belsky, D., Dickson, N., Hancox, R. J.,
Harrington, H., . . . Caspi, A. (2011). A gradient of childhood selfcontrol predicts health, wealth, and public safety. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 108,
2693–2698. doi:10.1073/pnas.1010076108
Moran, S., Bundick, M. J., Malin, H., & Reilly, T. S. (2013). How
supportive of their specific purposes do youth believe their family and
friends are? Journal of Adolescent Research, 28, 348 –377. doi:10.1177/
0743558412457816
National Research Council. (2000). How people learn: Brain, mind, and
school. Washington, DC: The National Academic Press.
National Research Council & the Institute of Medicine. (2004). Engaging
schools: Fostering high school students’ motivation to learn. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Nicholls, J. G. (1984). Achievement motivation: Conceptions of ability,
subjective experience, task choice, and performance. Psychological Review, 91, 328 –346. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.91.3.328
Nucci, L. (1996). Morality and the personal sphere of actions. In E. S.
Reed, E. Turiel, & T. Brown (Eds.), Values and knowledge (pp. 41– 60).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Olivola, C. Y., & Shafir, E. (2013). The martyrdom effect: When pain and
effort increase prosocial contributions. Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making, 26, 91–105. doi:10.1002/bdm.767
Oyserman, D., & Destin, M. (2010). Identity-based motivation: Implications for intervention. The Counseling Psychologist, 38, 1001–1043.
doi:10.1177/0011000010374775
Patall, E., Cooper, H., & Robinson, J. (2008). The effects of choice on
intrinsic motivation and related outcomes: A meta-analysis of research
findings. Psychological Bulletin, 134, 270 –300. doi:10.1037/0033-2909
.134.2.270
Patrick, S. D., & Duckworth, A. L. (2013, May). Empirical support for a
tripartite taxonomy of character in adolescents. Poster presented at the
25th annual convention of the Association for Psychological Science,
Washington, DC.
Pennebaker, J. W. (2004). Theories, therapies, and taxpayers: On the
complexities of the expressive writing paradigm. Clinical Psychology:
Science and Practice, 11, 138 –142. doi:10.1093/clipsy.bph063
Pintrich, P. R., & Schunk, D. H. (2002). Motivation in education: Theory,
research, and applications (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice
Hall Merrill.
Rachlin, H., Brown, J., & Cross, D. (2000). Discounting in judgments of
delay and probability. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 13,
145–159. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1099-0771(200004/06)13:2⬍145::AIDBDM320⬎3.0.CO;2-4
Raven, J., Raven, J. C., & Court, J. H. (1998). Manual for Raven’s
Progressive Matrices and Vocabulary scales. Section 3: The standard
progressive matrices. Oxford, England: Oxford Psychologists Press.
Raytheon Company. (2012). Math relevance to U.S. middle school students. Retrieved from http://www.raytheon.com/newsroom/rtnwcm/
groups/corporate/documents/content/rtn12_studentsmth_results.pdf
Roderick, M., Nagaoka, J., & Allensworth, E. (2006). From high school to
the future: A first look at Chicago Public School graduates’ college

579

enrollment, college preparation, and graduation from four-year colleges. Chicago, IL: Consortium on Chicago School Research.
Ross, L., & Nisbett, R. E. (1991). The person and the situation: Perspectives of social psychology. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Self-determination theory and the
facilitation of intrinsic motivation, social development, and well-being.
American Psychologist, 55, 68 –78. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.55.1.68
Ryu, M. (2012). The education gap: Understanding African American and
Hispanic attainment disparities in higher education. Washington, DC:
American Council on Education.
Sansone, C., Weir, C., Harpster, L., & Morgan, C. (1992). Once a boring
task always a boring task? Interest as a self-regulatory mechanism.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 379 –390. doi:
10.1037/0022-3514.63.3.379
Sansone, C., Wiebe, D. J., & Morgan, C. (1999). Self-regulating interest:
The moderating role of hardiness and conscientiousness. Journal of
Personality, 67, 701–733. doi:10.1111/1467-6494.00070
Schwartz, S. H. (1992). Universals in the content and structure of values:
Theoretical advance and empirical tests in 20 countries. Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology, 25, 1– 65. doi:10.1016/S00652601(08)60281-6
Sherman, D. K., Hartson, K. A., Binning, K. R., Purdie-Vaughns, V.,
Garcia, J., Taborsky-Barba, S., . . . Cohen, G. L. (2013). Deflecting the
trajectory and changing the narrative: How self-affirmation affects academic performance and motivation under identity threat. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 104, 591– 618. doi:10.1037/
a0031495
Simmons, J. P., Nelson, L. D., & Simonsohn, U. (2011). False-positive
psychology: Undisclosed flexibility in data collection and analysis allows presenting anything as significant. Psychological Science, 22,
1359 –1366. doi:10.1177/0956797611417632
Skinner, E. A., Kindermann, T. A., & Furrer, C. J. (2009). A motivational
perspective on engagement and disaffection conceptualization and assessment of children’s behavioral and emotional participation in academic activities in the classroom. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 69, 493–525. doi:10.1177/0013164408323233
Steger, M. F. (2012). Experiencing meaning in life: Optimal functioning at
the nexus of spirituality, psychopathology, and well-being. In P. T. P.
Wong (Ed.), The human quest for meaning (2nd ed., pp. 165–184). New
York, NY: Routledge.
Steger, M. F., Bundick, M., & Yeager, D. S. (2012). The development of
meaning during adolescence. In R. J. Levesque (Ed.), Encyclopedia of
adolescence (pp. 1666 –1777). New York, NY: Springer Press.
Steger, M. F., Frazier, P., Oishi, S., & Kaler, M. (2006). The Meaning in
Life Questionnaire: Assessing the presence of and search for meaning in
life. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 53, 80 –93. doi:10.1037/00220167.53.1.80
Steger, M. F., Kashdan, T. B., & Oishi, S. (2008). Being good by doing
good: Daily eudaimonic activity and well-being. Journal of Research in
Personality, 42, 22– 42. doi:10.1016/j.jrp.2007.03.004
Stephens, N. M., Fryberg, S. A., Markus, H. R., Johnson, C., & Covarrubias, R. (2012). Unseen disadvantage: How American universities’ focus
on independence undermines the academic performance of firstgeneration college students. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102, 1178 –1197. doi:10.1037/a0027143
Stigler, J. W., & Hiebert, J. (1999). The teaching gap: Best ideas from the
world’s teachers for improving education in the classroom. New York,
NY: Free Press.
Stipek, D. J. (2004). Motivation to learn: Integrating theory and practice.
Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Thaler, R. H., & Shefrin, H. M. (1981). An economic theory of self-control.
Journal of Political Economy, 89, 392– 406. doi:10.1086/260971

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

580

YEAGER ET AL.

Trope, Y., & Fishbach, A. (2000). Counteractive self-control in overcoming temptation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 493–
506. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.79.4.493
Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2010). Construal-level theory of psychological
distance. Psychological Review, 117, 440 – 463. doi:10.1037/a0018963
Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2011). Construal level theory. In P. Van Lange,
A. W. Kruglanski, & E. T. Higgins (Eds.), Handbook of theories of
social psychology (pp. 118 –134). London, England: Sage. doi:10.4135/
9781446249215.n7
Tsukayama, E., Duckworth, A. L., & Kim, B. E. (2013). Domain-specific
impulsivity in school-age children. Developmental Science, 16, 879 –
893. doi:10.1111/desc.12067
Tukey, J. W. (1977). Exploratory data analysis. Reading, MA: AddisonWesley.
U.S. Congress Joint Economic Committee. (2012). STEM education: Preparing jobs for the future. Retrieved from http://www.jec.senate.gov/
public//index.cfm?a⫽Files.Serve&File_id⫽6aaa7e1f-9586-47be-82e7326f47658320
Vallacher, R. R., & Wegner, D. M. (1989). Levels of personal agency:
Individual variation in action identification. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 57, 660 – 671. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.57.4.660
Vansteenkiste, M., Lens, W., & Deci, E. L. (2006). Intrinsic versus extrinsic goal contents in self-determination theory: Another look at the
quality of academic motivation. Educational Psychologist, 41, 19 –31.
doi:10.1207/s15326985ep4101_4
Vansteenkiste, M., Simons, J., Lens, W., Sheldon, K. M., & Deci, E. L.
(2004). Motivating learning, performance, and persistence: The synergistic effects of intrinsic goal contents and autonomy-supportive contexts. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87, 246 –260.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.87.2.246
Vohs, K. D. (2013). The poor’s poor mental power. Science, 341, 969 –970.
doi:10.1126/science.1244172
Walton, G. M. (2014). The new science of wise psychological interventions. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 23, 73– 82. doi:
10.1177/0963721413512856

Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A brief social-belonging intervention improves academic and health outcomes among minority students.
Science, 331, 1447–1451. doi:10.1126/science.1198364
Westernelectric555. (2008). File: Ti83plus.jpg [Image file]. Retrieved from
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ti83plus.jpg
Wilson, T. D. (2011). Redirect: The surprising new science of psychological change. New York, NY: Little, Brown and Company.
Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. (1982). Improving the academic performance of college freshmen: Attribution therapy revisited. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 42, 367–376. doi:10.1037/00223514.42.2.367
Wrzesniewski, A., Dutton, J. E., & Debebe, G. (2003). Interpersonal
sensemaking and the meaning of work. In B. M. Staw & R. Kramer
(Eds.), Research in organizational behavior (Vol. 25, pp. 93–135). New
York, NY: Elsevier Science. doi:10.1016/S0191-3085(03)25003-6
Yeager, D. S., & Bundick, M. J. (2009). The role of purposeful work
goals in promoting meaning in life and in schoolwork during adolescence. Journal of Adolescent Research, 24, 423– 452. doi:10.1177/
0743558409336749
Yeager, D. S., Bundick, M. J., & Johnson, R. (2012). The role of future
work goal motives in adolescent identity development: A longitudinal
mixed-methods investigation. Contemporary Educational Psychology,
37, 206 –217. doi:10.1016/j.cedpsych.2012.01.004
Yeager, D. S., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., Brzustoski, P.,
Master, A., . . . Cohen, G. L. (2014). Breaking the cycle of mistrust:
Wise interventions to provide critical feedback across the racial divide.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 143, 804 – 824. doi:
10.1037/a0033906
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological interventions
in education: They’re not magic. Review of Educational Research, 81,
267–301. doi:10.3102/0034654311405999

Received September 16, 2013
Revision received March 10, 2014
Accepted March 31, 2014 䡲

See	discussions,	stats,	and	author	profiles	for	this	publication	at:	https://www.researchgate.net/publication/299652348

Using	Design	Thinking	to	Improve
Psychological	Interventions:	The	Case	of	the
Growth	Mindset	During	the	Transition	to
High...
Article		in		Journal	of	Educational	Psychology	·	April	2016
DOI:	10.1037/edu0000098

CITATIONS

READS

19

1,925

14	authors,	including:
David	S.	Yeager

Chris	Hulleman

University	of	Texas	at	Austin

University	of	Virginia

41	PUBLICATIONS			1,483	CITATIONS			

47	PUBLICATIONS			1,951	CITATIONS			

SEE	PROFILE

SEE	PROFILE

Gregory	M	Walton
Stanford	University
38	PUBLICATIONS			2,199	CITATIONS			
SEE	PROFILE

Some	of	the	authors	of	this	publication	are	also	working	on	these	related	projects:

Growth	Mindset	Interventions	View	project

Making	Connections	View	project

All	content	following	this	page	was	uploaded	by	David	S.	Yeager	on	09	April	2016.

The	user	has	requested	enhancement	of	the	downloaded	file.

Journal of Educational Psychology
2016, Vol. 108, No. 3, 374 –391

© 2016 American Psychological Association
0022-0663/16/$12.00 http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/edu0000098

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Using Design Thinking to Improve Psychological Interventions:
The Case of the Growth Mindset During the Transition to High School
David S. Yeager

Carissa Romero and Dave Paunesku

University of Texas at Austin

Stanford University

Christopher S. Hulleman

Barbara Schneider

University of Virginia

Michigan State University

Cintia Hinojosa, Hae Yeon Lee, and Joseph O’Brien

Kate Flint, Alice Roberts, and Jill Trott

University of Texas at Austin

ICF International, Fairfax, Virginia

Daniel Greene, Gregory M. Walton, and Carol S. Dweck
Stanford University
There are many promising psychological interventions on the horizon, but there is no clear methodology
for preparing them to be scaled up. Drawing on design thinking, the present research formalizes a
methodology for redesigning and tailoring initial interventions. We test the methodology using the case
of fixed versus growth mindsets during the transition to high school. Qualitative inquiry and rapid,
iterative, randomized “A/B” experiments were conducted with ⬃3,000 participants to inform intervention revisions for this population. Next, 2 experimental evaluations showed that the revised growth
mindset intervention was an improvement over previous versions in terms of short-term proxy outcomes
(Study 1, N ⫽ 7,501), and it improved 9th grade core-course GPA and reduced D/F GPAs for lower
achieving students when delivered via the Internet under routine conditions with ⬃95% of students at 10
schools (Study 2, N ⫽ 3,676). Although the intervention could still be improved even further, the current
research provides a model for how to improve and scale interventions that begin to address pressing
educational problems. It also provides insight into how to teach a growth mindset more effectively.
Keywords: adolescence, growth mindset, incremental theory of intelligence, motivation, psychological
intervention

One of the most promising developments in educational psychology in recent years has been the finding that self-administered
psychological interventions can initiate lasting improvements in
student achievement (Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Garcia & Cohen,
2012; Walton, 2014; Wilson, 2002; Yeager & Walton, 2011).
These interventions do not provide new instructional materials or
pedagogies. Instead, they capitalize on the insights of expert teachers (see Lepper & Woolverton, 2001; Treisman, 1992) by addressing students’ subjective construals of themselves and school—

how students view their abilities, their experiences in school, their
relationships with peers and teachers, and their learning tasks (see
Ross & Nisbett, 1991).
For instance, students can show greater motivation to learn
when they are led to construe their learning situation as one in
which they have the potential to develop their abilities (Dweck,
1999; Dweck, 2006), in which they feel psychologically safe and
connected to others (Cohen, Garcia, Apfel, & Master, 2006; Stephens, Hamedani, & Destin, 2014; Walton & Cohen, 2007), and in

David S. Yeager, Department of Psychology, University of Texas at Austin;
Carissa Romero and Dave Paunesku, PERTS and Department of Psychology,
Stanford University; Christopher S. Hulleman, School of Education, University of
Virginia; Barbara Schneider, School of Education Michigan State University;
Cintia Hinojosa, Hae Yeon Lee, and Joseph O’Brien, Department of Psychology,
University of Texas at Austin; Kate Flint, Alice Roberts, and Jill Trott, ICF
International, Fairfax, Virginia; Daniel Greene, Gregory M. Walton, and Carol S.
Dweck, Department of Psychology, Stanford University.
We thank the teachers, principals, administrators, and students who
participated in this research. This research was supported by generous funding
from the Spencer Foundation, the William T. Grant Foundation, the Bezos
Foundation, the Houston Endowment, the Character Lab, the President and

Dean of Humanities and Social Sciences at Stanford University, Angela
Duckworth, a William T. Grant scholars award, and a fellowship from the
Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences (CASBS) to the first
and fourth authors. The authors are grateful to Angela Duckworth, Elizabeth
Tipton, Michael Weiss, Tim Wilson, Robert Crosnoe, Chandra Muller, Ronald
Ferguson, Ellen Konar, Elliott Whitney, Paul Hanselman, Jeff Kosovich,
Andrew Sokatch, Katharine Meyer, Patricia Chen, Chris Macrander, Jacquie
Beaubien, and Rachel Herter for their assistance. The look and feel of the
revised intervention was developed by Matthew Kandler.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to David S.
Yeager, Department of Psychology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin,
TX 78712. E-mail: dyeager@utexas.edu or gwalton@stanford.edu
374

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

DESIGN THINKING AND PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS

which putting forth effort has meaning and value (Hulleman &
Harackiewicz, 2009; Yeager et al., 2014; see Eccles & Wigfield,
2002; also see Elliot & Dweck, 2005; Lepper, Woolverton,
Mumme, & Gurtner, 1993; Stipek, 2002). Such subjective construals—and interventions or teacher practices that affect them—
can affect behavior over time because they can become selfconfirming. When students doubt their capacities in school—for
example, when they see a failed math test as evidence that they are
not a “math person”—they behave in ways that can make this true,
for example, by studying less rather than more or by avoiding
future math challenges they might learn from. By changing initial
construals and behaviors, psychological interventions can set in
motion recursive processes that alter students’ achievement into
the future (see Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Garcia & Cohen, 2012;
Walton, 2014; Yeager & Walton, 2011).
Although promising, self-administered psychological interventions have not often been tested in ways that are sufficiently
relevant for policy and practice. For example, rigorous randomized
trials have been conducted with only limited samples of students
within schools—those who could be conveniently recruited. These
studies have been extremely useful for testing of novel theoretical
claims (e.g., Aronson, Fried, & Good, 2002; Blackwell, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2007; Good, Aronson, & Inzlicht, 2003). Some
studies have subsequently taken a step toward scale by developing
methods for delivering intervention materials to large samples via
the Internet without requiring professional development (e.g.,
Paunesku et al., 2015; Yeager et al., 2014). However, such tests are
limited in relevance for policy and practice because they did not
attempt to improve the outcomes of an entire student body or entire
subgroups of students.
There is not currently a methodology for adapting materials that
were effective in initial experiments so they can be improved and
made more effective for populations of students who are facing
particular issues at specific points in their academic lives. We seek
to develop this methodology here. To do so, we focus on students
at diverse schools but at a similar developmental stage, and who
therefore may encounter similar academic and psychological challenges and may benefit from an intervention to help them navigate
those challenges. We test whether the tradition of “design thinking,” combined with advances in psychological theory, can facilitate the development of improved intervention materials for a
given population.1
As explained later, the policy problem we address is core
academic performance of 9th graders transitioning to public high
schools in the United States and the specific intervention we
redesign is the growth mindset of intelligence intervention (also
called an incremental theory of intelligence intervention; Aronson
et al., 2002; Blackwell et al., 2007; Good et al., 2003; Paunesku et
al., 2015). The growth mindset intervention counteracts the fixed
mindset (also called an entity theory of intelligence), which is the
belief that intelligence is a fixed entity that cannot be changed with
experience and learning. The intervention teaches scientific facts
about the malleability of the brain, to show how intelligence can be
developed. It then uses writing assignments to help students internalize the messages (see the pilot study methods for detail). The
growth mindset intervention aims to increase students’ desires to
take on challenges and to enhance their persistence, by forestalling
attributions that academic struggles and setbacks mean one is “not
smart” (Blackwell et al., 2007, Study 1; see Burnette et al., 2013;

375

Yeager & Dweck, 2012). These psychological processes can result
in academic resilience.

Design Thinking and Psychological Interventions
To develop psychological interventions, expertise in theory is
crucial. But theory alone does not help a designer discover how to
connect with students facing a particular set of motivational barriers. Doing that, we believe, is easier when combining theoretical
expertise with a design-based approach (Razzouk & Shute, 2012;
also see Bryk, 2009; Yeager & Walton, 2011). Design thinking is
“problem-centered.” That is, effective design seeks to solve predictable problems for specified user groups (Kelley & Kelley,
2013; also see Bryk, 2009; Razzouk & Shute, 2012). Our hypothesis is that this problem-specific customization, guided by theory,
can increase the likelihood that an intervention will be more
effective for a predefined population.
We apply two design traditions, user-centered design and A/B
testing. Theories of user-centered design were pioneered by firms
such as IDEO (Kelley & Kelley, 2013; see Razzouk & Shute,
2012). The design process privileges the user’s subjective perspective—in the present case, 9th grade students. To do so, it often
employs qualitative research methods such as ethnographic observations of people’s mundane goal pursuit in their natural habitats
(Kelley & Kelley, 2013). User-centered design also has a bias
toward action. Designers test minimally viable products early in
the design phase in an effort to learn from users how to improve
them (see Ries, 2011). Applied to psychological intervention, this
can help prevent running a large, costly experiment with an intervention that has easily discoverable flaws. In sum, our aim was to
acquire insights about the barriers to students’ adoption of a
growth mindset during the transition to high school as quickly as
possible, using data that were readily obtainable, without waiting
for a full-scale, long-term evaluation.
User-centered design typically does not ask users what they
desire or would find compelling. Individuals may not always have
access to that information (Wilson, 2002). However, users may be
excellent reporters on what they dislike or are confused by. Thus,
user-centered designers do not often ask, “What kind of software
would you like?” Rather, they often show users prototypes and let
them say what seems wrong or right. Similarly, we did not ask
students, “What would make you adopt a growth mindset?” But we
did ask for positive and negative reactions to prototypes of growth
mindset materials. We then used those responses to formulate
changes for the next iteration.
Qualitative user-centered design can lead to novel insights, but
how would one know if those insights were actually improvements? Experimentation can help. Therefore we drew on a second
tradition, that of “A/B testing” (see, e.g., Kohavi & Longbotham,
2015). The logic is simple. Because it is easy to be wrong about
what will be persuasive to a user, rather than guess, test. We used
the methodology of low-cost, short-term, large-sample, randomassignment experiments to test revisions to intervention content.
Although each experiment may not, on its own, offer a theoretical
1
Previous research has shown how design thinking can improve instructional materials but not yet psychological interventions (see Razzouk &
Shute, 2012).

YEAGER ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

376

advance or a definitive conclusion, in the aggregate they may
improve an intervention for a population of interest.
Showing that this design process has produced intervention
materials that are more ready for scaling requires meeting at least
two conditions: (a) the redesigned intervention should be more
effective for the target population than a previous iteration when
examining short-term proxy outcomes, and (b) the redesigned
intervention should address the policy-relevant aim: namely, it
should benefit student achievement when delivered to entire populations of students within schools. Interestingly, although a great
deal has been written about best practices in design (e.g., Razzouk
& Shute, 2012), we do not know of any set of experiments that has
evaluated the end-product of a design process by collecting both
types of evidence.

Focus of the Present Investigation
As a first test case, we redesign a growth mindset of intelligence
intervention to improve it and to make it more effective for the
transition to high school (Aronson et al., 2002; Blackwell et al.,
2007; Good et al., 2003; Paunesku et al., 2015; see Dweck, 2006;
Yeager & Dweck, 2012). This is an informative case study because
(a) previous research has found that growth mindsets can predict
success across educational transitions, and previous growth mindset interventions have shown some effectiveness; (b) there is
a clearly defined psychological process model explaining how a
growth mindset relates to student performance supported by a
large amount of correlational and laboratory experimental research
(see a meta-analysis by Burnette et al., 2013), which informs
decisions about which “proxy” measures would be most useful for
shorter-term evaluations. The growth mindset is thus a good place
to start.
As noted, our defined user group was students making the
transition to high school. New 9th graders represent a large
population of students—approximately 4 million individuals
each year (Davis & Bauman, 2013). Although entering 9th
graders’ experiences can vary, there are some common challenges: high school freshmen often take more rigorous classes
than previously and their performance can affect their chances
for college; they have to form relationships with new teachers
and school staff; and they have to think more seriously about
their goals in life. Students who do not successfully complete
9th grade core courses have a dramatically lower rate of high
school graduation, and much poorer life prospects (Allensworth
& Easton, 2005). Improving the transition to high school is an
important policy objective.
Previous growth mindset interventions might be better tailored
for the transition to high school in several ways. First, past growth
mindset interventions were not designed for the specific challenges
that occur in the transition to high school. Rather they were often
written to address challenges that a learner in any context might
face, or they were aimed at middle school (Blackwell et al., 2007;
Good et al., 2003) or college (Aronson et al., 2002). Second,
interventions were not written for the vocabulary, conceptual sophistication, and interests of adolescents entering high school.
Third, when they were created, they did not have in mind arguments that might be most relevant or persuasive for 14- to 15year-olds.

Despite this potential lack of fit, prior growth mindset interventions have already shown initial effectiveness in high schools.
Paunesku et al. (2015) conducted a double-blind, randomized
experimental evaluation of a growth mindset intervention with
over 1,500 high school students via the Internet. The authors found
a significant Intervention ⫻ Prior achievement interaction, such
that lower-performing students benefitted most from the growth
mindset intervention in terms of their GPA. Lower-achievers both
may have had more room to grow (given range restriction for
higher achievers) and also may have faced greater concerns about
their academic ability (see analogous benefits for lower-achievers
in Cohen, Garcia, Purdie-Vaughns, Apfel, & Brzustoski, 2009;
Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009; Wilson & Linville, 1982; Yeager, Henderson, et al., 2014). Looking at grade improvement with
a different measure, Paunesku et al. also found that previously
low-achieving treated students were also less likely to receive “D”
and “F” grades in core classes (e.g., English, math, science). We
examine whether these results could be replicated with a redesigned intervention.

Overview of Studies
The present research, first, involved design thinking to create a
newer version of a growth mindset intervention, presented here as
a pilot study. Next, Study 1 tested whether the design process
produced growth mindset materials that were an improvement over
original materials when examining proxy outcomes, such as beliefs, goals, attributions, and challenge-seeking behavior (see
Blackwell et al., 2007 or Burnette et al., 2013 for justification).
The study required a great deal of power to detect a significant
intervention contrast because the generic intervention (called the
“original” intervention here; Paunesku et al., 2015) also taught a
growth mindset.
Note that we did not view the redesigned intervention as “final,”
as ready for universal scaling, or as representing the best possible
version of a growth mindset. Instead our goal was more modest:
we simply sought to document that a design process could create
materials that were a significant improvement relative to their
predecessor.
Study 2 tested whether we had developed a revised growth
mindset intervention that was actually effective at changing
achievement when delivered to a census of students (⬎95%) in 10
different schools across the country.2 The focal research hypothesis was an effect on core course GPA and D/F averages among
previously lower-performing students, which would replicate the
Intervention ⫻ Prior achievement interaction found by Paunesku
et al. (2015).
Study 2 was, to our knowledge, the first preregistered replication of a psychological intervention effect, the first to have data
collected and cleaned by an independent research firm, and the
first to employ a census (⬎95% response rates). Hence, it was a
rigorous test of the hypothesis.

2
A census is defined as an attempt to reach all individuals in an
organization, and is contrasted with a sample, which does not.

DESIGN THINKING AND PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS

Pilot: Using Design Thinking to Improve a Growth
Mindset Intervention

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Method
Data. During the design phase, the goal was to learn as much
as possible, as rapidly as possible, given data that were readily
available. Thus, no intentional sampling was done and no demographic data on participants were collected. For informal qualitative data—focus groups, one-on-one interviews, and other types of
feedback— high school students were contacted through personal
connections and invited to provide feedback on a new program for
high school students.
Quantitative data—the rapid “A/B” experiments—were collected from college-aged and older adults on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk platform. Although adults are not an ideal data source for
a transition to high school intervention, the A/B experiments
required great statistical power because we were testing minor
variations. Data from Mechanical Turk provided this and allowed
us to iterate quickly. Conclusions from those tests were tempered
by the qualitative feedback from high school students. At the end
of this process, we conducted a final rapid A/B randomized experiment with high school students using the Qualtrics user panel
(not discussed further).
The “original” mindset intervention. The original intervention was the starting point for our revision. It involved three
elements. First, participants read a scientific article titled “You
Can Grow Your Intelligence,” written by researchers, used in the
Blackwell et al. (2007) experiment, and slightly revised for the
Paunesku et al. (2015) experiments. It described the idea that
the brain can get smarter the more it is challenged, like a muscle.
As scientific background for this idea, the article explained what
neurons are and how they form a network in the brain. It then
provided summaries of studies showing that animals or people
(e.g., rats, babies, or London taxi drivers) who have greater experience or learning develop denser networks of neurons in their
brains.
After reading this four-page article, participants were asked to
generate a personal example of learning and getting smarter—a
time when they used to not know something, but then they practiced and got better at it. Finally, participants were asked to author
a letter encouraging a future student who might be struggling in
school and may feel “dumb.” This is a “saying-is-believing” exercise (E. Aronson, 1999; J. Aronson et al., 2002; Walton &
Cohen, 2011; Walton, 2014).
“Saying-is-believing” is thought to be effective for several reasons. First, it is thought to make the information (in this case, about
the brain and its ability to grow) more self-relevant, which may
make it easier to recall (Bower & Gilligan, 1979; Hulleman &
Harackiewicz, 2009; Lord, 1980). Prior research has found that
students can benefit more from social-psychological intervention
materials when they author reasons why the content is relevant, as
opposed to being told why they are relevant to their own lives
(Godes, Hulleman, & Harackiewicz, 2007). Second, by mentally
rehearsing how one should respond when struggling, it can be
easier to enact those thoughts or behaviors later (Gollwitzer,
1999). Third, when students are asked to communicate the message to someone else—and not directly asked to believe it themselves—it can feel less controlling, it can avoid implying that

377

students are deficient, and it can lead students to convince themselves of the truth of the proposition via cognitive dissonance
processes (see research on self-persuasion, Aronson, 1999; also
see Bem, 1965; Cooper & Fazio, 1984).

Procedures and Results: Revising the Mindset
Intervention
Design methodology.
User-centered design. We (a) met one-on-one with 9th graders, (b) met with groups of 2 to 10 students, and (c) piloted with
groups of 20 to 25 9th graders. In these piloting sessions we first
asked students to go through a “minimally viable” version of the
intervention (i.e., early draft revisions of the “original” materials)
as if they were receiving it as a new freshman in high school. We
then led them in guided discussions of what they disliked, what
they liked, and what was confusing. We also asked students to
summarize the content of the message back to us, under the
assumption that a person’s inaccurate summary of a message is an
indication of where the clarity could be improved. The informal
feedback was suggestive, not definitive. However, a consistent
message from the students allowed the research team to identify, in
advance, predictable failures of the message to connect or instruct,
and potential improvements worth testing.
Through this we developed insights that might seem minor
taken individually, but, in the aggregate, may be important. These
were: to include quotes from admired adults and celebrities; to
include more and more diverse writing exercises; to weave purposes for why one should grow one’s brain together with statements that one could grow one’s brain; to use bullet points instead
of paragraphs; to reduce the amount of information on each page;
to show actual data from past scientific research in figures rather
than summarize them generically (because it felt more respectful);
to change examples that appear less relevant to high school students (e.g., replacing a study about rats growing their brains with
a summary of science about teenagers’ brains), and more.
A/B testing. A series of randomized experiments tested specific variations on the mindset intervention. In each, we randomized participants to versions of a mindset intervention and assessed
changes from pre- to posttest in self-reported fixed mindsets (see
measures below in Study 1; also see Dweck, 1999). Mindset
self-reports are an imperfect measure, as will be shown in the two
studies. Yet they are informative in the sense that if mindsets are
not changed— or if they were changed in the wrong direction—
then it is reason for concern. Self-reports give the data “a chance
to object” (cf. Latour, 2005).
Two studies involved a total of 7 factors, fully crossed, testing
5 research questions across N ⫽ 3,004 participants. These factors
and their effects on self-reported fixed mindsets are summarized in
Table 1.
One question tested in both A/B experiments was whether it was
more effective to tell research participants that the growth mindset
intervention was designed to help them (a “direct” framing), versus
a framing in which participants were asked to help evaluate and
contribute content for future 9th grade students (an “indirect”
framing). Research on the “saying-is-believing” tactic (E. Aronson, 1999; J. Aronson et al., 2002; Walton & Cohen, 2011; Yeager
& Walton, 2011) and theory about “stealth” interventions more
broadly (Robinson, 2010) suggest that the latter might be more

YEAGER ET AL.

378

Table 1
Designing The Revised Mindset Intervention: Manipulations and Results From Rapid, A/B Experiments of Growth Mindset
Intervention Elements Conducted on MTurk

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Effect on pre–
post mindset ⌬
A/B Study

Total N

1

1851

Manipulation and coding

Sample text

␤

p

Direct ⫽ 1 (this will help
you) framing vs.
Indirect ⫽ 0 (help
other people) framing

Direct: “Would you like to be smarter? Being smarter helps teens become the
person they want to be in life . . . In this program, we share the research
on how people can get smarter.” vs. Indirect: “Students often do a great
job explaining ideas to their peers because they see the world in similar
ways. On the following pages, you will read some scientific findings about
the human brain. . . . We would like your help to explain this information
in more personal ways that students will be able to understand. We’ll use
what we learn to help us improve the way we talk about these ideas with
students in the future.”
Refutation: Some people seem to learn more quickly than others, for
example, in math. You may think, “Oh, they’re just smarter.” But you
don’t realize that they may be working really hard at it (harder than you
think).
Benefits of mindset: People with a growth mindset know that mistakes and
setbacks are opportunities to learn. They know that their brains can grow
the most when they do something difficult and make mistakes. We studied
all the 10th graders in the nation of Chile. The students who had a growth
mindset were 3 times more likely to score in the top 20% of their class.
Those with a fixed mindset were more likely to score in the bottom 20%
Rats/Jugglers: Scientists used a brain scanner (it’s like a camera that looks
into your brain) to compare the brains of the two groups of people. They
found that the people who learned how to juggle actually grew the parts of
their brains that control juggling skills vs. Teenagers: Many of the
[teenagers] in the study showed large changes in their intelligence scores.
And these same students also showed big changes in their brain. . . . This
shows that teenagers’ brains can literally change and become smarter—if
you know how to make it happen.

⫺.234

.056

⫺.402

.002

.357

.006

⫺.122

.352

Direct: Why does getting smarter matter? Because when people get smarter,
they become more capable of doing the things they care about. Not only
can they earn higher grades and get better jobs, they can have a bigger
impact on the world and on the people they care about . . . In this
program, you’ll learn what science says about the brain and about making
it smarter. Vs. Indirect: (see above).
Refutation: Some people look around and say “How come school is so easy
for them, but I have to work hard? Are they smarter than me?” . . . They
key is not to focus on whether you’re smarter than other people. Instead,
focus on whether you’re smarter today than you were yesterday and how
you can get smarter tomorrow than you are today.
Celebrity: Endorsements from Scott Forstall, LeBron James, and Michelle
Obama.

⫺.319

.036

.002

.990

.273

.073

Refuting fixed mindset ⫽
1 vs. Not ⫽ 0
Labeling and explaining
benefits of “growth
mindset” ⫽ 1 vs.
Not ⫽ 0
Rats/jugglers scientific
evidence ⫽ 1 vs.
Teenagers ⫽ 0

2

1153
Direct (this will help
you) framing ⫽ 1 vs.
Indirect (help other
people) framing ⫽ 0
Refuting fixed mindset ⫽
1 vs. Not ⫽ 0

Celebrity endorsements ⫽
1 vs. Not ⫽ 0

Note. ␤ ⫽ standardized regression coefficient for condition contrast in multiple linear regression.

helpful, as noted above. Indeed, Table 1 shows that in both A/B
Study 1 and A/B Study 2 the direct framing led to smaller changes
in mindsets— corresponding to lower effectiveness—than indirect
framing (see rows 1 and 5 in Table 1). Thus, the indirect framing
was used throughout the revised intervention. To our knowledge
this is the first experimental test of the effectiveness of the indirect
framing in psychological interventions, even though it is often
standard practice (J. Aronson et al., 2002; Walton & Cohen, 2011;
Yeager & Walton, 2011).
The second question was: Is it more effective to present and
refute the fixed mindset view? Or is it more effective to only
teach evidence for the growth mindset view? On the one hand,
refuting the fixed mindset might more directly discredit the
problematic belief. On the other hand, it might give credence

and voice to the fixed mindset message, for instance by conveying that the fixed mindset is a reasonable perspective to hold
(perhaps even the norm), giving it an “illusion of truth”
(Skurnik, Yoon, Park, & Schwarz, 2005). This might cause
participants who hold a fixed mindset to become entrenched in
their beliefs. Consistent with the latter possibility, in A/B Study
1, refuting the fixed mindset view led to smaller changes in
mindsets— corresponding to lower effectiveness—as compared
with not doing so (see row 2 in Table 1). Furthermore, the
refutation manipulation caused participants who held a stronger
fixed mindset at baseline to show an increase in fixed mindset
postmessage, main effect p ⫽ .003, interaction effect p ⫽ .01.
That is, refuting a fixed mindset seemed to exacerbate fixed
mindset beliefs for those who already held them.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

DESIGN THINKING AND PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS

Following this discovery, we wrote a more subtle and indirect
refutation of fixed mindset thinking and tested it in A/B Study 2.
The revised content encouraged participants to replace thoughts
about between-person comparisons (that person is smarter than
me) with within-person comparisons (I can become even smarter
tomorrow than I am today). This no longer caused reduced effectiveness (see row 6 in Table 1). The final version emphasized
within-person comparisons as a means to discrediting betweenperson comparisons. As an additional precaution, beyond what we
had tested, the final materials never named or defined a “fixed
mindset.”
We also tested the impact of using well-known or successful
adults as role models of a growth mindset. For instance, the
intervention conveyed the true story of Scott Forstall, who, with
his team, developed the first iPhone at Apple. Forstall used growth
mindset research to select team members who were not afraid of
failure but were ready for a challenge. It furthermore included an
audio excerpt from a speech given by First Lady Michelle Obama,
in which she summarized the basic concepts of growth mindset
research. These increased adoption of a growth mindset compared
to versions that did not include these endorsements (see Table 1).
Other elements were tested as well (see Table 1).
Guided by theory. The redesign also relied on psychological
theory. These changes, which were not subjected to A/B testing,
are summarized here. Several theoretical elements were relevant:
(a) theories about how growth mindset beliefs affect student behavior in practice; (b) theories of cultural values that may appear
to be in contrast with growth mindset messages; and (c) theories of
how best to induce internalization of attitudes among adolescents.
Emphasizing “strategies,” not just “hard work.” We were
concerned that the “original” intervention too greatly emphasized
“hard work” as the opposite of raw ability, and underemphasized
the need to change strategies or ask adults for advice on improved
strategies for learning. This is because just working harder with
ineffective strategies will not lead to increased learning. So, for
example, the revised intervention said “Sometimes people want to
learn something challenging, and they try hard. But they get stuck.
That’s when they need to try new strategies—new ways to approach the problem” (also see Yeager & Dweck, 2012). Our goal
was to remove any stigma of needing to ask for help or having to
switch one’s approach.
Addressing a culture of independence. We were concerned
that the notion that you can grow your intelligence would perhaps
be perceived as too “independent,” and threaten the more communal, interdependent values that many students might emphasize,
especially students from working class backgrounds and some
racial/ethnic minority groups (Fryberg, Covarrubias, & Burack,
2013; Stephens et al., 2014). Therefore we included more prosocial, beyond-the-self motives for adopting and using a growth
mindset (see Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009; Yeager et al.,
2014). For example, the new intervention said:
People tell us that they are excited to learn about a growth mindset
because it helps them achieve the goals that matter to them and to people
they care about. They use the mindset to learn in school so they can give
back to the community and make a difference in the world later.

Aligning norms. Adolescents may be especially likely to conform to peers (Cohen & Prinstein, 2006), and so we created a norm

379

around the use of a growth mindset (Cialdini et al., 1991). For
instance, the end of the second session said “People everywhere are
working to become smarter. They are starting to understand that
struggling and learning are what put them on a path to where they
want to go.” The intervention furthermore presented a series of stories
from older peers who endorsed the growth mindset concepts.
Harnessing reactance. We sought to use adolescent reactance, or the tendency to reject mainstream or external exhortations to change personal choices (Brehm, 1966; Erikson, 1968;
Hasebe, Nucci, & Nucci, 2004; Nucci, Killen, & Smetana, 1996),
as an asset rather than as a source of resistance to the message. We
did this by initially framing the mindset message as a reaction to
adult control. For instance, at the very beginning of the intervention adolescents read this story from an upper year student:
I hate how people put you in a box and say ‘you’re smart at this’ or
‘not smart at that.’ After this program, I realized the truth about labels:
they’re made up. . . . Now I do not let other people box me in. . . . It’s
up to me to put in the work to strengthen my brain.

Self-persuasion. The revised intervention increased the number of opportunities for participants to write their own opinions
and stories. This was believed to increase the probability that more
of the benefits of “saying-is-believing” would be achieved.

Study 1: Does a Revised Growth Mindset Intervention
Outperform a Previous Effective Intervention?
Study 1 evaluated whether the design process resulted in materials
that were an improvement over the originals. As criteria, Study 1 used
short-term measures of psychological processes that are wellestablished to follow from a growth mindset: person versus processfocused attributions for difficulty (low ability vs. strategy or effort),
performance avoidance goals (overconcern about making mistakes or
looking incompetent), and challenge-seeking behavior (Blackwell et
al., 2007; Mueller & Dweck, 1998; see Burnette et al., 2013; Dweck
& Leggett, 1988; Yeager & Dweck, 2012). Note that the goal of this
research was not to test whether any individual revision, by itself,
caused greater efficacy, but rather to investigate all of the changes, in
the aggregate, in comparison with the original intervention.

Method
Data. A total of 69 high schools in the United States and
Canada were recruited, and 7,501 9th grade students (predominately ages 14 –15) provided data during the session when dependent measures were collected (Time 2), although not all finished
the session.3 Participants were diverse: 17% were Hispanic/Latino,
6% were black/African American, 3% were Native American/
American Indian, 48% were White, non-Hispanic, 5% were Asian/
Asian American, and the rest were from another or multiple racial
groups. Forty-eight percent were female, and 53% reported that
their mothers had earned a bachelor’s degree or greater.
Procedures.
School recruitment. Schools were recruited via advertisements in prominent educational publications, through social media
3
This experiment involved a third condition of equal cell size that was
developed to test other questions. Results involving that condition will be
presented in a future report, but they are fully consistent with all of the
findings presented here.

YEAGER ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

380

(e.g., Twitter), and through recruitment talks to school districts or
other school administrators. Schools were informed that they
would have access to a free growth mindset intervention for their
students. Because of this recruitment strategy, all participating
students indeed received a version of a growth mindset intervention. The focal comparison was between an “original” version of a
growth mindset intervention (Paunesku et al., 2015, which was
adapted from materials in Blackwell et al., 2007), and a “revised”
version, created via the user-centered, rapid-prototyping design
process summarized above. See screenshots in Figure 1.
The original intervention. Minor revisions were made to the
original intervention to make it more parallel to the revised intervention, such as the option for the text to be read to students.
Survey sessions. In the winter of 2015, school coordinators
brought their students to the computer labs for two sessions, 1 to
4 weeks apart (researchers never visited the schools). The Time 1
session involved baseline survey items, a randomized mindset intervention, some fidelity measures, and brief demographics. Random
assignment happened in real time and was conducted by a web server,
and so all staff were blind to condition. The Time 2 session involved
a second round of content for the revised mindset intervention, and
control exercises for the original mindset condition. At the end of
session two, students completed proxy outcome measures.
Measures. In order to minimize respondent burden and increase
efficiency at scale, we used or developed 1- to 3-item self-report
measures of our focal constructs (see a discussion of “practical measurement” in Yeager & Bryk, 2015). We also developed a brief
behavioral task.
Fixed mindset. Three items at Time 1 and Time 2 assessed
fixed mindsets: “You have a certain amount of intelligence, and
you really can’t do much to change it,” “Your intelligence is
something about you that you can’t change very much,” and
“Being a “math person” or not is something that you really cannot
change. Some people are good at math and other people aren’t.”
(Response options: 1 ⫽ Strongly disagree, 2 ⫽ Disagree, 3 ⫽
Mostly disagree, 4 ⫽ Mostly agree, 5 ⫽ Agree, 6 ⫽ Strongly
agree). These were averaged into a single scale with higher values
corresponding to more fixed mindsets (␣ ⫽ .74).
Challenge-seeking: The “Make-a-Math-Worksheet” Task.
We created a novel behavioral task to assess a known behavioral
consequence of a growth mindset: challenge-seeking (Blackwell et
al., 2007; Mueller & Dweck, 1998). This task may allow for a
detection of effects for previously high-achieving students, because GPA may have a range restriction at the high end. It used
Algebra and Geometry problems obtained from the Khan Academy website and was designed to have more options than previous
measures (Mueller & Dweck, 1998) to produce a continuous
measure of challenge seeking. Participants read these instructions:
We are interested in what kinds of problems high school math students prefer to work on. On the next few pages, we would like you to
create your own math worksheet. If there is time, at the end of the
survey you will have the opportunity to answer these math problems.
On the next few pages there are problems from 4 different math
chapters. Choose between 2 and 6 problems for each chapter.

You can choose from problems that are:
Very challenging but you might learn a lot; Somewhat challenging and
you might learn a medium amount; Not very challenging and you

probably will not learn very much; Do not try to answer the math
problems. Just click on the problems you’d like to try later if there’s time.

See Figure 2. There were three topic areas (Introduction to Algebra, Advanced Algebra, and Geometry), and within each topic area
there were four “chapters” (e.g., rational and irrational numbers,
quadratic equations, etc.), and within each chapter there were six
problems, each labeled “Not very challenging,” “Somewhat challenging,” or “Very challenging” (two per type).4 Each page showed the six
problems for a given chapter and, as noted, students were instructed
to select “at least 2 and up to 6 problems” on each page.
The total number of “Very challenging” (i.e., hard) problems
chosen across the 12 pages was calculated for each student (Range:
0 –24) as was the total number of “Not very challenging” (i.e.,
easy) problems (Range: 0 –24). The final measure was the number
of easy problems minus the number of hard problems selected.
Visually, the final measure approximated a normal distribution.
Challenge-seeking: Hypothetical scenario. Participants were
presented with the following scenario, based on a measure in
Mueller and Dweck (1998):
Imagine that, later today or tomorrow, your math teacher hands out
two extra credit assignments. You get to choose which one to do. You
get the same number of points for trying either one. One choice is an
easy review—it has math problems you already know how to solve,
and you will probably get most of the answers right without having to
think very much. It takes 30 minutes. The other choice is a hard
challenge—it has math problems you don’t know how to solve, and
you will probably get most of the problems wrong, but you might
learn something new. It also takes 30 minutes. If you had to pick right
now, which would you pick?

Participants chose one of two options (1 ⫽ The easy math
assignment where I would get most problems right, 0 ⫽ The hard
math assignment where I would possibly learn something new).
Higher values corresponded to the avoidance of challenge, and so
this measure should be positively correlated with fixed mindset
and be reduced by the mindset intervention.
Fixed-trait attributions. Fixed mindset beliefs are known predictors of person-focused versus process-focused attributional
styles (e.g., Henderson & Dweck, 1990; Robins & Pals, 2002). We
adapted prior measures (Blackwell et al., 2007) to develop a
briefer assessment. Participants read this scenario: “Pretend that,
later today or tomorrow, you got a bad grade on a very important
math assignment. Honestly, if that happened, how likely would
you be to think these thoughts?” Participants then rated this fixedtrait, person-focused response “This means I’m probably not very
smart at math” and this malleable, process-focused response “I can
get a higher score next time if I find a better way to study
(reverse-scored)” (response options: 1 ⫽ Not at all likely, 2 ⫽
Slightly likely, 3 ⫽ Somewhat likely, 4 ⫽ Very likely, 5 ⫽ Extremely likely). The two items were averaged into a single composite, with higher values corresponding to more fixed-trait,
person-focused attributional responses.
4
A screening question also asked students to list what math course they
are currently taking. Supplementary analyses found results were no different when limiting the worksheet task data only to the “chapters” that
correspond to the course a student was enrolled in.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

DESIGN THINKING AND PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS

381

Figure 1. Screenshots of the “original” and “revised” mindset interventions. See the online article for the color
version of this figure.

Performance avoidance goals. Because fixed mindset beliefs
are known to predict the goal of hiding one’s lack of knowledge
(Dweck & Leggett, 1988), we measured performance-avoidance
goals with a single item (Elliot & McGregor, 2001; performance
approach goals were not measured). Participants read “What
are your goals in school from now until the end of the year? Below,
say how much you agree or disagree with this statement. One of
my main goals for the rest of the school year is to avoid looking
stupid in my classes” (Response options: 1 ⫽ Strongly disagree,
2 ⫽ Disagree, 3 ⫽ Mostly disagree, 4 ⫽ Mostly agree, 5 ⫽ Agree,

Figure 2.
figure.

6 ⫽ Strongly agree). Higher values correspond to greater performance avoidance goals.
Fidelity measures. To examine fidelity of implementation
across conditions, students were asked to report on distraction in
the classroom, both peers’ distraction (“Consider the students
around you . . . How many students would you say were working
carefully and quietly on this activity today?” Response options:
1 ⫽ Fewer than half of students, 2 ⫽ About half of students, 3 ⫽
Most students, 4 ⫽ Almost all students, with just a few exceptions,
5 ⫽ All students) and one’s own distraction (“How distracted were

Screenshots from the “make a worksheet” task. See the online article for the color version of this

YEAGER ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

382

you, personally, by other students in the room as you completed
this activity today?” Response options: 1 ⫽ Not distracted at all,
2 ⫽ Slightly distracted, 3 ⫽ Somewhat distracted, 4 ⫽ Very
distracted, 5 ⫽ Extremely distracted).
Next, participants in both conditions rated how interesting the
materials were (“For you personally, how interesting was the
activity you completed in this period today?” Response options:
1 ⫽ Not interesting at all, 2 ⫽ Slightly interesting, 3 ⫽ Somewhat
interesting, 4 ⫽ Very interesting, 5 ⫽ Extremely interesting), and
how much they learned from the materials (“How much do you
feel that you learned from the activity you completed in this period
today?” Response options: 1 ⫽ Nothing at all, 2 ⫽ A little, 3 ⫽ A
medium amount, 4 ⫽ A lot, 5 ⫽ An extreme amount).
Prior achievement. School records were not available for this
sample. Prior achievement was indexed by a composite of selfreports of typical grades and expected grades. The two items were
“Thinking about this school year and the last school year, what
grades do you usually get in core classes? By core classes, we
mean: English, math, and science. We don’t mean electives, like
P.E. or art” (Response options: 1 ⫽ Mostly Fs, 2 ⫽ Mostly Ds, 3 ⫽
Mostly Cs, 4 ⫽ Mostly Bs, 5 ⫽ Mostly As) and “Thinking about
your skills and the difficulty of your classes, how do you think
you’ll do in math in high school? (Response options: 1 ⫽ Extremely poorly, 2 ⫽ Very poorly, 3 ⫽ Somewhat poorly, 4 ⫽
Neither well nor poorly, 5 ⫽ Somewhat well, 6 ⫽ Very well, 7 ⫽
Extremely well). Items were z scored within schools and then
averaged, with higher values corresponding to higher prior
achievement (␣ ⫽ .74).
Attitudes to validate the “Make-a-Math-Worksheet” Task.
Additional self-reports were assessed at Time 1 to validate the
Time 2 challenge-seeking behaviors. These were all expected to be
correlated with challenge-seeking behavior. These were the short
grit scale (Duckworth & Quinn, 2009), the academic self-control
scale (Tsukayama, Duckworth, & Kim, 2013), a single item of
interest in math (“In your opinion, how interesting is the subject of
math in high school?” response options: 1 ⫽ Not at all interesting,
2 ⫽ Slightly interesting, 3 ⫽ Somewhat interesting, 4 ⫽ Very
interesting, 5 ⫽ Extremely interesting), and a single item of math
anxiety (“In general, how much does the subject of math in high
school make you feel nervous, worried, or full of anxiety?” Re-

sponse options: 1 ⫽ Not at all, 2 ⫽ A little, 3 ⫽ A medium amount,
4 ⫽ A lot, 5 ⫽ An extreme amount).

Results
Preliminary analyses. We tested for violations of assumptions of linear models (e.g., outliers, nonlinearity). Variables either
did not violate linearity, or when transforming or dropping outliers, significance of results were unchanged.
Correlational analyses. Before examining the impact of the
intervention, we conducted correlational tests to replicate the basic
findings from prior research on fixed versus growth mindsets.
Table 2 shows that measured fixed mindset significantly predicted
fixed-trait, person-focused attributions, r(6636) ⫽ .28, performance avoidance goals, r(6636) ⫽ .23, and hypothetically choosing easy problems over hard problems, r(6636) ⫽ .12 (all ps ⬍
.001). The sizes of these correlations correspond to the sizes in a
meta-analysis of many past studies (Burnette et al., 2013). Thus, a
fixed mindset was associated with thinking that difficulty means
you are “not smart,” with having the goal of not looking “dumb,”
and with avoiding hard problems that you might get wrong, as in
prior research (see Dweck, 2006; Dweck & Leggett, 1988; Yeager
& Dweck, 2012).
Validating the “Make-a-math-worksheet” challenge-seeking
task. As shown in Table 2, the choice of a greater number of easy
problems as compared to hard problems at Time 2 was modestly
correlated with grit, self-control, prior performance, interest in
math, math anxiety measured at Time 1, 1 to 4 weeks earlier, and
all in the expected direction (all ps ⬍ .001, given large sample
size; see Table 2).
In addition, measured fixed mindset, fixed-trait attributions, and
performance avoidance goals predicted choices of more easy problems and fewer hard problems. The worksheet task behavior correlated with the single dichotomous hypothetical choice. Thus,
participants’ choices on this task appear to reflect their individual
differences in challenge-seeking tendencies.
Random assignment. Random assignment to condition was
effective. There were no differences between conditions in terms
of demographics (gender, race, ethnicity, special education, parental education) or in terms of prior achievement (all ps ⬎ .1),

Table 2
Correlations Among Measures in Study 1 Replicate Prior Growth Mindset Effects and Validate the “Make-a-Worksheet” Task

Measure
Grit
Self-control
Fixed mindset (Time 2)
Prior performance
Fixed trait attributions
Performance avoidance goals
Interest in math
Math anxiety
Hypothetical willingness to select
the easy (not hard) math
problem.
Note.

Actual easy
(minus hard)
problems selected

Grit

Selfcontrol

Fixed mindset
(Time 2)

Fixed trait
attributions

Performance
avoidance
goals

Prior
performance

Interest
in math

⫺.16
⫺.14
.13
⫺.17
.17
.10
⫺.23
.11

.51
⫺.16
.40
⫺.27
⫺.13
.27
⫺.07

⫺.16
.37
⫺.22
⫺.14
.29
⫺.08

⫺.25
.28
.23
⫺.14
.12

⫺.30
⫺.14
.48
⫺.35

.21
⫺.27
.23

⫺.10
.14

⫺.29

.29

⫺.19

⫺.16

.12

⫺.14

.25

.12

⫺.26

Ns range from 6,883 to 7,251; all ps ⬍ .01. Data are from both conditions; correlations did not differ across experimental conditions.

Math
anxiety

.12

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

DESIGN THINKING AND PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS

despite 80% power to detect effects as small as d ⫽ .06. Furthermore, as shown in Table 3, there were no preintervention differences between conditions in terms of fixed mindset.
Fidelity. Students in the revised and original intervention conditions did not differ in terms of their ratings of their peers’
distraction during the testing session, t(6454) ⫽ 0.35, p ⫽ .72, or
in terms of their own personal distraction, t(6454) ⫽ 1.92, p ⫽ .06.
Although there was a trend toward greater distraction in the
original intervention group, this was likely a result of very large
sample size. Regardless, distraction was low for both groups (at or
below a 2 on a 5-point scale).
Next, the revised intervention was rated as more interesting,
t(6454) ⫽ 4.44, p ⬍ .001, and also as more likely to cause
participants to feel as though they learned something, t(6454) ⫽
6.25, p ⬍ .001. This means the design process was successful in
making the new intervention engaging. Yet this meant that in
Study 2 it was important to ensure that the control condition was
also interesting.
Self-reported fixed mindset. The revised mindset intervention
was more effective at reducing reports of a fixed mindset as
compared to the original mindset intervention. See Table 3. The
original mindset group showed a change score of ⌬ ⫽ ⫺0.22 scale
points (of 6), as compared with ⌬ ⫽ ⫺0.48 scale point (of 6) for
the revised mindset group. Both change scores were significant at
p ⬍ .001, and they were significantly different from one another
(see Table 2).
In moderation analyses, students who already had more of a
growth mindset at baseline changed their beliefs less, Intervention ⫻ Preintervention fixed mindset interaction, t(6687) ⫽ ⫺3.385,
p ⫽ .0007, ␤ ⫽ .04, which is consistent with a ceiling effect
among those who already held a growth mindset. There was no
Intervention ⫻ Prior achievement interaction, t(6687) ⫽ 1.184,
p ⫽ .24, ␤ ⫽ .01, suggesting that the intervention was effective in
changing mindsets across all levels of achievement.
Primary analyses.
The “make-a-math-worksheet” task. Our primary outcome of
interest was challenge-seeking behavior. Compared with the orig-

383

inal growth mindset intervention, the revised growth mindset intervention reduced the tendency to choose more easy than hard
math problems, 4.62 versus 2.42, a significant difference,
t(6884) ⫽ 8.03, p ⬍ .001, d ⫽ .19 (see Table 3). This intervention
effect on behavior was not moderated by prior achievement,
t(6884) ⫽ ⫺.65, p ⫽ .52, ␤ ⫽ .01, or preintervention fixed
mindset, t(6884) ⫽ .63, p ⫽ .53, ␤ ⫽ .01, showing that the
intervention led high and low achievers alike to demonstrate
greater challenge-seeking.
It was also possible to test whether the revised growth mindset
intervention increased the overall number of challenging problems,
decreased the number of easy problems, or increased the proportion of problems chosen that were challenging. Supplementary
analyses showed that all of these intervention contrasts were also
significant, t(6884) ⫽ 3.95, p ⬍ .001, t(6884) ⫽ 8.60, p ⬍ .001,
t(6884) ⫽ 7.60, p ⬍ .001, respectively.
Secondary analyses.
Hypothetical challenge-seeking scenario. Compared with the
original mindset intervention, the revised mindset intervention
reduced the proportion of students saying they would choose the
“easy” math homework assignment versus the “hard” assignment
from 60% to 51%, logistic regression z ⫽ 7.951, p ⬍ .001, d ⫽ .19.
See Table 3. The intervention effect was not significantly moderated by prior achievement, z ⫽ ⫺1.82, p ⫽ .07, ␤ ⫽ .04, or
preintervention fixed mindset, z ⫽ 0.51, p ⫽ .61, ␤ ⫽ .01.
Attributions and goals. The revised intervention significantly
reduced fixed-trait, person-focused attributions as well as performance avoidance goals, compared with the original intervention,
ps ⬍ .01 (see Table 3). These effects were small, ds ⫽ .07 and 06,
but recall that this is the group difference between two growth
mindset interventions. Neither of these outcomes showed a significant Intervention ⫻ Preintervention fixed mindset interaction,
t(6647) ⫽ ⫺.62, p ⫽ .54, ␤ ⫽ .01, and t(6631) ⫽ ⫺.72, p ⫽ .47,
␤ ⫽ .01, for attributions and goals respectively. For attributions,
there was no Intervention ⫻ Prior achievement interaction,
t(6647) ⫽ .32, p ⫽ .74, ␤ ⫽ .001. For performance avoidance
goals, there was a small but significant Intervention ⫻ Prior achieve-

Table 3
Effects of Condition on Fixed Mindset, Attributions, Performance–Avoidance Goals, and Challenge-Seeking in Studies 1 and 2
Study 1
Original mindset
intervention
Measure
Pre-intervention (Time 1) fixed
mindset
Post-intervention (Time 2) fixed
mindset
Change from Time 1 to Time 2
Fixed trait attributions
Performance avoidance goals
Actual easy (minus hard) math
problems selected at Time 2
Hypothetical willingness to select the
easy (not hard) math problem at
Time 2
N (both Time 1 and 2)⫽

Study 2

Revised mindset
intervention

Revised mindset
intervention

M

SD

M

SD

Comparison

M

SD

M

SD

Comparison

3.20

1.15

3.22

1.15

t ⫽ 1.18

3.07

1.12

3.09

1.14

t ⫽ .30

2.98
⫺.22
2.14
3.40

1.21

1.21

t ⫽ 9.32ⴱⴱⴱ

t ⫽ 12.16ⴱⴱⴱ

t ⫽ 2.71ⴱⴱ
t ⫽ 2.60ⴱⴱ

2.54
⫺.55
2.03
3.42

1.16

.82
1.52

2.89
⫺.17
2.12
3.57

1.14

.87
1.51

2.74
⫺.48
2.08
3.31

.82
1.56

t ⫽ 3.58ⴱⴱⴱ
t ⫽ 2.95ⴱⴱ

4.62

11.52

2.42

11.38

60.4%
3665

51.2%
3480

Note. Mindset change scores from Time 1 to Time 2 significant at p ⬍ .001.
p ⬍ .01. ⴱⴱⴱ p ⬍ .001.

ⴱⴱ

Placebo control

—
t ⫽ 7.95ⴱⴱⴱ

54.4%
1646

.86
1.55
—

—
45.3%
1630

—
t ⫽ 5.71ⴱⴱⴱ

YEAGER ET AL.

384

ment interaction, in the direction that students with higher levels of
prior achievement benefitted slightly more, t(6631) ⫽ ⫺2.23, p ⫽
.03, ␤ ⫽ .03.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Study 2: Does a Redesigned Intervention
Improve Grades?
In Study 1, the revised growth mindset intervention outperformed its predecessor in terms of changes in immediate selfreports and behavior. In Study 2 we examined whether this revised
intervention would improve actual grades among 9th graders just
beginning high school and replicate the effects of prior studies.
We carried out this experiment with a census (⬎95%) of students in 10 schools. In addition, instead of conducting the experiment ourselves (as in Study 1 and prior research), we contracted
a third-party research firm specializing in government-sponsored
public health surveys to collect and clean all data.
These procedural improvements have scientific value. First, in
prior research that served as the basis for the present investigation
(Paunesku et al., 2015), the average proportion of students in the
high school who completed the Time 1 session was 17%. The goal
of that research (and Study 1) was to achieve sample size, not
within-school representativeness.5 Thus, the present study may
include more of the kinds of students that may have been underrepresented in prior studies.
Next, achieving a census of students is informative for policy.
As noted at the outset, schools, districts, and states are often
interested in raising the achievement for entire schools or for entire
defined subgroups, not for groups of students whose teachers or
schools may have selected them into the experiment on the basis of
their likelihood of being affected by the intervention.
Finally, ambiguity about seemingly mundane methodological
choices is one important source of the nonreplication of psychological experiments (see, e.g., Schooler, 2014). Therefore, it is
important for replication purposes to be able to train third-party
researchers in study procedures, and have an arms-length relationship with data cleaning, which was done here.

Method
Data. Participants were a maximum of 3,676 students from a
national convenience sample of 10 schools in California, New
York, Texas, Virginia, and North Carolina. One additional school
was recruited, but validated student achievement records could not
be obtained. The schools were selected from a national sampling
frame based on the Common Core of Data, with these criteria:
public high school, 9th grade enrollment between 100 and 600
students, within the medium range for poverty indicators (e.g., free
or reduce price lunch %), and moderate representation of students
of color (Hispanic/Latino or Black/African American). Schools
selected from the sampling frame were then recruited by a third
party firm. School characteristics—for example, demographics,
achievement, and average fixed mindset score—are in Table 4.
Student participants were somewhat more diverse than Study 1:
29% were Hispanic/Latino, 17% were black/African American,
3% were Native American/American Indian, 30% were White,
non-Hispanic, 6% were Asian/Asian American, and the rest were
from another or multiple racial groups. Forty-eight percent were
female, and 52% reported that their mothers had earned a bachelor’s degree or greater.

The response rate for all eligible 9th grade students in the 10
participating schools for the Time 1 session was 96%. A total of
183 students did not enter their names accurately and were not
matched at Time 2. All of these unmatched students received
control exercises at Time 2. An additional 291 students completed
Time 1 materials but not Time 2 materials, and this did not vary by
condition (Control ⫽ 148, Intervention ⫽ 143). There were no
data exclusions. Students were retained as long as they began the
Time 1 survey, regardless of Time 2 participation or quality of
responses—that is, we estimated “intent-to-treat” (ITT) effects.
ITT effects are conservative tests of the hypothesis, they afford
greater internal validity (preventing possible differential attrition
from affecting results), and they are more policy-relevant because
they demonstrate the effect of offering an intervention, which is
what institutions can control.
Procedures. The firm collected all data directly from the
school partners, and cleaned and merged it, without influence of
researchers. Before the final dataset was delivered, the research
team preregistered the primary hypothesis and analytic approach
via the Open Science Framework (OSF). The preregistered hypothesis, a replication of Paunesku et al.’s (2015) interaction
effect, was that prior achievement, indexed by a composite of 8th
Grade GPA and test scores, would moderate mindset intervention
effects on 9th grade core course GPA and D/F averages (see:
osf.io/aerpt; deviations from the preanalysis plan are disclosed in
the Appendix).
Intervention delivery. Student participation consisted of two
one-period online sessions conducted at the school, during regular
class periods, in a school computer lab or classroom. The sessions
were 1 to 4 weeks apart, beginning in the first 10 weeks of the
school year. Sessions consisted of survey questions and the intervention or control intervention. Students were randomly assigned
by the software, in real time, to the intervention or control group.
A script was read to students by their teachers at the start of each
computer session.
Mindset Intervention. This was identical to the revised mindset intervention in Study 1.
Control activity. The control activity was designed to be parallel to the intervention activity. It, too, was framed as providing
helpful information about the transition to high school, and participants were asked to read and retain this information so as to
write their opinions and help future students. Because the revised
mindset intervention had been shown to be more interesting that
previous versions, great effort was made to make the control group
at least as interesting as the intervention.
The control activity involved the same type of graphic art (e.g.,
images of the brain, animations), as well as compelling stories
(e.g., about Phineas Gage). It taught basic information about the
brain, which might have been useful to students taking 9th grade
biology. It also provided stories from upperclassmen, reporting
their opinions about the content. The celebrity stories and quotes in
Time 2 were matched but they differed in content. For instance, in
the control activity Michelle Obama talked about the White
5
In Study 1 we were not able to estimate the % of students within each
school who participated because schools did not provide any official data
for the study. Yet using historical numbers from the common core of data
as a denominator for a subsample of schools that could be matched, the
median response rate was approximately 40%.

DESIGN THINKING AND PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS

385

Table 4
School Characteristics in Study 2

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

School year
School
start date
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

8/18/14
8/18/14
9/3/14
8/25/14
8/25/14
8/25/14
8/26/14
8/25/14
8/25/14
9/2/14

Modal start
date for
Greatschools.org
Time 1
rating
10/6/14
10/3/14
10/23/14
9/30/14
10/6/14
10/7/14
9/23/14
9/18/14
10/8/14
10/29/14

4
2
2
7
5
2
7
4
8
6

Average preintervention
fixed mindset

%
White

3.13
3.22
3.23
2.65
3.11
2.95
3.00
3.21
3.07
3.43

20
3
10
62
41
29
78
11
52
55

House’s BRAIN initiative, an investment in neuroscience. Finally,
as in the intervention, there were a number of opportunities for
interactivity; students were asked open-ended questions and they
provided their reactions.
Measures.
9th grade GPA. Final grades for the end of the first semester
of 9th grade were collected. Schools that provided grades on a
0 –100 scale were asked which level of performance corresponded
to which letter grade (A⫹ to F), and letter grades were then
converted to a 0 to 4.33 scale. Using full course names from
transcripts, researchers, blind to students’ condition or grades,
coded the courses as science, math or English (i.e., core courses)
or not. End of term grades for the core subjects were averaged.
When a student was enrolled in more than one course in a given
subject (e.g., both Algebra and Geometry), the student’s grades in
both were averaged, and then the composite was averaged into
their final grade variable.
As a second measure using the same outcome data, we created
a dichotomous variable to indicate poor performance (1 ⫽ an
average GPA of D⫹ or below, 0 ⫽ not; this dichotomization
cutpoint was preregistered: osf.io/aerpt).
Prior achievement. The 8th grade prior achievement variable
was an unweighted average of 8th Grade GPA and 8th grade state
test scores, which is standard measure in prior intervention experiments with incoming 9th graders (e.g., Yeager, Johnson, et al.,
2014). The high schools in the present study were from different
states and taught students from different feeder schools. We therefore z scored 8th Grade GPA and state test scores. Because this
removes the mean from each school, we later tested whether
adding fixed effects for school to statistical models changed results
(it did not; see Table 6).6 A small proportion was missing both
prior achievement measures and they were assigned a value of
zero; we then included a dummy-variable indicating missing data,
which increases transparency and is the prevailing recommendation in program evaluation (Puma, Olsen, Bell, & Price, 2009).
Hypothetical challenge-seeking. This measure was identical
to Study 1. The make-a-worksheet task was not administered in
this study because it was not yet developed when Study 2 was
launched.
Fixed mindset, attributions, and performance goals. These
measures were identical to Study 1.
Fidelity measures. Measures of distraction, interest, and selfreported learning were the same as Study 1.

% Hispanic/
% Black/
Latino
African-American
26
57
13
19
17
19
21
78
27
16

32
33
74
10
40
48
1
6
11
26

%
Asian
22
7
3
9
1
2
0
4
9
3

% living below
poverty line
(in district)
State
18.3
18.3
41.0
10.8
13.7
13.7
11.6
27.8
27.8
5.9

CA
CA
NY
NC
NC
NC
TX
TX
TX
VA

Results
Preliminary analyses.
Random assignment. Random assignment to condition was
effective. There were no differences between conditions in terms
of demographics (gender, race, ethnicity, special education, parental education) or in terms of prior achievement within any of the 10
schools or in the full sample (all ps ⬎ .1). As shown in Table 3,
there were no preintervention differences between conditions in
terms of fixed mindset.
Fidelity. Several measures suggest high fidelity of implementation. On average, 94% of treated and control students answered
the open-ended questions at both Time 1 and 2, and this did not
differ by conditions or time. During the Time 1 session, both
treated and control students saw an average of 96% of the screens
in the intervention. Among those who completed the Time 2
session, treated students saw 99% of screens, compared with 97%
for control students. Thus, both conditions saw and responded to
their respective content to an equal (and high) extent.
Open-ended responses from students confirm that they were, in
general, processing the mindset message. Here are some examples
of student responses to the final writing prompt at Time 2, in which
they were asked to list the next steps they could take on their
growth mindset paths:
I can always tell myself that mistakes are evidence of learning. I
will always find difficult courses to take them. I’ll ask for help
when I need it.
To get a positive growth in mindset, you should always ask questions
and be curious. Don’t ever feel like there is a limit to your knowledge
and when feeling stuck, take a few deep breaths and relax. Nothing is
easy.
Step 1: Erase the phrase ‘I give up’ and all similar phrases from your
vocabulary. Step 2: Enter your hardest class of the day (math, for
example). Step 3: When presented with a brain-frying worksheet, ask
questions about what you don’t know.

6
Some prior research (Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009) used selfreported expectancies, not prior GPA, as a baseline moderator. We too
measured these (see Study 1 for measure). When added to the composite,
our moderation results were the same and slightly stronger. We did not
ultimately include this measure in our baseline composite in the main text
because we did not preregister it.

YEAGER ET AL.

386

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

When I grow up I want to be a dentist which involves science. I am
not good at science . . . yet. So I am going to have to pay more
attention in class and be more focused and pay attention and learn in
class instead of fooling around.

Next, students across the two conditions reported no differences
in levels of distraction: own distraction, t(3438) ⫽ 0.15, p ⫽ .88;
others’ distraction, t(3438) ⫽ 0.37, p ⫽ .71. Finally, control
participants actually rated their content as more interesting, and
said that they felt like they learned more, as compared to treated
participants, t(3438) ⫽ 7.76 and 8.26, Cohen’s ds ⫽ .25 and .27,
respectively, ps ⬍ .001. This was surprising but it does not
threaten our primary inferences. Instead it points to the conservative nature of the control group. Control students received a
positive, interesting, informative experience that held their attention and exposed them to novel scientific information relevant to
their high school biology classes (e.g., the brain) that was endorsed
by influential role models (e.g., Michele Obama, LeBron James).
Self-reported fixed mindset. As an additional manipulation
check, students reported their fixed mindset beliefs. As shown in
Table 3, both the intervention and control conditions changed in
the direction of a growth mindset between Times 1 and 2 (change
score ps ⬍ .001). However, those in the intervention condition
changed much more (Control ⌬ ⫽ ⫺.17 scale points of 6, Intervention ⌬ ⫽ ⫺.55 scale points of 6). These change scores differed
significantly from each other, p ⬍ .001. Table 5 reports regressions
predicting postintervention fixed mindset as a function of condition, and shows that choices of covariates did not affect this result.

Moderator analyses in Table 5 show that previously higherachieving students, and, to a much lesser extent, students who held
more of a fixed mindset at baseline, changed more in the direction
of a growth mindset.
It is interesting that the control condition showed a significant
change in growth mindset—almost identical to the original mindset condition in Study 1. Perhaps teachers were regularly discussing growth mindset concepts, perhaps treated students behaved in
a more growth-mindset-oriented way, spilling over to control
students, or perhaps the control condition itself— by creating
strong interest in the science of the brain and making students feel
as though they learned something—implicitly taught a growth
mindset. In any of these cases, this would make the treatment
effect on grades conservative.
Primary analyses.
9th grade GPA. Our first preregistered confirmatory analysis was to examine the effects of the intervention on 9th Grade
GPA, moderated by prior achievement. In the full sample, there
was a significant Intervention ⫻ Prior Achievement interaction,
t(3419) ⫽ 2.66, p ⫽ .007, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.05, replicating prior research
(Paunesku et al., 2015; Yeager et al., 2014; also see Wilson &
Linville, 1982, 1985). Table 6 shows that the significance of
this result did not depend on the covariates selected. Tests at ⫾1
SD of prior performance showed an estimated intervention
benefit of 0.13 grade points, t(3419) ⫽ 2.90, p ⫽ .003, d ⫽ .10,
for those who were at ⫺1 SD of prior performance, and no
effect among those at ⫹1 SD of prior performance, b ⫽ ⫺0.04

Table 5
Regressions Predicting Post-Intervention (Time 2) Fixed Mindset, Study 2
Variable
Intercept
Revised mindset intervention
Prior achievement (z scored,
centered at 0)
Intervention ⫻ Prior achievement
(z scored, centered at 0)
Female

Base model

Plus school
fixed effects

2.959ⴱⴱⴱ
(.028)
⫺.389ⴱⴱⴱ
(.039)
⫺.156ⴱⴱⴱ
(.028)
⫺.181ⴱⴱⴱ
(.040)

2.933ⴱⴱⴱ
(.079)
⫺.394ⴱⴱⴱ
(.039)
⫺.182ⴱⴱⴱ
(.029)
⫺.177ⴱⴱⴱ
(.039)

Asian
Hispanic/Latino
Black/African-American
Repeating freshman year
Pre-intervention fixed mindset (z
scored, centered at 0)
Intervention ⫻ Pre-intervention
fixed mindset (z scored,
centered at 0)
Adjusted R2
AIC
N

.076
10103.731
3279

.099
10030.747
3279

Plus demographic
covariates
2.943ⴱⴱⴱ
(.086)
⫺.397ⴱⴱⴱ
(.039)
⫺.173ⴱⴱⴱ
(.029)
⫺.176ⴱⴱⴱ
(.039)
.020
(.039)
⫺.115
(.084)
⫺.024
(.051)
.036
(.058)
.356ⴱⴱ
(.137)

.100
10015.772
3274

Plus pre-intervention
mindset
2.989ⴱⴱⴱ
(.071)
⫺.391ⴱⴱⴱ
(.032)
⫺.036
(.025)
⫺.183ⴱⴱⴱ
(.033)
⫺.031
(.032)
⫺.150ⴱ
(.069)
⫺.000
(.043)
⫺.008
(.048)
.180
(.114)
.704ⴱⴱⴱ
(.023)
⫺.120ⴱⴱⴱ
(.033)
.383
8759.446
3267

Note. OLS regressions. Unstandardized coefficients above standard errors (in parentheses). School fixed
effects included in model but suppressed from regression table.
ⴱ
p ⬍ .05. ⴱⴱ p ⬍ .01. ⴱⴱⴱ p ⬍ .001.

DESIGN THINKING AND PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS

387

Table 6
Regressions Predicting End-of-Term GPA In Math, Science, and English, Study 2
Variable
Intercept

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Revised mindset intervention (among
low prior-achievers, ⫺1 SD)
Prior achievement (z scored, centered
at ⫺1 SD)
Intervention ⫻ Prior achievement (z
scored, centered at ⫺1 SD)
Female

Plus school Plus demographic Plus pre-intervention
Base model fixed effects
covariates
mindset
1.556ⴱⴱⴱ
(.035)
.119ⴱ
(.049)
.693ⴱⴱⴱ
(.024)
⫺.079ⴱ
(.034)

1.584ⴱⴱⴱ
(.063)
.125ⴱⴱ
(.047)
.721ⴱⴱⴱ
(.024)
⫺.082ⴱ
(.033)

Asian
Hispanic/Latino
Black/African-American
Repeating freshman year
Pre-intervention fixed mindset (z
scored, centered at 0)
Intervention ⫻ Pre-intervention fixed
mindset (z scored, centered at 0)
Adjusted R2
AIC
N

.295
9781.892
3448

.358
9467.187
3448

1.581ⴱⴱⴱ
(.067)
.123ⴱⴱ
(.045)
.663ⴱⴱⴱ
(.023)
⫺.080ⴱ
(.032)
.327ⴱⴱⴱ
(.031)
.189ⴱⴱ
(.067)
⫺.287ⴱⴱⴱ
(.041)
⫺.322ⴱⴱⴱ
(.046)
⫺.922ⴱⴱⴱ
(.108)

.407
9196.462
3448

1.589ⴱⴱⴱ
(.066)
.135ⴱⴱ
(.046)
.641ⴱⴱⴱ
(.024)
⫺.091ⴱⴱ
(.032)
.338ⴱⴱⴱ
(.031)
.190ⴱⴱ
(.067)
⫺.284ⴱⴱⴱ
(.041)
⫺.309ⴱⴱⴱ
(.046)
⫺.894ⴱⴱⴱ
(.108)
⫺.110ⴱⴱⴱ
(.022)
⫺.018
(.032)
.416
9112.995
3438

Note. OLS regressions. Unstandardized coefficients above standard errors (in parentheses). School fixed
effects included in model but suppressed from regression table.
ⴱ
p ⬍ .05. ⴱⴱ p ⬍ .01. ⴱⴱⴱ p ⬍ .001.

grade points, t(3419) ⫽ 0.99, p ⫽ .33, d ⫽ .03. This may be
because higher achieving students have less room to improve,
or because they may manifest their increased growth mindset in
challenging-seeking rather than in seeking easy A’s.
Poor performance rates. In a second preregistered confirmatory analysis, we analyzed rates of poor performance (D or F
averages). This analysis mirrors past research (Cohen et al., 2009;
Paunesku et al., 2015; Wilson & Linville, 1982, 1985; Yeager,
Purdie-Vaughns, et al., 2014), and helps test the theoretically
predicted finding that the intervention is beneficial by stopping a
recursive process by which poor performance begets worse performance over time (Cohen et al., 2009; see Cohen & Sherman,
2014; Yeager & Walton, 2011).
There was a significant overall main effect of intervention on a
reduced rate of poor performance of 4 percentage points, z ⫽ 2.95,
p ⫽ .003, d ⫽ .10. Next, as with the full continuous GPA metric,
in a logistic regression predicting poor performance there was a
significant Intervention ⫻ Prior Achievement interaction, z ⫽
2.45, p ⫽ .014, ␤ ⫽ .05. At ⫺1 SD of prior achievement the
intervention effect was estimated to be 7 percentage points, z ⫽
3.80, p ⬍ .001, d ⫽ .13, whereas at ⫹1 SD there was a
nonsignificant difference of 0.7 percentage points, z ⫽ .42, p ⫽
.67, d ⫽ .01.
Secondary analyses.
Hypothetical challenge-seeking. The mindset intervention
reduced from 54% to 45% the proportion of students saying
they would choose the “easy” math homework assignment (that
they would likely get a high score on) versus the “hard”

assignment (that they might get a low score on; see Table 3).
The intervention effect on hypothetical challenge-seeking was
slightly larger for previously higher-achieving students, Intervention ⫻ Prior Achievement interaction z ⫽ 2.63, p ⫽ .008,
␤ ⫽ .05, and was not moderated by preintervention fixed
mindset, z ⫽ 1.45, p ⫽ .15, ␤ ⫽ .02. Thus, whereas lower
achieving students were more likely than high achieving students to show benefits in grades, higher achieving students were
more likely to show an impact on their challenge-seeking
choices on the hypothetical task.
Attributions and goals. The growth mindset intervention reduced fixed-trait, person-focused attributions, d ⫽ .13, and performance avoidance goals, d ⫽ .11, ps ⬍ .001 (see Table 3), unlike
some prior growth mindset intervention research, which did not
change these measures (Blackwell et al., 2007, Study 2). Thus, the
present study uses a field experiment to replicate much prior
research (Burnette et al., 2013; Dweck, 1999; Dweck, 2006; Yeager & Dweck, 2012).

General Discussion
The present research used “design thinking” to make psychological intervention materials more broadly applicable to students
who may share concerns and construals because they are undergoing similar challenges—in this case, 9th grade students entering
high school. When this was done, the revised intervention was
more effective in changing proxy outcomes such as beliefs and
short-term behaviors than previous materials (Study 1). Further-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

388

YEAGER ET AL.

more, the intervention increased core course grades for previously
low-achieving students (Study 2).
Although we do not consider the revised version to be the final
iteration, the present research provides direct evidence of an exciting possibility: a two-session mindset program, developed
through an iterative, user-centered design process, may be administered to entire classes of 9th graders (⬎95% of students) and
begin to raise the grades of the lowest performers, while increasing
the learning-oriented attitudes and beliefs of low and high performers. This approach illustrates an important step toward taking
growth mindset and other psychological interventions to scale, and
for conducting replication studies.
At a theoretical level, it is interesting to note the parallels
between mindset interventions and expert tutors: both are strongly
focused on students’ construals (see Lepper, Woolverton, Mumme,
& Gurtner, 1993; Treisman, 1992). Working hand-in-hand with
students, expert tutors build relationships of trust with students and
then redirect their construals of academic difficulty as challenges
to be met, not evidence of fixed inability. In this sense, both expert
tutors and mindset interventions recognize the power of construalbased motivational factors in students’ learning. Future interventions might do well to capitalize further on the wealth of knowledge of expert tutors, who constitute one of the most powerful
educational interventions (Bloom, 1984).

Replication
Replication efforts are important for cumulative science
(Funder et al., 2014; Lehrer, 2010; Open Science Collaboration,
2015; Schooler, 2011, 2014; Schimmack, 2012; Simmons et al.,
2011; Pashler & Wagenmakers, 2012; also see Ioannidis, 2005).
However, it would be easy for replications to take a misguided
“magic bullet” approach—that is, to assume that intervention
materials and procedural scripts that worked in one place for
one group should work in another place for another group
(Yeager & Walton, 2011). This is why Yeager and Walton
(2011) stated that experimenters “should [not] hand out the
original materials without considering whether they would convey the intended meaning” for the group in question (p. 291;
also see Wilson, Aronson, & Carlsmith, 2010).
The present research therefore followed a procedure of (a)
beginning with the original materials as a starting point, (b)
using a design methodology to increase the likelihood that they
conveyed the intended meaning in the targeted population (9th
graders), and (c) conducting well-powered randomized experiments in advance to ensure that, in fact, the materials were
appropriate and effective in the target population.
Study 2 showed that, when this was done, the revised mindset
intervention raised grades for previously low-achieving students,
when all data were collected, aggregated, and cleaned by an
independent third-party, and when all involved were blind to
experimental condition. Furthermore, the focal tests were preregistered (though see the Appendix). The present research therefore
provides a rigorous replication of Paunesku et al. (2015). This
directly addresses skepticism about whether a two-session, selfadministered psychological intervention can, under some conditions,
measurably improve the grades for previously low-performing students.

Nevertheless, the preregistered hypothesis reported here does
not advance our theory of mechanisms for psychological intervention effects. Additional analyses of the data— ones that could not
have been preregistered—will be essential for doing this and
further improving the intervention and its impact.

Divergence of Self-Reports and Behavior
One theme in the present study’s results—and a theme dating to
the original psychological interventions in education (Wilson &
Linville, 1982)—is a disconnect between self-reports and actual
behavior. On the basis of only the self-reported fixed mindset
results, we might have concluded that the intervention benefitted
high achievers more. However, on the basis of the GPA results, we
might conclude that the intervention “worked” better for students
who were lower in prior achievement. That is, self-reports and
grades showed moderation by prior performance in the opposite
directions.
What accounts for this? Two possibilities are germane. First,
grades follow a non-normal distribution that suffers from a range
restriction at the top, in part due to grade inflation. Thus higherachievers may not have room to increase their grades. But higherachievers may also be those who read material more carefully and
absorb the messages they are taught. These patterns could explain
smaller GPA effects but larger proxy outcome effects for higherachievers.
Another possibility is that high-achieving students may have
been inspired to take on more challenging work that might not
lead to higher grades but might teach them more. Indeed, the
hypothetical challenge-seeking measure supports this. For this
reason, it might have been informative to analyze scores on a
norm-referenced exam at the end of the term, as in some
intervention studies (Good et al., 2003; Hanselman, Bruch,
Gamoran, & Borman, 2014). If higher-achievers were choosing
harder tasks, their grades might have suffered, but their learning
might have improved. In the present research it was not possible
to administer a norm-referenced test due to the light-touch
nature of the intervention. In addition, curriculum was not held
constant across our diverse sample of schools.
Finally, Study 1’s development of a brief behavioral measure
of challenge seeking—the “make-a-worksheet” task—was a
methodological advance that may help avoid known problems
with using self-reports to evaluate behavioral interventions (see
Duckworth & Yeager, in press). This may make it a practical
proxy outcome in future evaluation of interventions (see Duckworth & Yeager, in press; Yeager & Bryk, 2015).

Limitations
The present research has many limitations. First, we only had
access to grades at the end of the first term of 9th grade—in some
cases, a few weeks after the intervention. It would have been
informative to collect grades over a longer period of time.
Second, we have not attempted here to understand heterogeneity
in effect sizes (cf. Hanselman et al., 2014). Building on the results
of the present study, we are now poised to carry out a systematic
examination of student, teacher, and school factors that cause
heterogeneous intervention effects. Indeed, with further revision to
the intervention materials, we are carrying out a version of Study

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

DESIGN THINKING AND PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS

2 with students in a national sample of randomly selected U.S.
public high schools. The present study provides a basis for this.
Third, it is interesting that, although the revised mindset intervention was more effective at changing short-term beliefs and
behaviors than the original intervention (Study 1), the effect sizes
for grades in Study 2 do not exceed those found in past analogous
studies (e.g., Paunesku et al., 2015; Yeager, Henderson, et al.,
2014). Perhaps the present study, in reaching a census of students,
included more students who were reluctant to participate or who
may have been resistant to the intervention message. We furthermore utilized intent-to-treat analyses—including students who saw
any content at Session 1 regardless of whether they completed
Session 2. Or perhaps the present study enlisted teachers who were
less compliant with procedures than the enthusiastic early adopter
teachers recruited in past studies. With lower experimental control
and a census of students, there may be greater error variance,
resulting in lower effect sizes.
Although the mindset effect sizes may appear to be small—and
they are compared with the magnitude of student engagement
issues in U.S. schools—they conform to expectations,7 and are
nevertheless practically meaningful. Considering that 9th grade
course failure almost perfectly predicts eventual high school graduation rates (Allensworth & Easton, 2005), if the growth mindset
intervention reduces by 4 percentage points the proportion of 9th
graders who earn D/F averages, then a fully scaled and spread
version of this program could in theory prevent 100,000 high
school dropouts in the U.S. per year—while increasing the
learning-oriented behavior of many other students.

Conclusion
This research began with a simple question: is it possible to take an
existing, initially effective psychological intervention and redesign it
to improve the outcomes for a population of students undergoing a
similar life transition? Now that we have shown this is possible for
a growth mindset intervention and now that we have described a
method for doing so, it will be exciting to see how this approach can
be applied to other interventions. If they too can be improved, would
it be possible to disseminate them in such a way that would actually
reduce the large number of high school dropouts for the nation as a
whole? We look forward to investigating this.

7
The correlations with fixed mindset beliefs in Table 2 ranged from r ⫽
.12 to r ⫽ .40, which matches a meta-analysis of implicit theories effects
(range of r ⫽ .15 to r ⫽ .24; Burnette et al., 2013). The present effects also
match to the average of social-psychological effects more generally, r ⫽
.21 (Richard, Bond, & Stokes-Zoota, 2003).

References
Allensworth, E. M., & Easton, J. Q. (2005). The on-track indicator as a
predictor of high school graduation. Chicago, IL: Consortium on Chicago School Research, University of Chicago.
Aronson, E. (1999). The power of self-persuasion. American Psychologist,
54, 875– 884. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0088188
Aronson, J., Fried, C., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the effects of stereotype threat on African American college students by shaping theories of
intelligence. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 113–125.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/jesp.2001.1491

389

Bem, D. J. (1965). An experimental analysis of self-persuasion. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 1, 199 –218. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
0022-1031(65)90026-0
Blackwell, L. A., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Implicit
theories of intelligence predict achievement across an adolescent transition: A longitudinal study and an intervention. Child Development, 78,
246 –263. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2007.00995.x
Bloom, B. (1984). The 2 sigma problem: The search for methods of group
instruction as effective as one-to-one tutoring. Educational Researcher,
13, 4 –16.
Bower, G. H., & Gilligan, S. G. (1979). Remembering information related
to one’s self. Journal of Research in Personality, 13, 420 – 432. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/0092-6566(79)90005-9
Brehm, J. W. (1966). A theory of psychological reactance. New York, NY:
Academic Press.
Bryk, A. S. (2009). Support a science of performance improvement. Phi Delta
Kappan, 90, 597– 600. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/003172170909000815
Burnette, J. L., O’Boyle, E. H., VanEpps, E. M., Pollack, J. M., & Finkel,
E. J. (2013). Mind-sets matter: A meta-analytic review of implicit
theories and self-regulation. Psychological Bulletin, 139, 655–701.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0029531
Cialdini, R. B., Kallgren, C. A., & Reno, R. R. (1991). A focus theory of
normative conduct: A theoretical refinement and reevaluation of the role
of norms in human behavior. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 24, 201–234. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2601(08)60330-5
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., & Master, A. (2006). Reducing the
racial achievement gap: A social-psychological intervention. Science,
313, 1307–1310. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1128317
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Apfel, N., & Brzustoski, P.
(2009). Recursive processes in self-affirmation: Intervening to close the
minority achievement gap. Science, 324, 400 – 403. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1126/science.1170769
Cohen, G. L., & Prinstein, M. J. (2006). Peer contagion of aggression and
health risk behavior among adolescent males: An experimental investigation of effects on public conduct and private attitudes. Child Development, 77, 967–983. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2006
.00913.x
Cohen, G. L., & Sherman, D. K. (2014). The psychology of change:
Self-affirmation and social psychological intervention. Annual Review of
Psychology, 65, 333–371. http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych010213-115137
Cooper, J., & Fazio, R. H. (1984). A new look at dissonance theory.
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 17, 229 –266. http://dx.doi
.org/10.1016/S0065-2601(08)60121-5
Davis, J., & Bauman, K. (2013). School enrollment in the United States:
2011. Washington, DC: United States Census Bureau.
Duckworth, A. L., & Quinn, P. D. (2009). Development and validation of
the short grit scale (GRIT-S). Journal of Personality Assessment, 91,
166 –174. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223890802634290
Duckworth, A. L., & Yeager, D. S. (in press). Measurement matters:
Assessing personal qualities other than cognitive ability. Educational
Researcher.
Dweck, C. (1999). Self-theories: Their role in motivation, personality, and
development. Philadelphia, PA: Psychology Press.
Dweck, C. S. (2006). Mindset. New York, NY: Random House.
Dweck, C. S., & Leggett, E. L. (1988). A social-cognitive approach to
motivation and personality. Psychological Review, 95, 256 –273. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.95.2.256
Eccles, J. S., & Wigfield, A. (2002). Motivational beliefs, values, and
goals. Annual Review of Psychology, 53, 109 –132. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1146/annurev.psych.53.100901.135153
Elliot, A. J., & Dweck, C. S. (Eds.). (2005). Handbook of competence and
motivation. New York, NY: Guilford Press.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

390

YEAGER ET AL.

Elliot, A. J., & McGregor, H. A. (2001). A 2 ⫻ 2 achievement goal
framework. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 501–519.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.80.3.501
Erikson, E. H. (1968). Identity: Youth and crisis. New York, NY: Norton.
Fryberg, S. A., Covarrubias, R., & Burack, J. (2013). Cultural models of
education and academic performance for Native American and European
American students. School Psychology International, 34, 439 – 452.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0143034312446892
Funder, D. C., Levine, J. M., Mackie, D. M., Morf, C. C., Sansone, C.,
Vazire, S., & West, S. G. (2014). Improving the dependability of
research in personality and social psychology: Recommendations for
research and educational practice. Personality and Social Psychology
Review, 18, 3–12. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1088868313507536
Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (2012). Social psychology and educational
intervention. In E. Shafir (Ed.), Behavioral foundations of policy. New
York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Godes, O., Hulleman, C. S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2007). Boosting
students’ interest in math with utility value: Two experimental tests.
Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Chicago, IL.
Gollwitzer, P. M. (1999). Implementation intentions: Strong effects of
simple plans. American Psychologist, 54, 493–503. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1037/0003-066X.54.7.493
Good, C., Aronson, J., & Inzlicht, M. (2003). Improving adolescents’
standardized test performance: An intervention to reduce the effects of
stereotype threat. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 24,
645– 662. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.appdev.2003.09.002
Hanselman, P., Bruch, S. K., Gamoran, A., & Borman, G. D. (2014).
Threat in context: School moderation of the impact of social identity
threat on racial/ethnic achievement gaps. Sociology of Education, 87,
106 –124. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0038040714525970
Hasebe, Y., Nucci, L., & Nucci, M. S. (2004). Parental control of the
personal domain and adolescent symptoms of psychopathology: A crossnational study in the United States and Japan. Child Development, 75,
815– 828. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2004.00708.x
Henderson, V. L., & Dweck, C. S. (1990). Motivation and achievement. In
S. S. Feldman & G. R. Elliott (Eds.), At the threshold: The developing
adolescent (pp. 308 –329). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hulleman, C. S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2009). Promoting interest and
performance in high school science classes. Science, 326, 1410 –1412.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1177067
Ioannidis, J. P. (2005). Why most published research findings are false.
PLoS ONE, 18, 40 – 47. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.0020124
Kelley, T., & Kelley, D. (2013). Creative confidence: Unleashing the
creative potential within us all. New York, NY: Crown Business.
Kohavi, R., & Longbotham, R. (2015). Online controlled experiments and
A/B tests. In C. Sammut & G. Webb (Eds.), Encyclopedia of machine
learning and data mining. New York, NY: Springer.
Kuncel, N. R., Crede, M., & Thomas, L. L. (2005). The validity of
self-reported grade point averages, class ranks, and test scores: A metaanalysis and review of the literature. Review of Educational Research,
75, 63– 82. http://dx.doi.org/10.3102/00346543075001063
Latour, B. (2005). Reassembling the social: An introduction to actornetwork theory. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Lehrer, J. (2010). The truth wears off. The New Yorker, 13, 52.
Lepper, M. R., & Woolverton, M. (2001). The wisdom of practice: Lessons
learned from the study of highly effective tutors. In J. Aronson (Ed.),
Improving academic achievement: Contributions of social psychology
(pp. 133–156). Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Lepper, M. R., Woolverton, M., Mumme, D. L., & Gurtner, J. L. (1993).
Motivational techniques of expert human tutors: Lessons for the design
of computer-based tutors. In S. P. Lajoie & S. J. Derry (Eds.), Computers
as cognitive tools: Technology in education. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Lord, C. G. (1980). Schemas and images as memory aids: Two modes of
processing social information. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 38, 257–269. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.38.2.257
Mueller, C. M., & Dweck, C. S. (1998). Praise for intelligence can
undermine children’s motivation and performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 33–52. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/00223514.75.1.33
Nucci, L. P., Killen, M., & Smetana, J. G. (1996). Autonomy and the
personal: Negotiation and social reciprocity in adult-child social exchanges. New Directions for Child and Adolescent Development, 1996,
7–24. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/cd.23219967303
Open Science Collaboration. (2015). Estimating the reproducibility of
psychological science. Science, 349, aac4716. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/
science.aac4716
Pashler, H., & Wagenmakers, E. J. (2012). Editors’ introduction to the
special section on replicability in psychological science: A crisis of
confidence? Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7, 528 –530. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1177/1745691612465253
Paunesku, D., Walton, G. M., Romero, C., Smith, E. N., Yeager, D. S., &
Dweck, C. S. (2015). Mind-set interventions are a scalable treatment for
academic underachievement. Psychological Science, 26, 784 –793.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0956797615571017
Puma, M. J., Olsen, R. B., Bell, S. H., & Price, C. (2009). What to do when
data are missing in group randomized controlled trials (NCEE 2009 –
0049). Washington, DC: National Center for Education Evaluation and
Regional Assistance, Institute of Education Sciences, U. S. Department
of Education.
Razzouk, R., & Shute, V. (2012). What is design thinking and why is it
important? Review of Educational Research, 82, 330 –348.
Richard, F. D., Bond, C. F., & Stokes-Zoota, J. J. (2003). One hundred
years of social psychology quantitatively described. Review of General
Psychology, 7, 331–363. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/1089-2680.7.4.331
Ries, E. (2011). The lean startup: How today’s entrepreneurs use continuous innovation to create radically successful businesses. New York,
NY: Random House LLC.
Robins, R. W., & Pals, J. L. (2002). Implicit self-theories in the academic
domain: Implications for goal orientation, attributions, affect, and selfesteem change. Self and Identity, 1, 313–336. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
15298860290106805
Robinson, T. N. (2010). Stealth interventions for obesity prevention and
control: Motivating behavior change. In L. Dube, A. Bechara, A.
Dagher, A. Drewnowski, J. LeBel, P. James, . . . R. Yada (Eds.), Obesity
prevention: The role of brain and society on individual behavior. New
York, NY: Elsevier.
Ross, L., & Nisbett, R. E. (1991). The person and the situation: Perspectives of social psychology. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Schimmack, U. (2012). The ironic effect of significant results on the
credibility of multiple-study articles. Psychological Methods, 17, 551–
566. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0029487
Schooler, J. (2011). Unpublished results hide the decline effect. Nature,
470, 437.
Schooler, J. W. (2014). Turning the lens of science on itself: Verbal overshadowing, replication, and metascience. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 9, 579 –584. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1745691614547878
Simmons, J. P., Nelson, L. D., & Simonsohn, U. (2011). False-positive
psychology: Undisclosed flexibility in data collection and analysis allows presenting anything as significant. Psychological Science, 22,
1359 –1366. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0956797611417632
Skurnik, I., Yoon, C., Park, D. C., & Schwarz, N. (2005). How warnings
about false claims become recommendations. Journal of Consumer
Research, 31, 713–724. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/426605
Stephens, N. M., Hamedani, M. G., & Destin, M. (2014). Closing the
social-class achievement gap: A difference-education intervention improves first-generation students’ academic performance and all students’

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

DESIGN THINKING AND PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS
college transition. Psychological Science, 25, 943–953. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1177/0956797613518349
Stipek, D. (2002). Motivation to learn: From theory to practice (4th ed.).
Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Treisman, U. (1992). Studying students studying calculus: A look at the
lives of minority mathematics students in college. A Mary P. Dolciani
Lecture. The College Mathematics Journal, 23, 362–372. http://dx.doi
.org/10.2307/2686410
Tsukayama, E., Duckworth, A. L., & Kim, B. (2013). Domain-specific impulsivity in school-age children. Developmental Science, 16, 879 – 893.
Walton, G. M. (2014). The new science of wise psychological interventions. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 23, 73– 82. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1177/0963721413512856
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2007). A question of belonging: Race,
social fit, and achievement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 82–96. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.92.1.82
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A brief social-belonging intervention improves academic and health outcomes of minority students.
Science, 331, 1447–1451. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1198364
Wilson, T. D. (2002). Strangers to ourselves: Discovering the adaptive
unconscious. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wilson, T. D., Aronson, E., & Carlsmith, K. (2010). Experimentation in
social psychology. In S. T. Fiske, D. T. Gilbert, & G. Lindzey (Eds.),
Handbook of social psychology (pp. 51– 81). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. (1982). Improving the academic performance of college freshmen: Attribution therapy revisited. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 42, 367–376. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1037/0022-3514.42.2.367

391

Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. (1985). Improving the performance of
college freshmen with attributional techniques. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 49, 287–293. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/00223514.49.1.287
Yeager, D. S., & Bryk, A. (2015). Practical measurement. Unpublished
Manuscript, University of Texas at Austin.
Yeager, D. S., & Dweck, C. S. (2012). Mindsets that promote resilience:
When students believe that personal characteristics can be developed.
Educational Psychologist, 47, 302–314. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
00461520.2012.722805
Yeager, D. S., Henderson, M. D., Paunesku, D., Walton, G. M., D’Mello,
S., Spitzer, B. J., & Duckworth, A. L. (2014). Boring but important: A
self-transcendent purpose for learning fosters academic self-regulation.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 107, 559 –580. http://dx
.doi.org/10.1037/a0037637
Yeager, D. S., Johnson, R., Spitzer, B. J., Trzesniewski, K. H., Powers, J.,
& Dweck, C. S. (2014). The far-reaching effects of believing people can
change: Implicit theories of personality shape stress, health, and achievement during adolescence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
106, 867– 884. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0036335
Yeager, D. S., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., Brzustoski, P.,
Master, A., . . . Cohen, G. L. (2014). Breaking the cycle of mistrust:
Wise interventions to provide critical feedback across the racial divide.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 143, 804 – 824. http://dx
.doi.org/10.1037/a0033906
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. (2011). Social-psychological interventions in
education: They’re not magic. Review of Educational Research, 81,
267–301. http://dx.doi.org/10.3102/0034654311405999

Appendix
Deviations From Preregistered Analysis Plan
The study was preregistered before the delivery of the dataset
to the researchers by the third-party research firm (osf.io/aerpt).
However, after viewing the data but before testing for the
effects of the intervention variable, we discovered that some of
the preregistered methods were not possible to carry out. Because at this time there are no standards for preregistration in
psychological science, the research team used its best judgment
to make minor adjustments. In the end, we selected analyses
that were closest to a replication of the Intervention ⫻ Prior
achievement interaction reported by Paunesku et al. (2015)
(Paunesku et al. also report a main effect of intervention on
grades, but the primary effect that is interpreted and highlighted
in the paper is the interaction). The deviations from the preanalysis plan were as follows:
• We initially expected to exclude students on an individualized special education plan, but that variable was not
delivered to us for any schools.
• We preregistered a second way of coding prior performance: by including self-reported prior grades in the composite. However, we later discovered a meta-analysis
showing that this is inappropriate for use in tests of mod-

View publication stats

•

•

eration because lower-performing students show greater
bias and measurement error, making it an inappropriate
moderator, even though self-reported grades are an effective linear covariate (Kuncel, Crede, & Thomas, 2005).
We hoped to include social studies grades as a core
subject, but schools did not define which classes were
social studies and they could not be contacted to clarify,
and so we only classified math, science, and English as
core classes.
We preregistered other analyses that will be the subject
of other working papers: effects on stress (which were
described as exploratory in our preregistered plan), and
moderation of intervention effects by race/ethnicity and
gender (which were not found in Paunesku et al., 2015
and so, strictly speaking, they are not a part of the
replication reported here).
Received April 21, 2015
Revision received December 7, 2015
Accepted December 8, 2015 䡲

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
2014, Vol. 106, No. 6, 000

© 2014 American Psychological Association
0022-3514/14/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/a0036335

The Far-Reaching Effects of Believing People Can Change: Implicit
Theories of Personality Shape Stress, Health, and Achievement
During Adolescence
AQ: au
AQ: 1

David Scott Yeager

Rebecca Johnson

University of Texas at Austin

National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Brian James Spitzer

AQ:2, 3

Kali H. Trzesniewski

New York University

University of California, Davis

Joseph Powers and Carol S. Dweck
Stanford University

The belief that personality is fixed (an entity theory of personality) can give rise to negative reactions to social
adversities. Three studies showed that when social adversity is common—at the transition to high school—an
entity theory can affect overall stress, health, and achievement. Study 1 showed that an entity theory of
personality, measured during the 1st month of 9th grade, predicted more negative immediate reactions to
social adversity and, at the end of the year, greater stress, poorer health, and lower grades in school. Studies
2 and 3, both experiments, tested a brief intervention that taught a malleable (incremental) theory of
personality—the belief that people can change. The incremental theory group showed less negative reactions
to an immediate experience of social adversity and, 8 months later, reported lower overall stress and physical
illness. They also achieved better academic performance over the year. Discussion centers on the power of
targeted psychological interventions to effect far-reaching and long-term change by shifting interpretations of
recurring adversities during developmental transitions.
Keywords: implicit theories, stress, health, ostracism, psychological interventions
Supplemental materials: http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0036335.supp

Future (Gale, Canton, & Zemeckis, 1985) depict teens as indelibly
marked as “losers,” “jocks,” or “bullies”—labels that are thought
to haunt them or buoy them throughout high school and into
adulthood. Contemporary news outlets reinforce this belief. For
instance, Newsweek Magazine stated that “the labels we get as
teenagers shape the rest of our lives” (Dailey, 2010, p. 1), while
New York Magazine explained “why you never truly leave high
school” (Senior, 2013, p. 1). Are these beliefs innocuous or could
they be harmful? It is possible that if a teen believed that social
attributes were set for life in high school, their worries about these
attributes, whether founded or unfounded, could have negative
long-term consequences. And perhaps these consequences could
extend beyond their social lives into other domains, such as overall
life stress, physical health or academic achievement.
Past research has shown that implicit theories of personality—
beliefs about whether people’s attributes are fixed or are malleable— have domain-specific effects (e.g., Chiu, Dweck, Tong, &
Fu, 1997; Chiu, Hong, & Dweck, 1997; Yeager, Trzesniewski, &
Dweck, 2013; Yeager, Trzesniewski, Tirri, Nokelainen, & Dweck,
2011; see Molden & Dweck, 2006; also see Finkel, Burnette, &
Scissors, 2007; Knee, 1998). Across a variety of situations and
populations, those who hold more of an entity theory of personality—the belief that personal characteristics are fixed—show more
negative reactions to social adversities such as exclusion (see

In America, the high school years are often thought of as a time
when a person’s social standing becomes set for life. Iconic films
such as The Breakfast Club (Tanen & Hughes, 1985) or Back to the

David Scott Yeager, Department of Psychology, University of Texas at
Austin; Rebecca Johnson, Department of Bioethics, National Institutes of
AQ: 31 Health, Bethesda, Maryland; Brian James Spitzer, Steinhardt School of Culture, Education, and Human Development, New York University; Kali H.
Trzesniewski, Department of Human Development, University of California,
Davis; Joseph Powers, Graduate School of Education, Stanford University;
AQ: 32 Carol S. Dweck, Department of Psychology, Stanford University.
Support for the conduct and reporting of this research was provided by the
Thrive Foundation for Youth, the Spencer Foundation, and the Raikes Foundation. We thank the students and teachers involved in this research for their
cooperation. We also thank Cary Catching, April House, Ahmad Saleh,
Jennifer McDonald, Kerry Morrissey, Shannon Morrissey, April Scott, Hector
Villalpando, Adriana Miu, Terry Yu, and Alexandria Ordway for their help
collecting data and Greg Walton, Geoff Cohen, and members of the DweckWalton lab for their extensive comments. All remaining errors are the authors’
own. The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to David
Scott Yeager, 108 East Dean Keeton Stop A8000, Austin, TX 78712-1043.
E-mail: dyeager@utexas.edu
1

AQ: 4

AQ: 5

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

2

YEAGER ET AL.

Yeager & Dweck, 2012). For instance, children and adolescents
with more of an entity theory react to social exclusion by feeling
worse about themselves (Yeager et al., 2011; see also Rudolph,
2010) and making more self-blaming attributions, such as “maybe
I’m not a likable person” (Erdley, Cain, Loomis, Dumas-Hines, &
Dweck, 1997). Furthermore, experimental manipulations have
shown this is a causal process. Teaching an incremental theory of
personality—the belief that people have the potential to change—
reduces negative reactions to social adversity, including shame and
aggressive retaliation (Yeager, Miu, Powers, & Dweck, 2013;
Yeager et al., 2011). Overall, this research has found consistent
effects of implicit theories of personality on relevant measures of
hostile social cognition and behavior.
However, the full importance of these findings has not yet been
determined because it is not known how far-reaching these effects
might be. It is possible that implicit theories—involving beliefs
about whether people’s attributes are fixed or are malleable—
could cause more global, long-term patterns of adjustment in areas
that on their surface have very little to do with perceptions of
personality traits. We suggest that implicit theories may create an
interpretive framework that, during times of social difficulty, could
have consequences for diverse domains of functioning. For instance, the transition to high school is laden with social adversities
such as peer exclusion (Barber & Olsen, 2004; Crosnoe, 2011),
and it is also a time during which stress increases while health and
achievement decline (Benner, 2011; Haugland, Wold, Stevenson,
Aaroe, & Woynarowska, 2001; Sundblad, Jansson, Saartok, Renström, & Engström, 2008). Stress, health, and underachievement
are outcomes that independently represent major research priorities, difficult to understand and address in their own right. Yet
implicit theories might tap into a social-cognitive “hub” from
which these outcomes emerge (also see G. L. Cohen & Sherman,
2014; Inzlicht & Kang, 2010; Walton & Cohen, 2011). To our
knowledge, no previous theory or data have shown a belief about
the malleability of social attributes simultaneously has an influence on all of these consequential outcomes.

Implicit Theories Affect Coping and Resilience During
Times of Adversity
Individuals can have implicit theories about a variety of human
attributes, including intellectual ability (Blackwell, Trzesniewski,
& Dweck, 2007) and social characteristics, such as personality
(Chiu, Hong, & Dweck, 1997; Yeager et al., 2011), moral character (Chiu, Dweck, Tong, & Fu, 1997), or shyness (Beer, 2002;
also see Finkel et al., 2007; Rudolph, 2010). Broadly, implicit
theories in these domains create psychological worlds or “meaning
systems” that affect self-regulation and behavior by shaping how
information is processed (Molden & Dweck, 2006).
When individuals are not experiencing any difficulty, implicit
theories are not strongly predictive of self-regulation and behavior
(for a meta-analysis, see Burnette, O’Boyle, VanEpps, Pollack, &
Finkel, 2013). Just as the belief that intelligence is fixed is not
threatening when school is easy (Blackwell et al., 2007), the belief
that people’s socially relevant characteristics are fixed is not likely
to lead to helplessness when there is no threat to one’s social status
(see Chen, DeWall, Poon, & Chen, 2012). However, during times
of difficulty, the different psychological worlds created by entity
versus incremental theories can lead to divergent coping and

resilience-related behaviors (Blackwell et al., 2007; see Yeager &
Dweck, 2012; also see Mueller & Dweck, 1998). In response to
exclusion or bullying, an entity theory—with its focus on static
traits and its tendency to view small behaviors as diagnostic of
global traits— can lead to the judgment that those who behave
aggressively are “bad people” and that a rejected person is “a
loser” (Erdley et al., 1997; Erdley & Dweck, 1993; Yeager et al.,
2011). These types of attributions compromise resilience by putting individuals in a world in which negative people or circumstances seem set in stone (Graham & Juvonen, 1998). As a result,
individuals with more of an entity theory tend to experience more
shame, harbor grudges, and seek aggressive revenge (Yeager et al.,
2011; Yeager, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2013; also see Finkel et
al., 2007).
Nearly all this research, however, has focused on implicit theories and resilience within a given domain, such as the effect of
implicit theories of intelligence on academic achievement (Blackwell et al., 2007; for a meta-analysis, see Burnette et al., 2013) or
the effect of implicit theories of socially relevant personality traits
on aggression in response to a social conflict (e.g., Yeager et al.,
2011; Yeager, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2013; also see Chen et al.,
2012). The present research extends these ideas by suggesting that
when individuals are in a developmental period during which
social adversity is chronic and widespread, then there may be
important spillover effects of implicit theories of personality into a
number of discrete domains of functioning (cf. Inzlicht & Kang,
2010). While it would be possible to test this hypothesis during any
such developmental period, below we outline why the transition to
high school is one appropriate period during which to do this.

The Transition to High School Is an Appropriate Time
to Measure and Change Implicit Theories
All life transitions have the potential to affect a person’s social
life, but the transition to high school can be especially difficult for
several reasons. First, moving into high school frequently disrupts
social networks, as old friendships are lost and new ones must be
created (Cairns & Cairns, 1994). For instance, during the first year
of high school, roughly 50% of casual friendships are different
from 1 month to the next (Chan & Poulin, 2007). This can make
social status precarious. Students often turn to aggression and
exclusion as a means of shoring up their social status (G. L. Cohen
& Prinstein, 2006; Faris & Felmlee, 2011; see Pellegrini & Long,
2002). In the face of this social reality, adolescents can understandably be anxious about threats to their social status coming
from exclusion or other forms of aggression, even if they themselves are not directly victimized (Juvonen & Graham, 2014).
Second, experience-sampling studies also suggest that adolescents become preoccupied with peer relationships. These studies
find that the percentage of time thinking about peer relationships
rises dramatically as teens move into high school (e.g., Richards,
Crowe, Larson, & Swarr, 1998).
Third, the threat that social adversity poses may be heightened
by the social-cognitive changes that lead adolescents to interpret
adversity in more problematic ways. High school-aged adolescents, relative to children or younger adolescents, increasingly
come to believe that social attributes are fixed entities that cannot
change (e.g., Killen, Kelly, Richardson, & Jampol, 2010). For
instance, older adolescents rely more on traits such as niceness or

AQ: 6

AQ: 7

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

IMPLICIT THEORIES, STRESS, HEALTH, AND ACHIEVEMENT

meanness as a way of classifying peers, relative to younger children (e.g., Birnbaum, Deeb, Segall, Ben-Eliyahu, & Diesendruck,
2010; Diesendruck & haLevi, 2006). Thus, adolescents entering
high school are both in a context that requires them to be more
vigilant to threats to their social status, and they hold more implicit
theories that make these threats seem more constant.
In summary, the changes common to the transition to high
school—the increased uncertainty of peer relationships, the heightened preoccupation with peer relationships, and the growing view
of personality traits as fixed—make it an appropriate developmental period to test whether the effects of implicit theories of personality generalize beyond reactions to social adversity and extend
to adjustment in multiple domains of functioning.

Stress, Health, and Achievement
Here we review the rationale for our specific predictions regarding the effects of implicit theories on stress, health, and achievement during the transition to high school.

Stress
Stress is defined as the sense that the demands in one’s environment are greater than one’s ability to cope with them (Lazarus
& Folkman, 1984), and past research has found that stress is
greatest when ambiguity and uncertainty about social status are
high, such as when social hierarchies are uprooted (for a review of
the primate and human literature, see Sapolsky, 2005; also see
Gould, 2003). This perfectly describes adolescent life during the
transition to high school (Juvonen & Graham, 2014). However, not
all adolescents will experience the transition to high school as
equally stressful. Social-cognitive theories of development emphasize that adverse experiences, such peer exclusion or victimization,
do not always undermine long-term adjustment. This is because
the interpretations of these adversities matter (Olson & Dweck,
2008; for a classic formulation in the context of depression, see
Beck, 1967). From this social-cognitive perspective, adolescents
who draw problematic conclusions from their social adversities—
for instance, believing exclusion means they are a “loser” who will
never be included—will tend to appraise them as more stressful.
Hence, life overall might be experienced as more stressful for high
school adolescents who interpret social failures through the lens of
an entity theory (e.g., Erdley et al., 1997). If so, then perhaps an
intervention designed to teach adolescents a different interpretation of adversity— one growing out of an incremental theory of
personality— could reduce overall levels of stress in life.

Physical Health
The social adversities common in unstable social hierarchies
also pose a greater likelihood of poor physical health (see Sapolsky, 2005). This is because chronic stress can produce physiological changes that undermine the immune system (see Miller, Chen,
& Cole, 2009; Sapolsky, 2005). Not surprisingly, then, largesample correlational studies find that experiences of peer social
adversity during childhood or adolescence predict poorer health
(Gini & Pozzoli, 2009), and this effect can persist long into
adulthood (Wolke, Copeland, Angold, & Costello, 2013). Additionally, blaming one’s own character for social difficulties is

3

associated with physical health symptoms (see Dickerson, Gruenewald, & Kemeny, 2011). Thus, it is possible that an intervention targeting implicit theories, which lessens negative reactions
such as shame when social status comes under attack (Yeager et
al., 2011), could, over time, result in reports of better health among
teens making the transition to high school.

Academic Achievement
Finally, social adversities such as exclusion could undermine
academic achievement for several reasons. Hormones commonly
elicited by social stressors such as peer dominance can have a
direct effect on the brain’s ability to form connections and create
new memories following a learning task (see Lupien, Maheu, Tu,
Fiocco, & Schramek, 2007). In addition, when social threats are
chronic—as they often are during the transition to high school—
the vigilance required to monitor one’s social status might monopolize attention, impairing the ability to focus on academic content
(Guinote, 2007a, 2007b), engage in abstract learning (Smith &
Trope, 2006), and make strategic decisions that benefit long-term
self-interests (Smith, Jostman, Galinsky, & van Dijk, 2008). Furthermore, ninth-grade students who believe that bullying is prevalent at their high school— even if they themselves are not bullied—are less likely to be committed to doing well at that school,
disagreeing with items such as “I try hard at school” (Mehta,
Cornell, Fan, & Gregory, 2013). Perhaps an entity theory, beyond
exacerbating the subjective experience of common social adversities, could impair learning, attention, and engagement, resulting in
lower academic performance over the year. Relatedly, perhaps an
appropriately timed nudge in the direction of an incremental theory
of personality could reduce this hypervigilance. This might allow
adolescents to focus on and engage more effectively with their
schoolwork, resulting in better grades over the year.

The Importance of Longitudinal Field Experiments for
Testing Basic Psychological Theory
Our research rests on the recognition that social-psychological
processes have a temporal dimension—that they do not end with
the first outcome assessed but instead can continue to unfold over
time (G. L. Cohen & Garcia, 2008; G. L. Cohen & Sherman, 2014;
Lewin, 1943; also see Reis & Gosling, 2010; Ross & Nisbett,
1991; Wilson, 2006; Yeager & Walton, 2011). Building on this,
the present research tests the hypothesis that interpretations of
social adversity arising from implicit theories trigger accumulating
consequences. Over time, these lead to divergent levels of stress,
health and academic achievement. Following recommendations
from Lewin (1952) and Bronfenbrenner (1979), we use longitudinal field experiments to test this. A presumption of this research is
that a brief but theoretically informed intervention could have
effects that persist many months later (e.g., G. L. Cohen, Garcia,
Purdie-Vaugns, Apfel, & Brzustoski, 2009; Finkel, Slotter,
Luchies, Walton, & Gross, in press; Sherman et al., 2013; Walton
& Cohen, 2011; see Garcia & Cohen, 2012; Walton, in press;
Wilson, 2006; Yeager & Walton, 2011). It could do so by changing
a key force in a “tension system”—the network of interacting
forces that drive behavior in a social environment (Bronfenbrenner, 1979; Lewin, 1952; Ross & Nisbett, 1991). Such a key
force might be a psychological tendency that asserts its influence

AQ: 8

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

4

YEAGER ET AL.

repeatedly, such as a tendency to interpret social adversity as fixed
rather than changeable (Abelson, 1985; Yeager et al., in press).
Intervention experiments can inform theory because they can test
whether a given psychological tendency is truly influential in a
given real-world tension system that abounds with uncontrolled
and powerful forces affecting behavior (see Cialdini & Paluck, in
press; Reis & Gosling, 2010). An additional advantage of intervention experiments is that they can directly inform efforts to
address major social issues (Cialdini & Paluck, in press; Wilson,
2006)—in the present case, social coping, stress, health, and academic underachievement during a difficult adolescent transition.

mental theory of personality. We used a double-blind experiment
to assess its impact on immediate reactions to social adversity and
its longer-term impact on stress, physical health, and academic
achievement. In Study 3, we replicated the intervention in a new
context—a low-income, predominately ethnic minority urban public high school—to assess the generality of the processes. This
study also explored potential long-term effects on adolescents’
construals of themselves, to begin to understand how and why an
implicit theories intervention might have a lasting impact.1

Fn1

Study 1

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Method
The Elusiveness of Cross-Domain Effects in
Intervention Research
Finally, the present research seeks to achieve one elusive goal of
research in the behavioral social sciences: transfer of an intervention’s benefits across domains. Several comprehensive early childhood interventions lasting several years and costing many thousands of dollars per person such as Perry Preschool or the
Abecedarian Project have successfully produced cross-domain effects (Heckman & Kautz, in press). Yet the track record is much
more disappointing for similarly comprehensive and expensive
adult or adolescent interventions explicitly designed to produce
cross-domain effects. For instance, Heckman and Kautz (in press)
reviewed a large number of diverse adolescent interventions, including interventions providing counseling, career and college
readiness skills, and improved nutrition. They did not find a
single example of a program that positively affected both educational outcomes and health outcomes upon longitudinal
follow-up. However, these past interventions, often involving
long-term training or residency programs, were not built on
precise social-psychological theory.
The present research provides a test of the general question of
whether it is possible for a theory-based adolescent intervention to
have effects on stress, health, and academic achievement. This
possibility rests on the finding that social relationships have wideranging downstream consequences (Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008;
also see Walton & Cohen, 2011). Thus, the present research is
an opportunity to assess the power of precise psychological
theory to make progress where more traditional human capital
interventions have hit an impasse.

The Present Research
In three studies, we investigated the longitudinal effects of implicit
theories of personality on stress, health, and academic achievement in
addition to the well-established short-term effects on social coping.
The first study asked whether there is correlational evidence that an
entity theory of personality predicts adjustment across a variety of
domains during the transition to high school—specifically, responses
to social adversity and levels of stress, health, and academic achievement. This longitudinal study measured implicit theories and responses to social adversity in the first month of school and then
examined associations with year-end levels of these adjustment measures, controlling for initial levels.
The second study used a randomized experiment to address the
causal role of implicit theories. During the first month of high
school we delivered an intervention that taught students an incre-

Participants. Participants were ninth grade students at a high
school in Northern California (N ! 158). Eight percent of students
received free or reduced-price lunch, a measure of low socioeconomic status. Forty-four percent of participants were White, 41%
Asian, 13% Latino, and 2% another racial or ethnic group. Fortyfour percent were female. Social adversities were common. On a
survey conducted in the third week of the school year, many
students (77%) already reported being the victim of at least some
physical, verbal, or social aggression.2 Some students did not
provide data at both assessments, and so degrees of freedom varied
across analyses.
Procedure. During the first week of the school year in September, parental consent was obtained for all students. In the third
week, students assented and completed an initial survey measuring
implicit theories of personality, baseline levels of global psychological stress and reported physical health, and background characteristics. One week later students came to the school’s computer
lab, where they participated in an established protocol for eliciting
feelings of social exclusion (described below). After the task,
participants reported their responses to the event. In May, at the
end of the school year, students were again surveyed to measure
their global stress and physical illness symptoms. After the school
year, official grades were collected from the school’s registrar.
Experience of peer exclusion. To elicit reactions to social
exclusion, students participated in a standard laboratory experience
of exclusion—the “Cyberball” paradigm (Williams & Jarvis,
2006). Cyberball is a short-lived and ultimately harmless instance
of social exclusion (Williams, 2009) and involves an online game
of catch with two “peers” purportedly from the students’ school.3
The task was programmed so that at first the other “players”
threw the ball to the participant twice. Then, for the remaining
minutes of the task, the other players threw it exclusively to each
other and not to the participant. Immediately following this, dependent variables were assessed.
1
Greater detail on all procedures, measures, and results in the three
studies can be found in the online supplemental materials.
2
In this study and throughout the article, the stopping rule was to collect
as much data as possible given the logistical constraints, student absences,
and class sizes in each school.
3
To further confirm that our Cyberball procedure had no lasting negative effect on stress, health, or achievement and that our extensive precautions were effective, in the present study, we were fortunate that other
students in the same school were surveyed at the beginning and end of the
year but did not play Cyberball. These students (who are a part of a
different study and are not discussed further) did not differ significantly in
their September or May outcomes compared to their peers who participated
in Cyberball, as described below.

Fn2

Fn3

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

IMPLICIT THEORIES, STRESS, HEALTH, AND ACHIEVEMENT

We took several precautions to make the exclusion experience
ultimately innocuous. Specifically, after completing initial dependent variables, participants saw an “error” box appear on the
screen informing them that there had been a glitch in the first
round such that the other Cyberball players were not able to see
their icon and therefore could not throw the ball to them. They
were asked to play again, and this time, participants were fully
included in the game of catch. At this point participants answered
a number of generic open-ended questions that were later coded to
assess suspicion (e.g., “Is there anything you’d like to share with
the research team?”). After the entire session was completed,
research assistants informed the class that in fact Cyberball had
been created by researchers in order to understand exclusion in
high school and that no one had actually been excluded. Assistants
answered students’ questions about the task. Students in general
saw the value of the task and many spontaneously said that they
were glad to have participated in the study and contributed to
science.
To minimize any possibility of participants informing other
students about the true purpose of the study, all participants were
run through the study in 1 day, in back-to-back classes in three
different computer labs in each class period. Beyond the openended questions described previously, the survey asked students if
they had heard anything about the study before entering the classroom and, if so, what they had heard. Participants’ responses to
these and all other open-ended questions were reliably coded by
research assistants. Twenty-two students suspected that the Cyberball task was being controlled by the computer, either because they
had been informed by a peer (four students) or because they did
not believe the cover story (18 students). These students were
excluded only from analyses of responses to Cyberball. Throughout the article, students were reliably coded as suspicious or not
about the Cyberball task by two independent coders (blind to
identities and characteristics of students) on the basis of participants’ open-ended responses to questions in the posttask survey
(Krippendorff’s " # .81). Suspicion was uncorrelated with all
measured variables.
Measures.
Implicit theories of personality. On the initial survey in September of ninth grade, students were given four items used in
previous research to assess adolescents’ implicit theories of personality (Yeager et al., 2011; e.g., “Bullies and victims are types
of people who really can’t be changed”; 1 ! Strongly disagree
to 6 ! Strongly agree). Responses were averaged (" ! .81),
and higher values corresponded to stronger endorsement of an
entity theory.
Negative reactions to social exclusion. One week after the
initial survey, participants underwent the Cyberball procedure and
reported how they reacted to it (three items: “How much stress
were you feeling when playing Cyberball?” “How much anxiety
were you feeling when playing Cyberball?” “How good or bad
were you feeling about yourself when playing Cyberball?”) on
fully labeled 7-point scales, with 7 corresponding to the most
negative responses (e.g., An extreme amount of stress or feeling
Extremely bad about yourself). In this study and throughout the
article, the items were averaged (" ! .75), then log-transformed to
reduce significant skew and converted to z-scores for ease of
interpretation (the joint test of both skew and kurtosis for the
untransformed metric was significant at p $ .0000001, and “ladder

5

of powers” analyses revealed that the log transformation improved
normality the most).
Global psychological stress. First on the initial survey and
then again at the end of the year, participants completed the
10-item Perceived Stress Scale (S. Cohen, Kamarck, & Mermelstein, 1983). This scale measures global appraisals that situations
in one’s life are stressful and beyond one’s ability to cope with
them (e.g., “In the last month, how often have you felt difficulties
were piling up so high that you could not overcome them?”). These
items, each rated on a fully labeled 5-point scale (1 ! Never, 5 !
Very often), were averaged (" ! .83).
Physical health. We sought to measure the extent to which
adolescents were sick to the point that it affected the quality of
their daily lives. To examine whether symptom levels were of this
magnitude, we adapted a subset of items from the validated Medical Outcomes Study core measures of health-related quality of life
(Hays, Sherbourne, & Mazel, 1993). In the form of this survey
intended for adults, items ask whether physical health symptoms
limit one’s role at work; in a validation study, such items were the
highest-loading items on a global factor of physical health (Hays et
al., 1993). In the present study, minor edits were made to make
these items relevant for adolescents. Three items assessed complaints that feeling “sick, tired, or in pain” interfered with “schoolwork or other regular daily activities” in the past 4 weeks (e.g.,
whether they “cut down the amount of time” spent on daily
activities due to illness; for each, 1 ! Yes, 0 ! No; items were
summed; range ! 0 –3; " ! .78).
Academic achievement. End-of-semester grades for English,
math, and science for the fall and spring terms of ninth grade were
obtained from official school records. Grades were reported on a
range from 0 to 4, with 4 corresponding to an “A” and 0 corresponding to an “F.”
Covariates and moderators. On the initial survey, participants
reported sex, race, and ethnicity. Students also reported their
frequency of experiencing various forms of peer victimization
(e.g., being excluded, having rumors spread about you, insulted,
hit; these were rated on a scale from 0 to 4, such that 0 ! Never,
and 4 ! All the time; ratings were then averaged). From school
records, we obtained grades earned the prior year, in eighth
grade.

Results
We examined the relationship between implicit theories of personality and responses to the experience of Cyberball exclusion,
each assessed in the first month of the school year. Next, we
examined associations between initial implicit theories and endof-year adjustment in each of the three domains— global psychological stress, health, and grades— controlling for initial levels of
each variable.
With the exception of academic achievement, all key variables
were analyzed with ordinary least squares regressions using
heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors. To examine associations
with academic achievement, three-level hierarchical linear models
with grading period and school subject nested within students were
estimated using the lme4 package in R (in these models, p-values
for significance tests were estimated using Monte Carlo sampling,
following best practices; Bates, 2010). All analyses controlled for
student sex and race/ethnicity. For tables reporting results that do

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

6

YEAGER ET AL.

Table 1
Effects of Implicit Theories of Personality on Stress, Physical Illness, and Grade Point Average
Independent variable
Study 1: Entity theory of
personality measure
(September of ninth grade)
(N ! 158)

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Dependent variable

T1

Immediate reactions to social exclusion
(September of ninth grade)
Global psychological stress
(May of ninth grade)
Physical illness (May of ninth grade)
Grade point average (Cumulative over
ninth grade)

b

SE

0.22!!

0.09

.21

0.18!!
0.27!

0.06
0.10

.20
.19

&0.18!!!

0.06

&.16

%

Study 2: Incremental theory
of personality intervention
(September of ninth grade)
(N ! 78)
b

SE

%

&0.50!

0.22

&.26

&0.37!!
&0.58!

0.15
0.28

0.34!

0.17

Study 3: Incremental theory of
personality intervention
(September of ninth grade)
(N ! 150)
b

SE

%

&0.32!

0.16

&.18

&.27
&.23

&0.23!
&0.54!!

0.11
0.19

&.18
&.21

.16

0.95!!

0.35a

.34

Note. The effect on each dependent variable for each study was estimated in a separate regression model. Models predicting reactions to exclusion, global
stress, and physical illness were estimated using ordinary least squares, controlling for sex and race and, when available, baseline values. Models predicting
grades were estimated in hierarchical linear models, with subjects and marking periods (e.g., semesters) nested within students; these models controlled for
sex, race, and prior (Grade 8) performance.
a
Results for grades in Study 3 were estimated among those with an entity theory at baseline (#3.5 on the entity theory measure, N ! 42), due to a significant
Intervention ' Baseline Implicit Theories interaction for that outcome. N is the maximum sample size; exact sample sizes vary across analyses within a
study due to missing data.
!
p $ .05. !! p $ .01. !!! p $ .001.

not include these covariates, and tables reporting results of regression models used in exploratory mediational analyses, see the
online supplemental materials. These do not differ in their overall
pattern of statistical significance. In this study and throughout the
article, all means, standard deviations, and proportions reported in
the text are raw, unadjusted numbers. All test statistics (t, z, etc.)
come from regression models and test the significance of a given
regression coefficient when controlling for the covariates noted
above.
Response to social adversity. Conceptually replicating past
research (Erdley et al., 1997; Yeager et al., 2011), during the first
month of ninth grade, adolescents with more of an entity theory
of personality reacted to the experience of Cyberball exclusion
more negatively, reporting more stress, anxiety, and negative
self-feelings, unstandardized b ! .22, t(147) ! 2.56, p ! .01,
standardized % ! .21 (see Table 1). We next turned to the
question of whether this effect on the social domain could,
generalize to additional outcomes over the course of the year.
Global psychological stress, physical health, and academic
achievement. Controlling for baseline levels of global stress,
adolescents who began the school year with more of an entity theory
of personality reported more global stress at the end of the school
year, b ! .18, t(138) ! 3.03, p ! .003, % ! .20 (see Table 1).
Adolescents with more of an entity theory of personality at the
beginning of the year also reported poorer physical health at the
end of the school year (i.e., more complaints that physical illness
impaired daily functioning), b ! .27, t(139) ! 2.37, p ! .02, % !
.19, again controlling for initial levels. Finally, stronger endorsement of an entity theory predicted lower grades over ninth grade
(averaging across math, science, and English), b ! &.18,
t(157) ! &3.10, p $ .001, % ! &.16, controlling for eighth-grade
achievement. Illustrating this finding, adolescents who held an
entity theory at baseline (who “agreed,” on average, with the entity
theory questions, i.e., average score #3.5 on the 1– 6 scale) had a
cumulative grade point average of 2.62, compared with a grade

point average of 3.08 among those who did not endorse an entity
theory (!3.5 on the 1– 6 scale).
In summary, an entity theory of personality—which was measured during a student’s first weeks in high school–predicted not
only more negative short-term reactions to social adversity (a
domain-specific effect) but also greater stress, worse health, and
lower grades over the course of the year, controlling for initial
levels of these variables. This suggests that implicit theories may
have longer term, cross-domain implications during a socially
difficult adolescent transition.4
Mediation. Recall that our theory was that the effects of
implicit theories of personality would generalize to other domains
to the extent that they alter interpretations of social adversity. We
therefore considered the possibility that negative reactions to Cyberball exclusion (i.e., reporting more stress, anxiety, and negative
self-feelings) might statistically mediate the link between implicit
theories and measures of overall adjustment across domains. If this
were the case, it might suggest that reactions to social adversity fed
into changes in the other variables over time. Consistent with this
expectation, correlation analyses found that more negative reac4
Past theory and data suggest that implicit theories should predict
adjustment and behavior primarily in times of adversity (Burnette et al.,
2013; Yeager & Dweck, 2012), and past research has shown this by
documenting an interaction between reports of peer victimization and
implicit theories in predicting adjustment outcomes (Rudolph, 2010; Yeager et al., 2013). At the same time, the present study was conducted during
the transition to high school—a time when, as noted at the outset, large
majorities of students experience at least some social adversity, and even
if they did not, they might reasonably worry that social difficulty could
befall them at any time. Nevertheless we examined whether students’
initial reports of the frequency of peer victimization might moderate
implicit theories effects on long-term adjustment. In separate regressions,
none of the Implicit Theories ' Peer Victimization interactions were
significant (ts $ 1.4, ps # .3), and none were in the theoretically expected
direction.

Fn4

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

IMPLICIT THEORIES, STRESS, HEALTH, AND ACHIEVEMENT

AQ: 9
AQ: 10

AQ: 11

tions to Cyberball exclusion in the first month of school significantly predicted year-end levels of global stress (r ! .31, p $ .001)
and poorer physical health (r ! .24, p ! .002). In mediational
analyses (Imai, Keele, & Tingley, 2010; Imai, Keele, Tingley, &
Yamamoto, 2010), there was a significant indirect (mediated)
effect of implicit theories through Cyberball reactions on global
stress (b ! .05, Quasi-Bayesian 95% confidence interval [CI]: .02,
.10) and physical health (b ! .06, 95% CI: .01, .14). We did not
find that our measure of reactions to Cyberball exclusion mediated
the effect on academic achievement (negative reactions to exclusion were uncorrelated with grades in either term, rs $ .05, ps #
.8).
In sum, we found significant evidence for mediation by negative
reactions to Cyberball exclusion for global stress and physical
health. Mediation by Cyberball was not apparent for grades.

Study 2
Study 1 was a preliminary correlational longitudinal study
showing that an entity theory of personality (the belief that people’s traits are fixed) is associated with harsher immediate reactions to social exclusion and also to longer-term differences in
overall adjustment across multiple domains over the school year.
Clearly, however, an experiment with random assignment to condition is needed to speak to the causal role of implicit theories.
Therefore in Studies 2 and 3 we administered an incremental
theory intervention during the first month of high school. The
intervention was designed to redirect adolescents’ implicit theories
away from an entity theory, so as to cut off cascading cycles of
stress, illness and underperformance before they could gain momentum (cf. Cook, Purdie-Vaughns, Garcia, & Cohen, 2012; Finkel et al., in press; Sherman et al., 2013). Mirroring Study 1, we
first tested whether the intervention lessened negative reactions to
social exclusion— how much stress, anxiety, and negative selffeelings participants report experiencing after being excluded. We
then assessed whether implicit theories affected long-term global
stress, physical health, and grades.
Aside from the intervention’s ability to illuminate the causal
relation between implicit theories and adjustment, the present
longitudinal field experiment is unique in several regards. First,
past implicit theories of personality interventions looked chiefly at
social outcomes, such as emotional and attributional reactions to
social exclusion (Yeager, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2011), aggressive retaliation (Yeager, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2013), or misconduct in school (Yeager, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2013). By
contrast, we test for wide-ranging effects on stress, health and
academic achievement. Second, in contrast to previous research,
the present study used a precise and light-touch intervention to
manipulate incremental theories. A past intervention used six
facilitated classroom workshops to alter adolescents’ implicit theories of personality (Yeager, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2013).
However, this past intervention involved many elements (e.g., lectures, discussion groups, skits). It is unknown whether a briefer
intervention that more precisely and efficiently communicates the
incremental theory could alter outcomes in the long term, with no
reinforcement.
In addition, no past control condition in an implicit theories of
personality experiment has taught a message about growth. Past
control conditions taught helpful skills (Yeager, Trzesniewski, &

7

Dweck, 2013) and/or delivered no message (Yeager et al., 2011;
Yeager, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2013). An important extension
of the present research is to rule out the possibility that any
optimistic message of growth—whether it addresses personality
traits or not— could promote positive outcomes across domains.
We compare an incremental theory of personality to an incremental theory about an important area that is thought to be unrelated to
responses to social exclusion.
Finally, we conducted this research during the first few weeks of
ninth grade. This is because of past theory and research demonstrating the recursive nature of social and academic life, with early
successes, failures, relationships and resources affecting later ones
(Garcia & Cohen, 2012; G. L. Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Yeager &
Walton, 2011). Indeed, Cook et al. (2012) conducted a brief
psychological intervention (a values affirmation) and manipulated
timing within the school year. These authors showed that the brief
intervention delivered early in the school year improved students’
grades significantly more than the same intervention delivered just
a few weeks later (also see meta-analytic evidence from Raudenbush, 1984). Building on this, the present intervention sought to
change implicit theories in the first few weeks of the first year of
high school, to slow or stop any possible negative recursive processes.

AQ: 12
AQ: 13

AQ: 14

Method
Participants. Study 2 was conducted in a school similar to the
one used in Study 1. Participants were all the ninth-grade students
enrolled in Algebra I at a high school in Northern California (N !
82), and so sample size was determined by the school setting. All
but four participants provided data at the long-term follow-up,
leaving N ! 78 for analysis. No other participants were excluded.
One percent of students were eligible for free or reduced-price
lunch. Participants were 44% White, 44% Asian American, and
12% Latino. In this school, only lower performing students took
Algebra I, with the majority of ninth graders taking Algebra II.
Hence this sample was academically at-risk relative to the school
population. It might more readily show the impact of an incremental theory intervention on their grades because they should be less
affected by range restrictions (i.e., students with all “A” grades
cannot improve).5
Procedure. The procedures were similar to those in Study 1. A
baseline survey was administered in the third week of the school year,
in September, as was the implicit theories of personality intervention.
One to 2 days later, negative reactions to exclusion due to the
Cyberball protocol and postintervention implicit theories were measured. A survey assessing global stress and health was administered in
May, and grades for the year were obtained from the registrar.
Unfortunately baseline levels of stress and health were not assessed.
The implicit theories of personality intervention was the only manipulation in this study (and in Study 3).
Intervention. The intervention procedure is described in
greater detail in the online supplement. Here, we provide an
overview.
5
Preliminary analyses of data from this study— but not analyses of the
dependent variables reported here—appear in a prior article (Study 3 in
Yeager, Miu, Powers, & Dweck, 2013).

Fn5

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

8

AQ: 15

Fn6

YEAGER ET AL.

As a preface to the intervention, during the first week of school,
Algebra I teachers gave an overview to both the experimental and
control groups of how the brain changes and learns. About 2 weeks
later, 1 week after the baseline survey, researchers came into the
classroom. They handed out envelopes containing either an experimental intervention or a control activity, which was randomly assigned at the individual level, with researchers blind to condition.
Students completed it silently during class time, and it took roughly
25 min. Importantly, teachers were kept blind to study hypotheses,
message content and students’ experimental conditions.
The experimental intervention (incremental theory of personality) presented information in support of the idea that people
have the potential to change and that therefore (a) if you are
excluded or victimized, it is not due to a fixed, personal
deficiency on your part, and (b) people who exclude or victimize you are not fixed, bad people but instead have complicated
motivations that are subject to change. Students read a brief
article summarizing actual neuroscience studies showing that
people’s behaviors are controlled by “thoughts and feelings in
their brains” and that such pathways in the brain can be
changed. Next, participants read three quotes purportedly written by upperclassmen who had previously read the same article.
The upperclassmen provided testimonials of how they used the
information discussed in the article when they encountered a
peer conflict. Finally, participants were asked to write their own
version of such a narrative to share with future ninth graders,
drawing on the examples they had just read from the upperclassmen or on their own experiences in high school or middle
school. As in past interventions (e.g., Yeager, Trzesniewski, &
Dweck, 2013), this is a “saying is believing” activity designed
to promote the internalization of the intervention message (see
E. Aronson, 1999; J. Aronson, Fried, & Good, 2002; Walton &
Cohen, 2011). After completing the one-time activity, it was not
mentioned again to students by researchers or teachers.
The control group activity was parallel but focused on the
malleability of athletic ability—a nonpersonality area that was not
thought to be as central to social adversity and therefore was not
predicted to have widespread effects during times of social adversity.6 As noted, this was done to eliminate the possibility that
simple optimism about the potential for growth in any important
area might account for our results. Although one way to test the
incremental theory of personality intervention would be to compare it to an entity theory intervention, this condition was precluded for obvious ethical reasons.
Experience of social exclusion. One to 2 days postintervention (depending on the class schedule), all students experienced
exclusion through the Cyberball protocol described in Study 1
and online. Research assistants administering the task were
blind to students’ experimental condition assignments. Five
students’ Cyberball data were not analyzed due to suspicion that
the Cyberball players were controlled by the computer—judgments that, as noted in Study 1, were made by coders blind to
condition assignment or other participant characteristics. In this
study and in Study 3, these judgments did not differ across
conditions.
Measures. The same measures of negative reactions to social
exclusion (i.e., stress, anxiety, and overall negative feelings about
the self), global psychological stress, and physical health, as described in Study 1 were again employed. In this study (and in

Study 3) we were able to obtain preintervention (eighth grade)
state test scores and combine these with preintervention grade
point averages so as to more completely control for prior differences in achievement. These were converted to z-scores and then
averaged. In addition, in the present study more grading periods
were available for analysis (three per semester, yielding six total
over the year, rather than only the final semester grades used in
Study 1). At each grading period, grades in the different subjects
demonstrated acceptable internal consistency reliability ("s #
.72).
As a first manipulation check, two coders, blind to experimental
hypotheses and to participant identities and characteristics, independently and reliably (Krippendorff’s " ! .85) judged whether
participants sufficiently answered the writing prompts in the intervention materials. This allowed us to assess whether the manipulation successfully elicited thinking that is in line with the incremental theory. When the coders disagreed, they were coached to
agreement by a third blind coder. As a second manipulation check,
the same implicit theories of personality measure as described in
Study 1 was administered in the baseline survey (1 week preintervention) and again after the Cyberball experience (one to 2 days
postintervention; "s # .78).

Results
Effectiveness of random assignment. There were no baseline
differences between the experimental and control groups in terms
of any variable we measured (see supplemental materials).
Manipulation check. We first investigated whether participants successfully read and processed the intervention materials.
The large majority of participants (97%) provided responses to the
intervention that were in line with the incremental theory. Specifically, when participants were asked to write about a time they felt
rejected or excluded and then explain to a peer how to use the
incremental theory in response to such an event, they wrote essays
such as those listed in Table 2.
The intervention also altered students’ reports of their implicit
theories. The experimental intervention led to lower postintervention entity theories of personality one to 2 days after compared to
students in the control group (Experimental M ! 2.39, SD ! 1.09;
Control M ! 2.86, SD ! 1.20), t(76) ! &2.05, p ! .04,
d ! &0.39, controlling for baseline theories.
Response to social adversity. Furthermore, replicating the
Study 1 correlational findings, students in the experimental condition reacted less negatively to the Cyberball exclusion one to 2
days after the intervention (Z-scored, unadjusted data: Experimental M ! &.22, SD ! .97; Control M ! .27, SD ! .92),
t(71) ! &2.24, p ! .03, d ! &0.52. Recall that, in this study and
throughout the article, means and standard deviations come from
raw data, while t-statistics come from a regression testing the
6
Testifying to the strength of the control intervention that focused on
athletic ability, females in the control significantly increased their likelihood of joining a sport in the Fall semester compared to those in the
incremental theory of personality treatment. There was no effect among
males and no omnibus effect. Including sports participation as a covariate
did not change any of our results, and sports participation did not predict
the key outcomes.

T2

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

IMPLICIT THEORIES, STRESS, HEALTH, AND ACHIEVEMENT

9

Table 2
Representative Quotes Written by Participants Who Were Taught an Incremental Theory of Personality
Study

Quotes

2

“All the people that are mean and hurtful to you are just missing out on a good friend they could’ve had. But with all that said people can
change and learn what they did and said are wrong. Just because someone is one way right now doesn’t mean they can’t change at all
in time. Because in reality they can change.”
“If someone was being picked on at school, I would tell its [sic] not going to last forever and it only hurts for a little while . . . if they feel
different or left out the person that they are now is not the person they will be in 10 years.”
“When we were starting the school year I went [to] where my friends hang out. Then they just looked at me and kept on talking . . . I felt
really left out especially because we were all really good friends in middle school . . . [Although] it may seem like your life is crashing
down, and that nothing will ever get better, it is not the end of the world. Your life will not be like this forever. . . . People can change.
It’s only your first day of school.”
“After all that [peer victimization] happened . . . I knew that they would one day change but I didn’t know when. . . . maybe they were
going through a hard time and they all just wanted to make themselves feel better. Or maybe they were back-stabbed by their old
friends and wanted to release their anger. I honestly don’t know but I made new friends and they are so nice! Don’t be afraid to make
new friends, they can change your way of thinking.”
“Understand that she could be going through some hard times in her life too. The problem isn’t always you. It could be her too. I felt
very out of place at the school I went to. But over time, I started to change, and people around me started to change too. After that
year, I felt right in place.”

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

3

Fn7

F1

significance of the treatment variable in a model with covariates.7
Overall, it appears that students read and processed the intervention, and it altered their immediate reactions to social exclusion,
conceptually replicating past findings (e.g., Yeager et al., 2011).
Building on these analyses, we turn to our primary question:
whether the effect of the intervention on responses to social
adversity generalizes to multiple domains of adjustment over the
first year of high school.
Global psychological stress, physical health, and academic
achievement. Extending the Study 1 findings, incremental theory condition participants reported significantly lower global stress
scores 8 months postintervention (Experimental condition M !
2.86, SD ! 0.69; Control M ! 3.21, SD ! 0.63), t(76) ! &2.53,
p ! .01, d ! &0.56. In addition, the incremental theory intervention improved reports of health (i.e., reduced reports of symptoms
of physical illness that impaired daily functioning) at the end of the
year (Experimental M ! 1.19, SD ! 1.21; Control M ! 1.76,
SD ! 1.32), t(76) ! &2.03, p ! .04, d ! &0.46.
We next examined effects on grades. The achievement of students in the two conditions did not differ before the intervention,
t(76) ! 0.08, ns (also see Figure 1 and online). However, the
incremental theory intervention led to higher grades over the
course of the year (Experimental condition M ! 2.47, SD ! .95;
Control M ! 2.12, SD ! 1.12), t(76) ! 2.11, p ! .037, d ! 0.34
(statistical test from the hierarchical linear model). Plotting the
grades over the year (see Figure 1) showed that the intervention
did not lead to rising grades so much as it slowed a decline in
grades (cf. G. L. Cohen et al., 2009; Finkel et al., in press). That
is, Figure 1 shows that in the months following the intervention,
control-condition students showed a steep decline in performance,
which is common for academically at-risk students during the
transition to high school (Benner, 2011). The incremental theory
intervention, however, softened the decline such that experimental
condition students better maintained their grades over the year.
This pattern of results is consistent with the notion that social and
academic processes are interwoven and build on each other during
difficult transition periods—and that appropriately timed psychological interventions can redirect interpretations of adversity and
set in motion more beneficial, self-reinforcing processes across

domains (see G. L. Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Cook et al., 2012;
Garcia & Cohen, 2012; Walton, in press; see Wilson, 2011).8
An important predictor of later achievement is passing Algebra
I by ninth grade. This is a crucial “gateway” course for high school
graduation. Students who have to repeat the course are highly
unlikely to graduate (e.g., Silver, Saunders, & Zarate, 2008; also
see Langenkamp, 2011). We found that 14% of control-condition
students received a D or below in both semesters of Algebra I (the
level of performance at which students were encouraged by teachers to repeat the course), compared to only 2% of experimental
condition students, logistic regression (2(1) ! 3.83, p ! .05, odds
ratio (OR) ! .13.
Moderation by baseline implicit theories? Past implicit theories research (e.g., Blackwell et al., 2007) has found evidence in
the direction of larger treatment effects among those with an entity
theory at baseline. This is sensible because those who hold an
entity theory presumably have more to gain from learning an
incremental theory than do those who already hold an incremental
theory. Therefore our hypothesis was that the incremental theory
of personality intervention would have the largest effects among
those who began the year with an entity theory. In separate
regressions, one for each outcome, we tested for Experimental
Condition ' Baseline implicit theories interactions. Surprisingly,
in this study, none were significant (ts # 1, ps # .3). That is,
although we had predicted stronger effects among those who may
need the incremental theory the most, it appeared, at least in this
sample, that students across the implicit theories continuum benefited equally from the incremental message.
7
The overall pattern of significance was not altered when analyses were
reconducted with no covariates in the model (see regression tables in the
online supplement).
8
The effect of the intervention was not moderated by baseline levels of
peer victimization. In separate regression analyses, the Intervention ' Peer
Victimization interactions were not significant at p $ .05: When predicting
year-end global stress or health (ts $ 1, ps # .4); when predicting grades,
b ! .25, t(76) ! 1.80, p ! .08. Unlike in Study 1, in every case the
nonsignificant moderation was in the theoretically expected direction of
greater long-term effects for students reporting more peer victimization at
baseline.

Fn8

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

10

YEAGER ET AL.

3.0

Grade Point Average

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

2.7

2.4

2.1

Intervention

Condition
Incremental Theory of Personality
Control

1.8

End of
8th Grade

1

2

End of
Semester 1
of 9th Grade

Grading Period

4

5

End of
Semester 2
of 9th Grade

Figure 1. Effect of incremental theory of personality intervention on academic performance across the
transition to high school (Study 2). Lines represent raw means for a given marking period, drawn with a LOESS
smoothing curve. Eighth-grade performance is a composite of grade point average and state test scores (with test
scores rescaled to have the same mean and standard deviation of the eighth-grade point average).

Mediation. Negative reactions to Cyberball exclusion significantly predicted year-end levels of global stress (r ! .28, p !
.02), and mediated the effect of the treatment on stress (b ! –.09,
95% CI –.21, –.002). Next, negative reactions to Cyberball exclusion did not significantly predict year-end health (r ! .21, p !
.10). While Cyberball reactions did not significantly mediate the
effect of the treatment effect on health (b ! –.11, 95% CI –.34,
.03), it is possible that this latter mediation failed to reach statistical significance due to lower statistical power than in Study 1.
Indeed, the standardized indirect effect in the present study (% !
.045), was nearly identical to the same indirect effect in Study 1
(% ! .044).
Analysis suggested that the effects of the intervention on grades
were partially mediated by Cyberball reactions. In a hierarchical
linear model, negative reactions to Cyberball at the beginning of
the school year predicted grades over the year (% ! .17, p ! .03),
controlling for eighth-grade achievement. Next, controlling for
Cyberball reactions reduced the treatment effect to nonsignificance
(p ! .13). We then conducted a “2-2-1” mediation model (Zhang,
Zyphur, & Preacher, 2009). In the present mediational model, the
“Level 2” variable (implicit theories intervention) predicts another
“Level 2” variable (Cyberball reactions), which in turn predicts the
“Level 1” variable (grades). Because there is not a standard package to implement this model in R, we wrote a custom bootstrapping program. When doing this, there was a significant indirect

effect of the treatment on grades through Cyberball reactions (% !
.04, bias-corrected and accelerated 95% CI: .029, .049). In sum,
when looking broadly across Studies 1 and 2, in five out of six
cases (four of which were significantly different from zero at p $
.05) the mediational data were consistent with the idea that implicit
theories could affect overall adjustment across domains by altering
reactions to social exclusion.

Study 3
Study 2 demonstrated the causality of the processes documented
in Study 1 and showed that it is possible for an intervention in one
domain to have effects that ripple into various domains of functioning during adolescence. The present study was a replication
conducted a year later in a different school— one of the poorestperforming and lowest-income in California. Many researchers
have recently emphasized the importance of exact replications for
building a psychological science that maximizes reproducible findings (Schimmack, 2012; Simmons, Nelson, & Simonsohn, 2011).
This study was designed to do this.
At the same time, many factors could affect the likelihood of a
replication in a new and different context. As Lewin’s (1952)
theory maintained, any psychological strategy to promote behavior
change is embedded in a “tension system” of factors promoting
and hindering behavior (G. L. Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Ross &

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

IMPLICIT THEORIES, STRESS, HEALTH, AND ACHIEVEMENT

AQ: 16

Nisbett, 1991). Often, psychological interventions such as that
tested here assume that the system was poised for change, provided
that thinking was redirected. When that is not the case, divergent
results may emerge. Stated differently, brief psychological interventions that produce widespread and lasting treatment effects
likely do so through a number of different, interconnected mediators that depend critically on context (cf. Pennebaker & Chung,
2011). When these intermediary processes are not present, or are
not effectively altered, then an intervention might not produce
either immediate or sustained change (G. L. Cohen & Sherman,
2014).
Study 2 was conducted in a nonpoor, largely nonminority context, in which students on average experienced high quality instruction and are presumed to be safer in their neighborhoods
relative to youth in less advantaged contexts. Yet perhaps in such
a context social exclusion is a primary source of stress, meaning
that a psychological intervention to take the edge off these experiences could transfer across multiple domains of functioning.
However, many adolescents live in different settings—settings in
which social adversity involving peers in school is just one stressor
among many. It is unknown whether similar effects would be
observed for youth with greater environmental stressors—for instance, racial minority youth living in high-poverty, high-violence
neighborhoods with historically low levels of educational attainment. Perhaps the effect would be drowned out by competing
adversities. Then again, perhaps social adversity matters as much
or more in these contexts, and so an incremental theory intervention would have similar or larger effects. Altogether, the present
study was designed to push the boundaries of the effect of implicit
theories of personality to a new population, as an initial foray into
examining the generality of the effect.
Finally, Study 3 involved exploratory analyses to extend theory
about the role of implicit theories of personality in affecting the
development of views about the self during adolescence. Following some recent research, we focus on students’ construals of
themselves (Sherman et al., 2013). Key to our theory is research
suggesting that those with more of an incremental theory of
personality place greater emphasis on behaviors than on traits,
because behaviors are more dynamic, context-sensitive and malleable (e.g., Chiu, Hong, & Dweck, 1997; also see Molden &
Dweck, 2006). Perhaps students receiving the intervention would
be more likely to see themselves in terms of actions as opposed to
labels—as “doing” rather than “being.” To explore this we took
advantage of a feature of the Study 3 baseline and follow-up
surveys: a new warm-up question that asked participants to write
about what people in school thought of them. This open-ended
question was likely to elicit students’ construals of themselves and
their social image. We coded students’ responses using the LIWC
textual analysis software (Pennebaker, Francis, & Booth, 2007)
and analyzed the use of common verbs (as an index of seeing
oneself as “doing” rather than “being”).

11

leadership was strong and progressive, and so perhaps there was
untapped potential for student motivation and learning. To mirror
the Study 2 sample, students in Algebra I were invited to participate and parental consent and assent were obtained from nearly all
(95%).9 Forty-nine percent of the participants were female; 77%
were Hispanic or Latino, 10% were White, 5% were Black or
African American, and 8% indicated some other race or ethnicity.
A majority spoke Spanish in the home. As in Study 2, many
students in the school experienced social adversities: 70% of
students reported at least some form of physical, verbal, or socialrelational aggression on a baseline survey in the first month of the
school year. Some students could not be reached for the year-end
survey, and so degrees of freedom varied across analyses.
Procedures. We made every effort to conduct a precise replication, although we had to adapt to the realities of the school.
First, many students’ English skills were poor, so we provided
students the option of reading the intervention in Spanish (which
had been translated by native Spanish speakers). Seven percent
chose to do it in Spanish (this was no different by condition and
did not have an effect on experimental outcomes). The intervention
was delivered by computer rather than on paper (which was done
in Study 2) so as to enable the option to complete the activity in
Spanish or use web-based translation software. Next, the school
was unable to provide an additional class session for the Cyberball
experience of exclusion. Therefore, the measure of reactions to
social adversity and the manipulation check survey items were
administered immediately after the intervention, rather than 1–2
days later as in Study 2. Finally, all data collection (and the
intervention) occurred in nonacademic classes such as physical
education or art.
As in Studies 1 and 2, some students (19) suspected that the peer
Cyberball players were being controlled by the computer (as
judged by reliable, independent coders blind to hypotheses or
condition assignments; this did not differ by condition), and so
their reactions to Cyberball were not analyzed (although their data
for the remaining dependent variables were analyzed).
Measures. All measures in Study 3 were identical in terms of
both content and timing of assessment to those administered in
Study 2, except for (a) the change noted above in the timing of the
Cyberball experience and manipulation check, (b) the addition of
a “warm-up” question that was useful for assessing self-construals,
and (c) only end-of-semester grades were available for the two
semesters and not the two additional intermediate grades per
semester that were available in Study 2.
Self-construals. The first question on the September preintervention survey and May postintervention survey was this: “In
general, what do people in your grade at school think about you?
Type as many or as few words that people in general might think
about you in the box below.” Ninety percent of students wrote a
response, with an average number of 10 words. Responses to this
question were first spell-checked to correct common errors and
increase match rates for the LIWC software. The theoretically

Method
Participants. Participants (N ! 150) were ninth-grade students attending one of the lowest-performing high schools in
California according to test scores. Seventy-three percent of students in the school were eligible for free or reduced-price lunch, an
indicator of low socioeconomic status. Despite this, the school

9
Students were excluded if they had a disability and were placed in
special education (e.g., dyslexia or autism), because these students would
not be expected to successfully self-administer the theory-change materials
in the time allotted, and because their grades were not comparable (teachers
provided grades for those students based on an individualized education
plan, not based on mastery of grade-level content standards).

Fn9

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

12

YEAGER ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

relevant linguistic category was common verbs (e.g., walk, went,
see; not auxiliary verbs such as am, will, or have). Examples of
statements with common verbs were “I think outside the box” or “I
know for a fact a few people do not like me, which honestly
doesn’t bug me at all” or “I get my work done-most of the time”
or “I try to be nice to people.” A dichotomous variable was
created, such that participants received a value of 1 if they used
any word in a category and 0 if they did not. The base rate was
65%. The other standard LIWC dictionaries were also applied (see
www.liwc.net/descriptiontable1.php), and exploratory analyses are
reported in the supplemental materials.

Results
Effectiveness of random assignment. There were no baseline
differences between the experimental and control groups in terms
of any variable we measured (see online supplement).
Manipulation check. As in Study 2, independent, reliable
coders (Krippendorff’s " ! .88) judged that the overwhelming
majority of participants (93%) wrote acceptable responses to the
prompt asking participants to support the incremental theory of
personality with an example from their own lives. Some examples
written by participants are in Table 2.
Unexpectedly, unlike Study 2 or past studies (Yeager et al.,
2013) the intervention did not measurably alter students’ responses
to the manipulation check measure assessing implicit theories of
personality (Experimental M ! 3.14, SD ! 1.22; Control M !
3.07, SD ! 1.32), t(150) ! 0.52, p ! .60, d ! &0.08, controlling
for baseline theories. (As noted earlier, throughout this study
means and standard deviations are from raw data while statistical tests come from regression models.) We believe this null
finding is likely due to the difference in experimental procedure
noted above (i.e., with the implicit theory measure coming right
after the Cyberball experience), but we are unsure of the mechanism. Perhaps adolescents showed greater reactance because
they had just viewed persuasive materials, or perhaps the Cyberball experience differentially changed the meaning of the
scale choices.
Response to social adversity. Most important, however, we
replicated the Study 2 finding that participants in the experimental
condition reacted to the Cyberball exclusion significantly less
negatively than did those in the control condition (as in Studies
1–2, this log-transformed measure was z-scored: Experimental
M ! –.22, SD ! 1.03; Control M ! .07, SD ! .96), t(123) !
–2.02, p ! .045, d ! &0.31. Thus, given the effect on immediate
interpretations of social adversity—and given students’ openended responses, which clearly demonstrate that participants read
and processed the incremental theory message—we proceeded to
test whether the intervention again generalized its effects to overall
stress, health and grades.
Stress and physical health. The findings related to stress and
health were replicated (Table 1). Eight months postintervention,
intervention condition participants reported reduced global psychological stress (Experimental M ! 2.68, SD ! .60; Control M !
2.91, SD ! .66), t(135) ! –2.14, p ! .03, d ! &0.37, and better
physical health (i.e., fewer complaints of physical illness that
impaired daily functioning; Experimental M ! 0.89, SD ! 1.06;
Control M ! 1.43, SD ! 1.99), t(133) ! –2.59, p ! .01,
d ! &0.46. As in Study 2, none of these findings were moderated

by baseline implicit theories (ts $ 1, ps # .7) or reports of peer
victimization (ts $ 1.3, ps # .17), although all of these were in the
theoretically expected direction (greater effects for victimized students and those with more of an entity theory at baseline). Of
course, the large majority of adolescents reported at least some
peer victimization, and so perhaps all participants faced sufficient
worries about being excluded by peers and therefore could benefit
from the incremental theory. Overall, the effect of the incremental
theory intervention on stress and health replicated even in a lowincome, urban public school—a population thought to have many
more environmental stressors and threats to health than the Study
2 population.
Academic achievement. The incremental theory intervention
significantly improved grades among those who began the school
year with more of an entity theory and not among those who
already held an incremental theory. There was no significant main
effect of the intervention on grades, b ! .04, t(149) ! 0.25, p !
.80, d ! 0.03, but the expected Experimental Condition ' Baseline implicit theories interaction (which was not found in Study 2)
emerged, t(149) ! 2.56, p ! .01. To interpret this result, which
was obtained using the continuous implicit theories measure, we
examined the simple effects within substantively meaningful
groups: those who had an entity theory of personality at baseline
(who “agreed,” on average, with the entity theory scale, i.e., #3.5)
and those who did not (!3.5 on the entity theory scale). Among
baseline entity theorists, there was a large and significant treatment
effect on grades (Experimental M ! 2.29 on the 0 – 4-point scale,
SD ! 1.23; Control M ! 1.23, SD ! 1.22), t(40) ! 2.71, p ! .009,
d ! 0.80. Among those who did not have an entity theory at
baseline there was no effect of the treatment on grades (Experimental M ! 2.01, SD ! 1.33; Control M ! 2.05, SD ! 1.25),
t(106) ! – 0.75, p ! .45, d ! 0.12. There was no significant
moderation by baseline peer victimization in the full sample or
either subsample of students with an entity or incremental
theory at baseline (ts $ 1, ps # .5). Thus grades were improved
by a great deal for a theoretically and practically important,
albeit small, subgroup of participants with an entity theory at
baseline.
We replicated the effect of the intervention on course failures in
Algebra I among those with an entity theory at baseline. In that
subsample, 42% of control-condition students received a D or
below in both semesters of Algebra I, compared to only 19% of
experimental condition students: logistic regression (2(1) ! 5.36,
p ! .02, OR ! .32.
Mediation. Looking only at the data from Study 3, negative
reactions to Cyberball exclusion did not significantly predict yearend global stress (r ! .13, p ! .14), or grades, % ! .03, p ! .81
but did predict health (r ! .21, p ! .02) and did not significantly
mediate the effect of the intervention on these outcomes at the p $
.05 level (Stress: b ! –.01, 95% CI: –.07, .04; Health: b ! –.07,
95% CI: –.20, .01; Grades: b ! –.06, 95% CI: –.11, .01). Some of
this discrepancy may be due to statistical power. To examine this
further, we maximized power by stacking data from Studies 2 and
3 into a single data set (see Cooper & Patall, 2009, for a review of
raw data meta-analysis; also see Schimmack, 2012). We then
conducted moderated mediation tests (Imai, Keele, et al., 2010) to
assess whether the indirect effects were significant overall and
whether the indirect effects were significantly different across the
two studies. In the stacked data set with Studies 2 and 3 combined,

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

IMPLICIT THEORIES, STRESS, HEALTH, AND ACHIEVEMENT

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Fn10

Cyberball exclusion significantly mediated treatment effects on
long-term stress, –.02, 95% CI: –.03, –.01, corresponding to 8% of
the direct effect—a small but statistically detectable amount. Cyberball reactions also significantly mediated treatment effects on
long-term health (b ! –.08, 95% CI: –.12, –.04), corresponding to
35% of the direct effect. Moderated mediation tests comparing
Study 2 to Study 3 did not approach significance (p ! .30 and p!
.76, respectively). Thus, when using all of the available data,
Studies 2 and 3 support theory regarding the role of differential
reactions to social exclusion as one mediator of long-term stress
and health effects. This closely parallels the Study 1 correlational
findings. For grades, the mediational findings across studies were
more inconsistent.10
Self-construals. The design of Study 3 allowed for an analysis
of intervention effects on self-construals, assessed via subtle features of the text of students’ self-descriptions coded by the LIWC
program. The data supported the hypothesis that learning more of
the incremental theory might lead students to see themselves more
in terms of actions as opposed to labels. In the experimental group,
74% of students used a common verb in their May selfdescriptions, compared to 56% of control students, (2(1) ! 5.53,
p ! .02. These groups did not differ at baseline on this metric,
(2(1) ! 1.59, p ! .21, and controlling for initial levels in a logistic
regression did not eliminate the statistical significance of the May
condition effect on verb-use (in the covariate model, p ! .03).
Summary. The core of the Study 2 findings were replicated in
this highly different context with a larger sample. A brief intervention teaching an incremental theory of personality reduced
immediate negative reactions to social exclusion, and, 8 months
postintervention, reduced overall life stress and reports of physical
health problems. In addition, the intervention improved overall
grades among those expected to benefit the most—students with
an entity theory of personality at baseline. Furthermore, a textual
analysis of students’ self-descriptions suggests the intervention
may have seeped into students’ construals of themselves. If these
linguistic analyses are confirmed in future studies, this may lead to
new avenues for understanding the long-term maintenance of the
treatment effect.

General Discussion
The present correlational and experimental studies support a
novel social-cognitive account of what causes some people to
adjust better than others during a developmental transition that is
fraught with social adversities. Study 1 showed that adolescents
just beginning high school reacted to social adversity more negatively when they interpreted it through the lens of an entity theory
of personality, an implicit theory that leads students to see social
adversity as stemming from traits that cannot change (Erdley et al.,
1997; Yeager et al., 2011). And perhaps because the stresses of
social adversity accumulate over time, an entity theory predicted
greater overall stress, poorer health, and worse grades at the end of
the school year.
Given that an entity theory seems to be a psychological
liability during the transition to high school, we sought to
determine whether delivering a brief but theoretically informed
intervention to reduce entity theories could promote adjustment.
Studies 2 and 3 showed that exposing adolescents to an incremental theory of personality—the idea that people’s traits in

13

high school are not fixed throughout life but have the potential
to change— could alter responses to immediate social adversity
and reduce reports of global stress and physical illness at the
end of the school year. These findings replicated in a relatively
advantaged high school sample and in a low-income, lowperforming high school. Interestingly, the intervention had
these lasting effects with no explicit reinforcement or mention
of the incremental theory after the initial session.
The incremental theory intervention reported in Studies 2 and
3 also improved English, math, and science grades over the
school year. In Study 2 this was true for all students. In Study
3 this was true for students who began the school year with
more of an entity theory, a finding that is consistent with
theoretical expectations. In each study, the intervention also
affected more specific academic outcomes such as the pass rate
in Algebra I, an important predictor of whether students will go
on to graduate high school and attend college (Silver et al.,
2008). The overall pattern of results suggests that implicit
theories of personality can tap into a psychological hub during
the transition to high school, resulting in effects that benefit
multiple domains of development— even domains that, at first
glance, seem remote to beliefs about personality traits.
The present findings add to past research in several ways. First,
previous research has shown that implicit theories of intelligence
can affect academic performance (e.g., Blackwell et al., 2007). But
no research had shown that implicit theories of personality relate
to academic performance— either correlationally or experimentally. Next, previous interventions have taught an incremental
theory of personality and affected social outcomes, such as realworld aggression in response to peer provocation (e.g., Yeager et
al., 2013). However, the present research is among the first to
show that an intervention addressing a belief about the social self
could extend to the variables of stress, health, and academic
performance during difficult adolescent transitions (also see Walton & Cohen, 2011).
Next, much research has documented an association between
stress or health on the one hand and self-relevant cognitions and
emotions such as self-blame or shame on the other (e.g., Dickerson
et al., 2011). Yet no research had examined the link between stress
or health and the underlying beliefs—in the present case, implicit
theories—that have been shown to give rise to self-blame or shame
(Erdley et al., 1997; Yeager et al., 2011).
More generally, a large number of past adolescent interventions
have found it difficult to produce cross-domain effects on stress,
health, and achievement, and this is often been interpreted as
meaning that larger, more time-intensive, and earlier interventions
are required (e.g., Heckman & Kautz, in press). Yet this interpretation perhaps undervalues the importance of psychological construals of adversity during difficult life transitions. The present
research illustrates that a precise theory of the beliefs that give rise
10
Unfortunately the Imai, Keele, et al. (2010) program cannot test
moderated multilevel mediation. Yet it seems likely that significant moderation by sample would occur given the robust mediation in Study 2 and
the effect in the opposite direction in the present study, Study 3. At the
same time, recall that the mediation effect for grades was only tested within
the smaller subsample of roughly 45 students who began the year with
more of an entity theory. And so statistical power to detect mediation for
that outcome was dramatically reduced.

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

14

YEAGER ET AL.

to problematic interpretations of difficulty can, during developmental periods rife with social hardship, have counterintuitively
large and lasting effects across a number of domains of human
functioning (see G. L. Cohen & Sherman, 2014).

Understanding the Lasting Effects of
Brief Interventions

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

AQ: 17

The present intervention used tactics developed in a long line of
past brief social-psychological interventions that affected consequential outcomes over time (see G. L. Cohen et al., 2009; Pennebaker, 2004; Ross & Nisbett, 1991; Sherman et al., 2013; see
Walton, in press; Wilson, 2006; Yeager & Walton, 2011). Wilson
et al. (2002) showed that a brief attributional retraining intervention could improve struggling students’ grades at the end of the
following semester, and Walton and Cohen (2011) showed that a
brief (1-hr) social belonging intervention could improve minority
college students’ academic achievement 3.5 years postintervention
(also see G. L. Cohen et al., 2009; Sherman et al., 2013). These
studies have many elements in common with the present research.
Each starts with a theory about how interpretations of a commonly
recurring adversity—low grades, experiences of being left out or
negatively stereotyped— could feed into a cycle of stress and
academic performance. Next, these interventions seek to alter the
meaning of these adversities—for instance, preventing the conclusion that struggling in school means you are “dumb” or “don’t
belong,” or, in the present research, that being picked on means
you are a “loser” and that the aggressors are “bullies.” Crucially,
these interventions are delivered at times when adversities were
predicted to recur, precisely when changes in the meaning of
adversity can be critical for setting in motion the processes that
sustain change and maximize its impact (Cook et al., 2012). Of
course, an important future direction is to directly examine the
optimal timing of the present intervention through further experimentation, in addition to broader efforts to develop theory and data
about recursive processes that affect development (G. L. Cohen &
Sherman, 2014; Yeager & Walton, 2011).

Strengths, Weaknesses, and Future Directions
Several features of our studies lead to confidence in our conclusions. Studies 2 and 3 were conducted in two highly different
school sites— one low-income and urban and one higher income
and suburban—and we found evidence for the relation between
implicit theories of personality and overall adjustment in both.
This supports the generalizability of the direct effects, at least in
these two different settings, acknowledging that it is unknown how
similar these schools are to urban and suburban schools in general.
Importantly, justification for causal inferences within these schools
was clear. The experimental intervention was double-blind, meaning that teachers (and students) were unaware of assignment to
groups and to hypotheses regarding stress, health or achievement,
preventing them from treating experimental and control students
differentially on the basis of condition assignments. Moreover, the
implicit theories of personality intervention were compared to a
control group that also learned a positive and optimistic message
about growth, which controls for the simple placebo effect of
getting an uplifting message. It therefore adds to previous implicit
theories of personality studies that have not done this (such as
Yeager et al., 2011, 2013).

Still, the present research is not without limitations. As with
many findings in psychology, we do not fully understand the set of
conditions required to obtain the effects documented here. While it
is helpful that the findings replicated in very different school
settings, it is also true that the research team held a number of
procedural details relatively constant across the two experiments
that may or may not have affected the results. This involves factors
such as timing during the school year (the first few weeks; Cook
et al., 2012), keeping students blind to the persuasive purpose of
the materials, piloting and customizing the intervention and assessments, and procedures to ensure students were minimally
distracted when completing the materials. To the extent that future
studies might alter these, effect sizes might differ. Effect sizes
might also vary when contextual factors that produced the sustained treatment effect are not present (cf. Lewin, 1952), as may be
the case when conducting these interventions in new school settings. Altogether, the boundary conditions of the effects have not
yet been mapped out and thoughtful replication efforts may help
document these.
The present findings may also lead to future lines of research.
First, the mechanisms that sustained the effect of the intervention
until the end of the year could be further explored. One explanation
is that the intervention produced lasting changes in adolescents’
interpretations of social adversity. Indeed, the exploratory linguistic analyses of self-construals presented in Study 3 provide evidence consistent with this possibility (also see analyses of lasting
changes in interpretations of social adversity in Study 2 in the
online supplement). A second explanation, however, is that the
intervention’s effects on reactions to adversity might “wear off,”
but only after they have set in motion positive recursive social and
academic processes that reinforce themselves through their repetition (cf. G. L. Cohen et al., 2009; Finkel et al., in press; Sherman
et al., 2013). Perhaps treated students, by reacting with less stress,
anxiety and negative self-feelings following early social exclusion, were more resilient when making friends, leading them to
have more stable social networks. These social supports may
have reduced stress levels and improved health and grades over
time (see, e.g., Walton, Logel, Peach, Spencer, & Zanna, 2013;
also see Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008). Future research with more
diverse assessments from multiple informants could more fully
track these potential processes.
All participants in the experimental studies were exposed to
Cyberball ostracism following the incremental theory intervention
to test the hypothesis that responses to Cyberball would mediate
long-term effects. However it is possible that exposure to this
social adversity itself could have facilitated the longitudinal treatment effects by allowing students to “practice” their new, more
hopeful way of thinking in the short term, before the incremental
theory message faded. Indeed, past intervention studies testing the
effects of values affirmation (Cook et al., 2012; Sherman et al.,
2013), attribution retraining (Wilson et al., 2002), and emotional
reappraisal (Jamieson, Mendes, Blackstock, & Schmader, 2010)
have used an analogous procedure of having a challenge or adversity immediately follow the delivery of a brief psychological
intervention. Like these past studies, we did not directly test
whether this feature of our design facilitated the long-term treatment effects. Perhaps this was not necessary because high school
could provide enough stressful experiences; the experience of
Cyberball may be redundant with the real-world exclusion teen-

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

IMPLICIT THEORIES, STRESS, HEALTH, AND ACHIEVEMENT

AQ: 18
AQ:18,
19

agers face. If so, then teens might have the opportunity to utilize
their new implicit theory whether an immediate social adversity
experience is provided by researchers or not.
Our research relied on self-reports to assess stress and health. It
is reassuring that the relation between implicit theories, stress, and
health both matched theoretical predictions and replicated across
three different schools. Nevertheless, future research might supplement these self-reports by assessing the relation of implicit
theories to biological indicators of stress following social adversity, such as levels of cortisol (see Dickerson & Zoccola, in press),
as well as more objective and comprehensive measures of physical
health.
Last, future research should assess the temporal relation between changes in stress and changes in achievement and health.
We believe it is possible and even likely that the intervention, in
softening interpretations of social exclusion, altered levels of overall stress, which in turn affected learning and academic performance. Indeed, in supplemental analyses not reported in the text,
we found that the effect of implicit theories on grades over the year
was significantly mediated by year-end levels of overall stress in
all three studies. However, due to the timing of our assessments
(stress was assessed in May, grades over the entire year), such
mediational analyses cannot truly illuminate the direction of the
relation between global life stress and either grades or health. An
alternative possibility is that by affecting early levels of stress, the
interventions improved grades and health, which in turn affected
year-end levels of stress, in a recursive process that strengthened
through its repetition (cf. G. L. Cohen et al., 2009; Cook et al.,
2012; Finkel et al., in press; Sherman et al., 2013). Testifying to
the interconnectedness of these outcomes, Knack et al. (2011)
showed that stress reactivity following peer victimization predicted later health problems, while Nishina and Juvonen (2005)
showed that the low grades and absenteeism among victimized
teens could be explained in part by physical health complaints (see
Juvonen & Graham, 2014). It will be interesting and important in
future research to understand these possible reciprocal relations.

Conclusion
As we noted at the outset, a common idea in American society
is that being labeled “cool” or a “nerd” early in high school defines
a person forever after, regardless of the changes they may make
later. Our research shows that many teens are hearing this message
loud and clear, and it is undermining their resilience.
Of course, not all people think this way. For instance, Winnie
Holzman, the creator of the iconic show about high school, My
So-Called Life (Herskovitz, Zwick, & Holzman, 2007), said (as
summarized by Senior, 2013):
“In high school we become pretty convinced that we know what
reality is: We know who looks down on us, who is above us, exactly
who our friends and our enemies are.” The truth of the matter, is that
we really have no clue. “What seems like unshakable reality is
basically just a story we learned to tell ourselves.” (p. 5)

Consistent with this notion, our research shows that adolescents
can learn to tell themselves a different story, a story in which
people have the potential to change. And when they do, they show
better adjustment across the board: lower stress, better health, and
higher grades. Going forward, it will be important for researchers,

15

educators, parents, and media outlets to find ways to emphasize
this message of the human potential for change.

References
Abelson, R. P. (1985). A variance explanation paradox: When a little is a
lot. Psychological Bulletin, 97, 129 –133. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.97.1
.129
Aronson, E. (1999). The power of self-persuasion. American Psychologist,
54, 875– 884. doi:10.1037/h0088188
Aronson, J., Fried, C., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the effects of stereotype threat on African American college students by shaping theories of
intelligence. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 113–125.
doi:10.1006/jesp.2001.1491
Barber, B. K., & Olsen, J. A. (2004). Assessing the transitions to middle
and high school. Journal of Adolescent Research, 19, 3–30. doi:10.1177/
0743558403258113
Bates, D. M. (2010). lme4: Mixed-effects modeling with R. Retrieved from
http://lme4.r-forge.r-project.org/book/
Beck, A. T. (1967). Depression: Clinical, experimental and theoretical
aspects. New York, NY: Hoeber Medical Division, Harper & Row.
Beer, J. S. (2002). Implicit self-theories of shyness. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 83, 1009 –1024. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.83.4
.1009
Benner, A. D. (2011). The transition to high school: Current knowledge,
future directions. Educational Psychology Review, 23, 299 –328. doi:
10.1007/s10648-011-9152-0
Birnbaum, D., Deeb, I., Segall, G., Ben-Eliyahu, A., & Diesendruck, G.
(2010). The development of social essentialism: The case of Israeli
children’s inferences about Jews and Arabs. Child Development, 81,
757–777. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2010.01432.x
Blackwell, L. S., Trzesniewski, K., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Implicit
theories of intelligence predict achievement across an adolescent transition: A longitudinal study and an intervention. Child Development, 78,
246 –263. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2007.00995.x
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The ecology of human development: Experiments by nature and design. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Burnette, J. L., O’Boyle, E., VanEpps, E. M., Pollack, J. M., & Finkel, E. J.
(2013). Mindsets matter: A meta-analytic review of implicit theories and
self-regulation. Psychological Bulletin, 139, 655–701. doi:10.1037/
a0029531
Cacioppo, J. T., & Patrick, W. (2008). Loneliness: Human nature and the
need for social connection. New York, NY: Norton.
Cairns, R. B., & Cairns, B. D. (1994). Lifelines and risks: Pathways of
youth in our time. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Chan, A., & Poulin, F. (2007). Monthly changes in composition of friendship networks in early adolescence. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 53, 578 –
602. doi:10.1353/mpq.2008.0000
Chen, Z., DeWall, C. N., Poon, K.-T., & Chen, E.-W. (2012). When
destiny hurts: Implicit theories of relationships moderate aggressive
responses to ostracism. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48,
1029 –1036. doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2012.04.002
Chiu, C., Dweck, C. S., Tong, J. Y., & Fu, J. H. (1997). Implicit theories
and conceptions of morality. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 923–940. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.73.5.923
Chiu, C. Y., Hong, Y., & Dweck, C. S. (1997). Lay dispositionism and
implicit theories of personality. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 19 –30. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.73.1.19
Cialdini, R., & Paluck, E. L. (in press). Field research methods. In H. T.
Reis, & C. M. Judd (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in personality
AQ: 20
and social psychology. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Cohen, G. L., & Garcia, J. (2008). Identity, belonging and achievement: A
model, interventions, implications. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 17, 365–369. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8721.2008.00607.x

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

16

YEAGER ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaugns, V., Apfel, N., & Brzustoski, P.
(2009). Recursive processes in self-affirmation: Intervening to close the
minority achievement gap. Science, 324, 400 – 403. doi:10.1126/science
.1170769
Cohen, G. L., & Prinstein, M. J. (2006). Peer contagion of aggression and
health-risk behavior among adolescent males: An experimental investigation of effects on public conduct and private attitudes. Child Development, 77, 967–983. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2006.00913.x
Cohen, G. L., & Sherman, D. (2014). The psychology of change: Selfaffirmation and social psychological intervention. Annual Review of
Psychology, 65, 333–371. doi:10.1146/annurev-psych-010213-115137
Cohen, S., Kamarck, T., & Mermelstein, R. (1983). A global measure of
perceived stress. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 24, 385–396.
doi:10.2307/2136404
Cook, J. E., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (2012).
Chronic threat and contingent belonging: Protective benefits of values
affirmation on identity development. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 102, 479 – 496. doi:10.1037/a0026312
Cooper, H., & Patall, E. A. (2009). The relative benefits of meta-analysis
conducted with individual participant data versus aggregated data. Psychological Methods, 14, 165–176. doi:10.1037/a0015565
Crosnoe, R. (2011). Fitting in, standing out: Navigating the social challenges of high school to get an education. New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511793264
Dailey, K. (2010, December 16). The legacy of high school cliques: How
the labels we get as teenagers shape the rest of our lives, and why social
networking and the economy are changing the way a generation deals
with those early stereotypes. Newsweek. Retrieved from http://www
.newsweek.com/can-you-ever-escape-those-high-school-labels-69097
Dickerson, S. S., Gruenewald, T. L., & Kemeny, M. E. (2011). Physiological effects of social threat: Implications for health. In J. Cacioppo &
J. Decety (Eds.), Handbook of social neuroscience (pp. 787– 803). New
York, NY: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/
9780195342161.013.0052
AQ: 21 Dickerson, S. S., & Zoccola, P. M. (in press). Cortisol responses to social
exclusion. In C. N. DeWall (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of social
exclusion. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Diesendruck, G., & haLevi, H. (2006). The role of language, appearance,
and culture in children’s social category based induction. Child Development, 77, 539 –553. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2006.00889.x
Erdley, C., Cain, K., Loomis, C., Dumas-Hines, F., & Dweck, C. S. (1997).
The relations among children’s social goals, implicit personality theories
and response to social failure. Developmental Psychology, 33, 263–272.
doi:10.1037/0012-1649.33.2.263
Erdley, C., & Dweck, C. S. (1993). Children’s implicit theories as predictors of their social judgments. Child Development, 64, 863– 878. doi:
10.2307/1131223
Faris, R., & Felmlee, D. (2011). Status struggles: Network centrality and
gender segregation in same- and cross-gender aggression. American
Sociological Review, 76, 48 –73. doi:10.1177/0003122410396196
Finkel, E. J., Burnette, J. L., & Scissors, L. E. (2007). Vengefully ever
after: Destiny beliefs, state attachment anxiety, and forgiveness. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 871– 886. doi:10.1037/00223514.92.5.871
Finkel, E. J., Slotter, E. B., Luchies, L. B., Walton, G. M., & Gross, J. J.
(in press). A brief intervention to promote conflict reappraisal preserves
marital quality over time. Psychological Science.
Gale, B. (Producer), Canton, N. (Producer), & Zemeckis, R. (Director).
(1985). Back to the future [Motion picture]. United States: Universal
Pictures.
Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (2012). A social psychological approach to
educational intervention. In E. Shafir (Ed.), Behavioral foundations of
public policy (pp. 329 –347). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Gini, G., & Pozzoli, T. (2009). Association between bullying and psychosomatic problems: A meta-analysis. Pediatrics, 123, 1059 –1065. doi:
10.1542/peds.2008-1215
Gould, R. V. (2003). Collision of wills: How ambiguity about social rank
breeds conflict. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Graham, S., & Juvonen, J. (1998). Self-blame and peer victimization in
middle school: An attributional analysis. Developmental Psychology, 34,
587–599. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.34.3.587
Guinote, A. (2007a). Power affects basic cognition: Increased attentional
inhibition and flexibility. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
43, 685– 697. doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2006.06.008
Guinote, A. (2007b). Power and the suppression of unwanted thoughts:
Does control over others decrease control over the self? Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 43, 433– 440. doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2006
.03.003
Haugland, S., Wold, B., Stevenson, J., Aaroe, L. E., & Woynarowska, B.
(2001). Subjective health complaints in adolescence: A cross-national
comparison of prevalence and dimensionality. European Journal of
Public Health, 11, 4 –10. doi:10.1093/eurpub/11.1.4
Hays, R. D., Sherbourne, C. D., & Mazel, R. M. (1993). The Rand 36-Item
Health Survey 1.0. Health Economics, 2, 217–227. doi:10.1002/hec
.4730020305
Heckman, J., & Kautz, T. (in press). Fostering and measuring skills: AQ: 22
Interventions that improve character and cognition. In J. Heckman, J. E.
Humphries, & T. Kautz. (Eds.), The GED and the role of character in
American life. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Herskovitz, M., Zwick, E., & Holzman, W. (Producers). (2007). My
so-called life [Television series]. Los Angeles, CA: Shout! Factory.
Imai, K., Keele, L., & Tingley, D. A. (2010). A general approach to causal
mediation analysis. Psychological Methods, 15, 309 –334. doi:10.1037/
a0020761
Imai, K., Keele, L., Tingley, D. A., & Yamamoto, T. (2010). Causal
mediation analysis using R. In H. D. Vinod (Ed.), Advances in social
science research using R (pp. 129 –154). New York, NY: Springer.
Inzlicht, M., & Kang, S. K. (2010). Stereotype threat spillover: How coping
with threats to social identity affects aggression, eating, decisionmaking, and attention. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
99, 467– 481. doi:10.1037/a0018951
Jamieson, J. P., Mendes, W. B., Blackstock, E., & Schmader, T. (2010).
Turning the knots in your stomach into bows: Reappraising arousal
improves performance on the GRE. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 46, 208 –212. doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2009.08.015
Juvonen, J., & Graham, S. (2014). Bullying in schools: The power of
bullies and the plight of victims. Annual Review of Psychology, 65,
159 –185. doi:10.1146/annurev-psych-010213-115030
Killen, M., Kelly, M. C., Richardson, C., & Jampol, N. S. (2010). Attributions of intentions and fairness judgments regarding interracial peer
encounters. Developmental Psychology, 46, 1206 –1213. doi:10.1037/
a0019660
Knack, J. M., Jensen-Campbell, L. A., & Baum, A. (2011). Worse than
sticks and stones? Bullying is associated with altered HPA axis functioning and poorer health. Brain and Cognition, 77, 183–190. doi:
10.1016/j.bandc.2011.06.011
Knee, C. R. (1998). Implicit theories of relationships: Assessment and
prediction of romantic relationship initiation, coping, and longevity.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 360 –370. doi:
10.1037/0022-3514.74.2.360
Langenkamp, A. G. (2011). Effects of educational transitions on students’
academic trajectory: A life course perspective. Sociological Perspectives, 54, 497–520. doi:10.1525/sop.2011.54.4.497
Lazarus, R. S., & Folkman, S. (1984). Stress, appraisal, and coping. New
York, NY: Springer.
Lewin, K. (1943). Defining the “field at a given time”. Psychological
Review, 50, 292–310. doi:10.1037/h0062738

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

IMPLICIT THEORIES, STRESS, HEALTH, AND ACHIEVEMENT

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Lewin, K. (1952). Group decision and social change. In G. E. Swanson,
T. M. Newcomb, & E. L. Hartley (Eds.), Readings in social psychology
(2nd ed., pp. 330 –344). New York, NY: Holt.
Lupien, S. J., Maheu, F., Tu, M., Fiocco, A., & Schramek, T. E. (2007).
The effects of stress and stress hormones on human cognition: Implications for the field of brain and cognition. Brain and Cognition, 65,
209 –237. doi:10.1016/j.bandc.2007.02.007
Mehta, B. S., Cornell, D., Fan, X., & Gregory, A. (2013). Bullying climate
and school engagement in ninth-grade students. Journal of School
Health, 83, 45–52.
Miller, G., Chen, E., & Cole, S. (2009). Health psychology: Developing
biologically plausible models linking the social world and physical
health. Annual Review of Psychology, 60, 501–524. doi:10.1146/annurev
.psych.60.110707.163551
Molden, D. C., & Dweck, C. S. (2006). Finding “meaning” in psychology:
A lay theories approach to self-regulation, social perception, and social
development. American Psychologist, 61, 192–203. doi:10.1037/0003066X.61.3.192
Mueller, C. M., & Dweck, C. S. (1998). Praise for intelligence can
undermine children’s motivation and performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 33–52. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.75.1.33
Nishina, A., & Juvonen, J. (2005). Daily reports of witnessing and experiencing peer harassment in middle school. Child Development, 76,
435– 450. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2005.00855.x
Olson, K., & Dweck, C. S. (2008). A blueprint for social cognitive
development. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 3, 193–202. doi:
10.1111/j.1745-6924.2008.00074.x
Pellegrini, A., & Long, J. (2002). A longitudinal study of bullying, dominance, and victimization during the transition from primary school
through secondary school. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 20, 259 –280. doi:10.1348/026151002166442
AQ: 26 Pennebaker, J. (2004). Theories, therapies, and taxpayers: On the complexities of the expressive writing paradigm. Clinical Psychology: Science
and Practice, 11, 138 –142. doi:10.1093/clipsy.bph063
Pennebaker, J. W., & Chung, C. K. (2011). Expressive writing: Connections to physical and mental health. In H. S. Friendman (Ed.), The
Oxford handbook of health psychology (pp. 417– 437). New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.
Pennebaker, J. W., Francis, M. E., & Booth, R. J. (2007). Linguistic Inquiry
and Word Count: LIWC [Computer software]. Austin, TX: Liwc.net.
Raudenbush, S. (1984). Magnitude of teacher expectancy effects on pupil
IQ as a function of the credibility of expectancy induction: A synthesis
of findings from 18 experiments. Journal of Educational Psychology,
76, 85–97. doi:10.1037/0022-0663.76.1.85
Reis, H. T., & Gosling, S. D. (2010). Social psychological methods outside
the laboratory. In S. Fiske, D. Gilbert, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook
of social psychology (5th ed., Vol. 1, pp. 82–114). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Richards, M. H., Crowe, P. A., Larson, R., & Swarr, A. (1998). Developmental patterns and gender differences in the experience of peer companionship during adolescence. Child Development, 69, 154 –163.
Ross, L., & Nisbett, R. E. (1991). The person and the situation: Perspectives of social psychology. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Rudolph, K. D. (2010). Implicit theories of peer relationships. Social
Development, 19, 113–129. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9507.2008.00534.x
Sapolsky, R. M. (2005). The influence of social hierarchy on primate
health. Science, 308, 648 – 652. doi:10.1126/science.1106477
Schimmack, U. (2012). The ironic effect of significant results on the
credibility of multiple-study articles. Psychological Methods, 17, 551–
566. doi:10.1037/a0029487
Senior, J. (2013, January 20). Why you never truly leave high school: New
science on its corrosive, traumatizing effects. New York Magazine.
Retrieved from http://nymag.com/news/features/high-school-2013-1/
Sherman, D. K., Hartson, K. A., Binning, K. R., Purdie-Vaughns, V.,
Garcia, J., Taborsky-Barba, S., . . . Cohen, G. L. (2013). Deflecting the

17

trajectory and changing the narrative: How self-affirmation affects academic performance and motivation under identity threat. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 104, 591– 618. doi:10.1037/
a0031495
Silver, D., Saunders, M., & Zarate, E. (2008). What factors predict high
school graduation in the Los Angeles Unified School District? (California Dropout Research Project Report #14). Santa Barbara, CA: Univer- AQ: 28
sity of California, Santa Barbara.
Simmons, J. P., Nelson, L. D., & Simonsohn, U. (2011). False-positive
psychology: Undisclosed flexibility in data collection and analysis allows presenting anything as significant. Psychological Science, 22,
1359 –1366. doi:10.1177/0956797611417632
Smith, P. K., Jostman, N. B., Galinsky, A. D., & van Dijk, W. W. (2008).
Lacking power impairs executive functions, Psychological Science, 19,
441– 447. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02107.x
Smith, P. K., & Trope, Y. (2006). You focus on the forest when you’re in
charge of the trees: Power priming and abstract information processing.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 90, 578 –596. doi:
10.1037/0022-3514.90.4.578
Sundblad, G. B., Jansson, A., Saartok, T., Renström, P., & Engström,
L.-M. (2008). Self-rated pain and perceived health in relation to stress
and physical activity among school-students: A 3-year follow-up. Pain,
136, 239 –249. doi:10.1016/j.pain.2007.06.032
Tanen, N. (Producer), & Hughes, J. (Producer & Director). (1985). The
breakfast club [Motion picture]. United States: Universal Pictures.
Walton, G. M. (in press). The new science of wise psychological interventions. Current Directions in Psychological Science.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A brief social-belonging intervention improves academic and health outcomes among minority students.
Science, 331, 1447–1451. doi:10.1126/science.1198364
Walton, G. M., Logel, C., Peach, J. M., Spencer, S. J., & Zanna, M. P.
(2013). Two brief social-psychological interventions transform women’s
experience, relationships and achievement in engineering. Unpublished
manuscript, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
Williams, K. D. (2009). Ostracism: A temporal need-threat model. In M.
Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 41, pp.
279 –314). New York, NY: Academic Press.
Williams, K. D., & Jarvis, B. (2006). Cyberball: A program for use in
research on ostracism and interpersonal acceptance. Behavior Research
Methods, 38, 174 –180. doi:10.3758/BF03192765
Wilson, T. D. (2006). The power of social psychological interventions.
Science, 313, 1251–1252. doi:10.1126/science.1133017
Wilson, T. D. (2011). Redirect: The surprising new science of psychological change. New York, NY: Little, Brown. doi:10.1037/e506142012001
Wilson, T. D., Damiani, M., & Shelton, N. (2002). Improving the academic
performance of college students with brief attributional interventions. In
J. Aronson (Ed.), Improving academic achievement: Impact of psychological factors on education (pp. 89 –108). San Diego, CA: Academic
Press. doi:10.1016/B978-012064455-1/50008-7
Wolke, D., Copeland, W. E., Angold, A., & Costello, E. J. (2013). Impact
of bullying in childhood on adult health, wealth, crime, and social
outcomes. Psychological Science, 24, 1958 –1970. doi:10.1177/
0956797613481608
Yeager, D. S., & Dweck, C. S. (2012). Mindsets that promote resilience:
When students believe that personal characteristics can be developed.
Educational Psychologist, 47, 302–314. doi:10.1080/00461520.2012
.722805
Yeager, D. S., Miu, A., Powers, J., & Dweck, C. S. (2013). Implicit
theories of personality and attributions of hostile intent: A meta-analysis,
an experiment, and a longitudinal intervention. Child Development, 84,
1651–1667. doi:10.1111/cdev.12062
Yeager, D. S., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., Pebley, P.,
Master, A., . . . Cohen, G. L. (in press). Breaking the cycle of mistrust:

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

18

YEAGER ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Wise interventions to provide critical feedback across the racial divide.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General.
Yeager, D. S., Trzesniewski, K., & Dweck, C. S. (2013). An implicit
theories of personality intervention reduces adolescent aggression in
response to victimization and exclusion. Child Development, 84, 970 –
988. doi:10.1111/cdev.12003
Yeager, D. S., Trzesniewski, K., Tirri, K., Nokelainen, P., & Dweck, C. S.
(2011). Adolescents’ implicit theories predict desire for vengeance after
remembered and hypothetical peer conflicts: Correlational and experimental evidence. Developmental Psychology, 47, 1090 –1107. doi:
10.1037/a0023769

Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. (2011). Social-psychological interventions in
education: They’re not magic. Review of Educational Research, 81,
267–301. doi:10.3102/0034654311405999
Zhang, Z., Zyphur, M. J., & Preacher, K. J. (2009). Testing multilevel
mediation using hierarchical linear models. Organizational Research
Methods, 12, 695–719. doi:10.1177/1094428108327450

Received July 11, 2013
Revision received February 10, 2014
Accepted February 11, 2014 !

Child Development, xxxx 2013, Volume 00, Number 0, Pages 1–17

Implicit Theories of Personality and Attributions of Hostile Intent:
A Meta-Analysis, an Experiment, and a Longitudinal Intervention
David S. Yeager

Adriana S. Miu

University of Texas at Austin

Emory University

Joseph Powers and Carol S. Dweck
Stanford University

Past research has shown that hostile schemas and adverse experiences predict the hostile attributional bias.
This research proposes that seemingly nonhostile beliefs (implicit theories about the malleability of personality) may also play a role in shaping it. Study 1 meta-analytically summarized 11 original tests of this hypothesis (N = 1,659), and showed that among diverse adolescents aged 13–16 a ﬁxed or entity theory about
personality traits predicted greater hostile attributional biases, which mediated an effect on aggressive desires.
Study 2 experimentally changed adolescents’ implicit theories toward a malleable or incremental view and
showed a reduction in hostile intent attributions. Study 3 delivered an incremental theory intervention that
reduced hostile intent attributions and aggressive desires over an 8-month period.

The hostile attributional bias is the tendency to interpret ambiguous provocation as intentional, that is,
to view others’ negative actions toward you as purposeful and hostile when their intention is unclear
(Dodge, 1980, 2006). For example, imagine an adolescent who is walking down the hallway in his
school. A peer runs down the hallway, knocking
him over and spilling his books on the ﬂoor, causing other peers to laugh (Dodge, 2006, p. 791). Was
this done on purpose or was it an accident? What
would the student do in response?
Over a hundred studies have demonstrated that
a hostile attributional bias is a predictor of the
desire to enact reactive aggression. This has been
shown in response to hypothetical scenarios, laboratory provocations, and provocations in real-world
settings (Dodge, 2006; Dodge, Coie, & Lynam,
2006). Research has also shown that changing this
hostile bias toward more of a benign attribution of
intent can reduce children’s and adolescents’ reactive aggression (e.g., Hudley & Graham, 1993; for a
Support for this research was provided by the Spencer Foundation and the Thrive Foundation for Youth. The authors are
grateful to the students and teachers who participated in this
research and to April House, April Scott, Kerry Morrissey, Shannon Morrissey, Ahmad Saleh, Shannon Brady, Cary Catching,
Liz Chamberlain, Brian Spitzer, Kali Trzesniewski, Michelle Harris, Jessica Reed, and Rebecca Johnson for their assistance conducting this research.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to
David Yeager, 108 E. Dean Keeton Stop A8000, Austin, TX 787121043. Electronic mail may be sent to yeager@psy.utexas.edu.

meta-analysis, see Wilson & Lipsey, 2006). Combined, these constitute some of the most robust,
generative, and important ﬁndings in all of developmental psychology. Indeed, this research has provided leverage for understanding and addressing
peer aggression, one of the most pressing problems
facing today’s youth.
But where does the hostile attributional bias
come from? Dodge (2006) has theorized that past
hostile experiences, such as abuse or long-term
exposure to violent contexts, can lead to hostile
schemas that produce a heightened vigilance to
peer hostility and therefore promote hostile intent
attributions. Although such hostile experiences and
schemas are undoubtedly inﬂuential, we propose
that a hostile attributional bias can also emerge
from more seemingly nonhostile sources, such as
an implicit theory about whether people’s traits are
ﬁxed and unchangeable. More speciﬁcally, we propose that adolescents who hold an entity theory of
personality—the idea that people’s traits cannot
change (Dweck, Chiu, & Hong, 1995; Erdley &
Dweck, 1993; Yeager, Trzesniewski, Tirri, Nokelainen, & Dweck, 2011)—will be more likely to attribute ambiguous provocations to a peer’s hostile
intent and, because of this, to express a greater
© 2013 The Authors
Child Development © 2013 Society for Research in Child Development, Inc.
All rights reserved. 0009-3920/2013/xxxx-xxxx
DOI: 10.1111/cdev.12062

2

Yeager, Miu, Powers, and Dweck

desire for aggressive revenge. This is because those
with more of an entity theory see people’s good
and bad behaviors as emanating from enduring
traits rather than being a product of circumstances
(Erdley & Dweck, 1993; see also Chiu, Hong, &
Dweck, 1997; Levy & Dweck, 1999), and so they
may then be more likely to conclude that a peer
who upset them is a bad person who upset them
on purpose. If this were true, then one method for
reducing attributions of hostile intent might be to
change adolescents’ implicit theories toward more
of a malleable or incremental view of personality
traits.
To test these proposals, we conducted the present research. Study 1 was a meta-analysis of 11 original correlational tests of the hypothesis that an
entity theory would predict greater attributions of
hostile intent following both imagined and experienced provocations. Study 1 also explored whether
these increased hostile attributions might statistically mediate the effect of an entity theory on the
desire to respond aggressively. Study 2 addressed
the causal role of implicit theories. It experimentally
changed adolescents’ theories toward an incremental view and observed differences in attributions of
hostile intent. Study 3 extended this by conducting
a longitudinal experiment that measured the effects
of an incremental theory intervention on hostile
attributions and a desire for vengeance over an 8month period.
Schemas That Shape Hostile Attributional Biases
As noted, Dodge (2006) has argued that attributions of hostile intent are a function of hostile schemas that result in part from negative life events
and that hostile attributional tendencies mediate the
impact of these negative schemas on behavior. For
instance, research has documented that socialization
from parents who, themselves, have hostile attributional tendencies can predict children’s increased
hostile attributional styles (MacBrayer, Milich, &
Hundley, 2003), as can frequent experiences of peer
victimization (Yeung & Leadbeater, 2007), or the
experience of abuse during childhood (Dodge,
Bates, & Pettit, 1990; see Dodge, 2006, for a review).
Relatedly, other research has shown that hostile
“schemas”—such as the chronic accessibility of hostile thoughts—can predict attributions of hostile
intent and because of this predict aggressive desires
or behavior (Burks, Laird, Dodge, Pettit, & Bates,
1999; Dodge, Laird, Lochman, & Zelli, 2002; see
Dodge, 2006, for a review). Overall, this is important evidence that hostile experiences and schemas

might produce hostile attributional tendencies.
However, how complete is this explanation of the
origins of the hostile attributional bias?
Implicit Theories
We propose that other, seemingly nonhostile
schemas—ones that may or may not arise from hostile experiences and are distinct from overall negative views about the social world—could also
contribute to hostile intent attributions. Speciﬁcally,
we argue that implicit theories of personality,
which involve a theory about the ﬁxedness versus
malleability of personality traits, can promote hostile intent attributions when adolescents are confronted with peer provocations of ambiguous
intent.
Implicit theories are core beliefs about the malleability of people’s traits, and they frame people’s
interpretations of events in their social worlds. As a
result, they play a role in shaping judgments and
reactions to other people’s behaviors (Chiu et al.,
1997; Erdley & Dweck, 1993; Yeager et al., 2011).
For instance, adults with more of an entity theory
often interpret minor behaviors as having a stronger positive or negative valence (Hong, Chiu,
Dweck, & Sacks, 1997) and as more indicative of
underlying moral character (Chiu et al., 1997), compared to adults with more of an incremental theory.
Past research is consistent in showing that an entity
theory about personality creates a psychological
world in which people’s global character can be
judged as good or bad from even thin slices of
behavior.
Building on this research, we propose that
although an entity theory of personality itself does
not necessarily arise from hostile inﬂuences, it can
nevertheless create a psychological preparedness
toward hostile judgments of others. Consistent with
this prediction, Erdley and Dweck (1993, Study 2)
found that fourth- and ﬁfth-grade students who
held more of an entity theory viewed a peer’s antisocial behavior as arising from the peer’s underlying, stable, and deﬁcient traits. They then
displayed less empathy for the peer and prescribed
more punishment for him or her. Moreover, when
later confronted with positive behaviors performed
by the peer—thus providing participants with an
opportunity to view the peer’s previous antisocial
behavior as due to circumstances rather than traits—
those with more of an entity theory maintained their
global negative trait judgments of the antisocial peer.
More recently, Yeager et al. (2011) examined the
effect of implicit theories of personality on high

Implicit Theories and Hostile Intent Attributions

school students’ responses to personal experiences
of peer conﬂict. They showed that those with more
of an entity theory were more likely to attribute
instances of victimization directed at them to a
peer’s personal qualities. This characterological
attribution mediated an effect on a greater desire to
“get back at,” “hurt,” or “punish” the transgressing
peer. Next, Yeager et al. (2011) used a brief experiment to change adolescents’ implicit theories
toward more of an incremental view, and showed
that the incremental theory reduced the belief that a
hypothetical peer who bullied them had negative
personal qualities. This, in turn, reduced the desire
for revenge.
Although instructive, this past research did not
investigate the role of implicit theories in shaping
the interpretation of negative events in which the
intent of an anonymous peer was ambiguous—
which is the critical test of an attributional bias (cf.
Dodge, 1980). The Yeager et al. (2011) scenarios
involved peers who explicitly and unambiguously
were bullying the participants repeatedly on purpose. Thus, it is currently unknown whether implicit theories of personality would predict the hostile
attributional bias. Moreover, both the Erdley and
Dweck (1993) and the Yeager et al. (2011) research
relied on hypothetical scenarios and did not measure attributions following actual experiences of
peer conﬂict. Therefore, the present studies extended
past research by testing whether implicit theories
might predict attributions of hostile intent following
ambiguous provocations from unknown peers in
hypothetical scenarios and in controlled behavioral
experiences of peer exclusion.
The Origins of Implicit Theories
Although the developmental origins of an entity
theory are not fully known, some past research supports the notion that entity theories can result from
nonhostile or even positive inﬂuences, and yet
nonetheless predict negative attributions and reactions. In analogous past experiments on implicit
theories of intelligence, positive, well-intentioned
praise for being “smart” could induce an entity
theory of intelligence (Mueller & Dweck, 1998).
Moreover, Dweck et al. (1995) reported that a ﬁxed
or entity theory about intelligence is not simply the
residue of poor academic performance. Many highachieving students hold an entity theory about their
academic ability, yet those with more of an entity
theory of academic ability, regardless of their actual
levels of ability, tend to respond more negatively in
the face of academic challenges, for example, by

3

blaming their failures on themselves, lying about
low grades, considering cheating, or giving up
(Blackwell, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2007; Mueller
& Dweck, 1998; for an overview, see Dweck, 2006).
More directly relevant to the present research, Chiu
et al. (1997, Study 5) changed participants’ implicit
theories of personality with a brief scientiﬁc article
summarizing longitudinal studies that either
showed that people’s traits become set, like plaster
(in an entity theory condition) or that they can be
molded, like clay, throughout life (in an incremental
theory condition). This brief article led participants
to adopt entity versus incremental frameworks
when judging others. Hence, past research is suggestive that implicit theories can arise even from
positive or nonhostile inﬂuences (such as scientiﬁc
information) and are not only the product of hostile
experiences. Building on this past research, we propose that adolescents who have learned more of
an entity theory of personality, regardless of the
frequency of past negative events or their overall
negative schemas about people, will respond to
ambiguous peer conﬂicts with a different pattern of
attributions and behavioral desires than those who
have learned more of an incremental theory.
The Present Research
Study 1 reports 11 original correlations that were
collected from eight independent samples of adolescents. Five of these samples included one test of the
relation between implicit theories and the hostile
attributional bias, and three included two tests
employing measures collected at different times.
These 11 tests of our hypothesis employed various
questions, stimuli (e.g., scenarios and behavioral
provocations), and lengths of time between measurements, and they were aggregated into a single
effect size estimate using meta-analytic methods, to
facilitate more general conclusions. In addition, to
test for whether implicit theories would predict
attributions among adolescents from relatively hostile as well as relatively nonhostile contexts, Study
1 included samples from both lower violence and
higher violence neighborhoods. Last, Study 1 metaanalytically summarized tests of whether attributions of hostile intent mediated the effect of implicit
theories on aggressive desires.
Study 2 was an experiment designed to test the
causal effect of implicit theories on hostile attributional biases. In it we changed implicit theories
toward more of a malleable or incremental view of
personality and then measured short-term changes
in attributions of hostile intent. As in Study 1, this

4

Yeager, Miu, Powers, and Dweck

experiment was conducted in two contexts with
highly different levels of neighborhood violence, to
demonstrate the generality of this process. Finally,
Study 3 was a longitudinal experiment that administered a brief (two class session) incremental theory
intervention and measured attributions of hostile
intent and vengeful desires 8 months later.

Study 1

low socioeconomic status, and came from neighborhoods with violence rates above the national average, according to federal statistics (United States
Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2011). In the remaining two samples the
majority of students came from middle- or highincome families and lived in neighborhoods with
violence rates below the national average. Response
rates in all studies were over 75%. Parental consent
and student assent were obtained for all participants.

Method
Participants

Procedure

Participants were students in Grades 8, 9, and 10
from eight independent samples coming from six
different schools in the United States (samples collected from the same schools included different students surveyed in different years; N = 1,128 unique
participants provided a total of N = 1,659 observations). See Table 1 for a summary of sample characteristics. Some of these studies were conducted
expressly to test the present hypotheses, and others
were designed to test additional hypotheses that
will be included in future research articles. However, critically, all the samples included here were
administered measures of implicit theories and
attributions of hostile intent, and none of the relations between these variables have been reported in
another research article.
In the aggregate, 49% of participants were
female. Twelve percent self-identiﬁed as Black or
African American, 17% as White, 26% as Asian,
42% as Hispanic or Latino, and the rest as another
race or ethnicity. Schools were located in New York
City or the San Francisco Bay Area. In six of the
eight samples, the majority of students at the school
received free or reduced-price lunch, an indicator of

In all studies, students completed activities and
questions as a class on computers in a school computer lab during school hours. The session was
administered by a trained research assistant who
led students to work quietly and privately for the
roughly 30 min required. Four of the studies
included an ambiguous provocation that students
believed was a real interaction with another student
(described below). In each case, students were thoroughly debriefed after the experience. At the end of
all of the studies, students were thanked for their
participation and were told how their responses
would be used to advance science and help future
students like themselves.

Measures
Entity Theory
Participants in all studies answered ﬁve questions measuring an entity theory of personality
traits relevant to peer conﬂicts in high school. These
questions were developed and used in past research
(Yeager et al., 2011). Participants were asked to

Table 1
Samples Summarized Meta-Analytically in Study 1
Sample
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

N
39
128
179
204
36
305
211
26

Grade level
9th
9th–10th
9th–10th
9th
9th
9th
9th
8th

Location

% female

% Black

% White

% Asian

% Hispanic or Latino

New York, NY
Bay Area, CA
Bay Area, CA
New York, NY
Bay Area, CA
Bay Area, CA
Bay Area, CA
Bay Area, CA

63
49
53
51
46
45
49
51

36
28
9
22
3
2
5
3

8
4
13
12
50
35
4
7

28
30
9
26
41
46
6
10

28
38
58
35
6
15
80
80

Note. Participants could indicate as many races or ethnicities as they wished, or none at all, and therefore row percentages need not
add up to 100%. Samples 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, and 8 were collected from schools located in neighborhoods with higher levels of poverty and
violence, whereas samples 5 and 6 were located in upper-middle-class neighborhoods with lower levels of poverty and violence.

Implicit Theories and Hostile Intent Attributions

agree or disagree with statements such as “Bullies
and victims are types of people that really can’t be
changed” (1 = strongly disagree, 6 = strongly agree;
below we report analyses showing that implicit theories are distinct from overall negative schemas
about people). These items were internally consistent across studies: as ranged from .66 to .83.
Attributions of Hostile Intent
In each of the tests of our hypothesis, one of two
different ambiguous provocations was used to
evoke attributions of hostile intent. One was a
hypothetical scenario and one was a behavioral
experience of social exclusion. Following the design
employed in past demonstrations of an attributional
bias (e.g., Dodge, 1980), in each of these provocations the identity of the peer was unknown to the
participant. Indeed, a crucial precondition for a test
of an attributional bias is to examine person perceptions in the absence of any previous knowledge
about the character of the provoking peer.
Hypothetical scenario. Seven tests of our hypothesis employed an ambiguous scenario. This was a
paradigmatic scenario used to illustrate the hostile
attributional bias and was based on an example
described by Dodge (2006, p. 791):
Imagine that you were walking in a crowded
hallway at school and everybody was rushing to
get to the next class so they wouldn’t be late.
While you were looking the other way, you and
another student bumped into each other (pretty
hard), so it hurt your shoulder and you dropped
the books that you were carrying. The other student paused brieﬂy, looked at you quickly, and
then turned away and hurried to class.
A pilot experiment showed that this stimulus
was, in fact, ambiguous with regard to hostile
intent (see online Supporting Information).
Cyberball exclusion. In four tests of our hypothesis,
students experienced a standardized (but short-lived
and harmless) instance of social exclusion during
an online game of catch (“Cyberball”) with two
“peers” purportedly from their secondary school
but located in another room (Williams, 2009; Williams, Yeager, Cheung, & Choi, 2012). In reality,
there were no other human players and the game
was programmed so that the computer players
threw the ball to the participant twice at the outset
and then threw it exclusively to each other. From
the perspective of the participant, the hostility of
the other player’s intentions was highly ambiguous.

5

Participants did not communicate with the excluders before, during, or after the game and were
aware that the other players did not know their
identity. In this way, participants were provided no
clues as to the identities or intentions of the peers
who excluded them, producing a great deal of latitude for them to ﬁll in the details (cf. Heider &
Simmel, 1944). Note that a strength of this method
is that it more narrowly isolates attributions of
hostile intent. Indeed, even when students believed
that the Cyberball exclusion was done on purpose,
not all of these students believed that it was done
on purpose in order to be mean. In a pilot study, we
interviewed participants about their impression of
the other players’ motives following Cyberball. In
this pilot, roughly half of students interpreted
Cyberball exclusion as arising from hostile intent,
saying “they were trying to make me feel bad by
leaving me out.” Yet other students thought the
exclusion arose from a joke that was not intended
to be malicious, from a computer malfunction, or
because the other players did not understand the
rules of the game. Hence, even when students
believed that the peers meant to exclude them,
there was variation in whether those intentions
were attributed to hostility. In sum, exclusion via
Cyberball allowed for important variety in our
tests of the relation between implicit theories and
attributions of hostile intent.
Measures of intent following the provocations. After
reading the scenario or experiencing peer exclusion,
participants rated attributions of hostile intent.
These questions varied across studies to reduce the
possibility that the results were an artifact of a
certain question type (see see online Supporting
Information Table S1 for more detail).
In two of the tests of the hypothesis that
employed the ambiguous scenario, participants
rated how much they thought “this person bumped
into you on purpose or on accident” on a 5-point
scale (1 = a complete accident, 5 = completely on
purpose). In the ﬁve remaining tests that employed
the scenario, participants rated on a 7-point scale
how much they thought “They were being mean to
me on purpose” and “They were trying to be mean
to me” (1 = not at all, 7 = an extreme amount), and
these two questions were combined by taking their
unweighted average (as > .8 across studies). These
items were modeled after commonly used measures
of the hostile attributional bias (Pettit, Lansford,
Malone, Dodge, & Bates, 2010).
In the four tests of our hypothesis that employed
a behavioral experience of Cyberball exclusion, participants answered two items such as “They were

6

Yeager, Miu, Powers, and Dweck

being mean to me on purpose” (1 = Not at all,
7 = An extreme amount). These two questions were
combined into a single measure (as > .8 across
studies).
Aggressive Desires
Seven tests of our hypothesis measured a type of
aggressive desire following the ambiguous provocation.
Desire for vengeance. In ﬁve tests of the hypothesis, a desire for vengeance was measured following
the provocation. Participants rated how much they
felt like “hurting,” “punishing,” or “getting back at”
the peer in the ambiguous provocation scenario
(1 = not at all, 7 = an extreme amount; items were averaged, as > .8 across studies). In past research, the
desire for vengeance was strongly correlated (r = .50)
with self-report measures of real-world reactive
aggressive behavior (Yeager et al., 2011, Study 1).
Desire to use vengeance for emotion regulation.
Recent theories of aggressive behavior have noted
the importance of anticipated positive emotional
states following aggression as a precursor for
aggressive behaviors (for a review, see Baumeister,
Vohs, DeWall, & Zhang, 2007; see also Yeager et al.,
2011, Study 3). Therefore, to broaden the scope of
our measures of aggressive desires, in two tests of
our hypothesis a desire to use vengeance for emotion regulation was measured (note that the “desire
for vengeance” was not measured in these two samples). Participants rated ﬁve items such as “It would
make me feel better to think about hurting them
back” and “All I would have to do is imagine myself
taking revenge and I would feel better” (1 = strongly
disagree, 7 = strongly agree). These ﬁve items were
averaged, with higher values corresponding to a
greater desire for vengeance (as > .8 across studies).
Peer Victimization
Students in nine of our tests were asked to report
levels of peer victimization by answering four items
(including how often they have “been hit, slapped,
or pushed” or “been excluded or left out by other
students” in the “past month or so”), each on a
5-point scale from 0 = never to 4 = very often. These
items were averaged, a = .79, with higher values
corresponding to more victimization.
Analysis Plan
This study utilizes a method employed in recent
investigations that have conducted a set of original

studies and then summarized them using the statistical method of meta-analysis to reach more general
conclusions about the phenomenon under study
(e.g., Yeager & Krosnick, 2011, 2012). Our analyses
were performed in the following manner. First,
ordinary least squares regressions were conducted
for each of the key hypotheses (e.g., an entity theory predicting attributions of hostile intent). (Individual unstandardized regression coefﬁcients from
these models are presented in the online Supporting
Information Table S1.) All variables in the study
were recoded to range continuously from 0 to 1.
The indirect or mediated effects and their 95% conﬁdence intervals were estimated using bootstrapping methods in the Mediation package in R (Imai,
Keele, & Tingley, 2010; Imai, Keele, Tingley, &
Yamamoto, 2011; R Development Core Team, 2008).
The variance statistics for these indirect effects was
approximated by dividing the range of the 95%
conﬁdence interval by 4 and then squaring. Next,
effect sizes (r) and variances were calculated for
each of these tests using the corresponding t statistics (for the a, b, and c effects) or variances (for the
ab, or indirect, effects). Finally, these effect sizes
were aggregated in separate random-effects metaanalyses, estimated by the metafor package in R
(Viechtbauer, 2010).
This meta-analytic procedure is desirable for several reasons. First, it guards against publication bias—
or the tendency to report only studies that had
signiﬁcant effects consistent with hypotheses
(Schooler, 2011). Second, it guards against “researcher
degrees of freedom”—or idiosyncratic decisions
about how to conduct an analysis so as to maximize the signiﬁcance in a given study, such as
which items to drop from aggregate scales or which
control variables to include (Simmons, Nelson, &
Simonsohn, 2011). Third, it guards against artifactual ﬁndings by allowing for tests of homogeneity
of effect sizes across different measures, methods,
and populations. Given that the hostile attributional
bias is one of the most frequently studied constructs
in the psychology of aggression, we believed that
any claim about the potential origins of this highly
important construct should overcome each of these
potential criticisms. Therefore, our meta-analyses
include all tests that we have conducted of the key
hypotheses, even ones that did not reach statistical
signiﬁcance. No study we have run was excluded,
and, as noted, these studies employed different
methods to allow for more general conclusions.
Relatedly, we present statistics supporting the idea
that no studies were withheld (i.e., we test for
“publication bias”). Next, in every case we made

Implicit Theories and Hostile Intent Attributions

the same decision about control variables across
analyses (e.g., we do not include any, except in
supplemental analyses testing a speciﬁc hypothesis
about a potential confounding variable, peer victimization; note that conducting analyses without control variables that reduce error variance in the key
dependent variable most likely makes our effect
size estimates more conservative). Finally, we made
a priori and consistent decisions about the composition of each of the scales employed in our research.

Results and Discussion
Does an Entity Theory Predict Attributions of Hostile
Intent?
An entity theory signiﬁcantly predicted attributions of hostile intent across 11 tests (N = 1,659),
meta-analytic r = .18, Z = 7.80, p < .0001. The funnel
plot of effect sizes (a test for publication bias) was
not asymmetric, Kendall’s τ = .38, p > .10, adding
support to our disclosure that no test was withheld
from our meta-analysis. Differences in samples or
procedures did not affect our key result: test of
homogeneity, Q(10) = 15.54, p > .10. For instance,
implicit theories signiﬁcantly predicted hostile intent
attributions when both were measured on the same
day, when attributions were measured after 3
weeks, and when attributions were measured after
1.5 years (see online). The ﬁnding of nonsigniﬁcant
heterogeneity was supported by planned tests of
moderation by ambiguous provocation stimulus
(hypothetical scenario vs. Cyberball), Q(1) = .002,
p = .97, and by sample composition (samples with
higher neighborhood violence vs. samples with
lower neighborhood violence), Q(1) = .001, p = .96.
Next, classic investigations of the hostile attributional bias have focused on boys only (Dodge,
1980; Hudley & Graham, 1993). We therefore metaanalyzed Sex 9 Implicit Theories interactions from
each of the 11 regressions predicting hostile intent
and found no signiﬁcant moderation by sex, metaanalytic r = .01, Z = .31, p = .75.
Some research has found that peer victimization
predicts greater hostile attributional biases (e.g.,
Yeung & Leadbeater, 2007). Yet when we reconducted our meta-analysis controlling for adolescents’ reported frequency of victimization, our
results were unchanged, r = .17, Z = 6.36, p < .0001.
We have claimed that the seemingly nonhostile
implicit theories of personality traits are distinct
from explicitly hostile schemas; that is, believing
that bad traits cannot change is not the same as

7

believing that people in general are bad. However,
we have not yet presented evidence testing this
proposition. Therefore, we conducted an additional
study with Grade 9 students at the same school
that provided Sample 6 in the present meta-analysis
(see Table 1), N = 212. We measured overall negative schemas about people (three items, e.g., “Overall, how mean and hostile are people in school,”
“Overall, how much are people in your school out
to get you”; 1 = not at all, 5 = an extreme amount;
a > .8), in addition to an entity theory of personality, attributions of intent, and frequency of peer
victimization. An entity theory predicted greater
attributions of hostile intent when controlling for
these hostile schemas and for frequency of peer
victimization, r = .19, p < .01. Moreover, an entity
theory predicted hostile intent attributions even
among the subset of 97 students who reported largely nonhostile schemas (i.e., average of not at all
on the 5-point hostile schema measure), r = .20,
p < .05, again controlling for victimization. Thus,
implicit theories are distinct from hostile schemas.
Our studies revealed that the size of the effect of
an entity theory on attributions of hostile intent was
consistent but modest, roughly r = .18. How does
this result compare to extant theories of the origins
of the hostile attributional bias? To address this, we
compared our study’s effect size with the effects
highlighted in Dodge’s (2006) authoritative summary of hostile schemas and experiences that predict a hostile attributional bias (Burks et al., 1999;
Dodge et al., 1990; Dodge et al., 2002, MacBrayer
et al., 2003; Yeung & Leadbeater, 2007; —the latter
was substituted for Graham & Juvonen, 1998,
which was cited by Dodge, 2006, but did not report
the necessary effect size). This set of studies was
chosen by Dodge (2006) as representative of the
documented precursors of an attributional bias. Our
calculation showed that the effect of hostile inﬂuences on the attributional bias in past research ranged from r = .08 to r = .34, with a meta-analytic
average of r = .189, Z = 5.05, N = 1,362 (for hostile
schemas: r = .20; for hostile experiences: r = .17,
moderator Q(1) = .12, ns). Notably, this average
effect was not signiﬁcantly different from the effect
of implicit theories found in our studies, moderation test p > .50. Also note that the past studies
summarized by Dodge only included published
studies with signiﬁcant effects and likely constitutes
an upward bound on the average size of the effect.
If we restricted our meta-analysis of the studies we
conducted to only those that yielded a signiﬁcant
effect, we would obtain an effect of r = .25, which is
slightly larger than past studies of hostile schemas

8

Yeager, Miu, Powers, and Dweck

and experiences summarized by Dodge (2006).
Hence, the relation between seemingly nonhostile
implicit theories and the hostile attributional bias is
comparable to prominent examples of the relation
between this bias and hostile schemas and
experiences.
Do an Entity Theory and Attributions of Hostile Intent
Predict More Aggressive Reactions?
In 7 of our 11 tests (N = 1,102), we measured
aggressive desires following an ambiguous provocation. In these 7 tests, there was a signiﬁcant metaanalytic average effect of an entity theory on hostile
intent (a paths), r = .20, Z = 6.79, p < .0001, and on
aggressive desires (c paths), r = .23, Z = 6.61,
p < .0001 (effects shown in Figure 1). In addition,
conceptually replicating much past research, there
was a signiﬁcant effect of hostile intent on aggressive desires (b paths), r = .51, Z = 11.63, p < .0001.
Did Hostile Intent Attributions Mediate the Relation
Between an Entity Theory and Aggressive Desires?
On average, there was a signiﬁcant indirect (ab)
effect leading from an entity theory to aggressive
desires through hostile intent, r = .09, Z = 4.29,
p < .0001 (see Figure 1), and this was homogeneous
across the studies, Q(6) = 6.98, p = .32. For ﬁve of
the seven tests the effect of implicit theories was
reduced to nonsigniﬁcance when controlling for
intent. The average size of this indirect effect corresponds to a weighted average of 41% of the direct
(c) effect of an entity theory on aggressive desires.
This shows that a signiﬁcant and substantial proportion of the effect of an entity theory on aggressive

a

=
:r
th
Pa

,Z
.2

9
.7
=6

,p

1
00
<.

Hostile
Intent

b

Pa
th
:

r=

.5
1

,Z

=1

1.
63

,p

<.
00
1

desires was accounted for by the relation between
an entity theory and hostile intent attributions.
In sum, our ﬁndings are consistent with Dodge’s
(2006) claim that schemas will predict aggression
mediated through attributions of hostile intent. However, it extends this past theory by showing that a
seemingly nonhostile schema about the ﬁxedness of
traits can produce hostile intent attributions at, statistically, the same level that more explicitly hostile
schemas and experiences have in past research. As a
side note, our study was a methodological advance
because it was, to our knowledge, the ﬁrst or one of
the ﬁrst to meta-analyze mediation effects.

Study 2
Study 1 showed that adolescents who held more of
an entity theory of personality were more likely to
interpret ambiguous provocations from unknown
peers as arising from hostile intent. In turn, they
exhibited more aggressive desires. Study 1 was limited, however, in that it did not address the causal
direction of the relation between implicit theories
and attributions of hostile intent. Therefore, in
Study 2 we conducted an experiment that changed
adolescents’ implicit theories and then assessed the
effect of this change on their attributions.
As in Study 1, we intentionally included samples of
adolescents from different environments, each with
dramatically different levels of neighborhood hostility. The ﬁrst sample lived and attended school in an
urban section of Oakland, California. According FBI
ofﬁcial statistics (United States Department of Justice,
Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2011), in 2010, the
year of our study, Oakland had the fourth highest per
capita violent crime rate in the nation, with one violent crime for every 65 residents. The second sample
lived and attended school in a medium-sized city in
Georgia that had a much lower rate, at one violent
crime for every 250 residents, which is almost exactly
the national average. We predicted that changes in
implicit theories could affect attributions in both hostile contexts and in more nonhostile contexts.

c Path: r=.23, Z=6.61, p<.001

Entity
Theory

ab (Indirect) Path: r=.09, Z=4.22, p<.001

Aggressive
Desires

Figure 1. Meta-analytic summary of direct and indirect correlational effects of an entity (ﬁxed) theory of personality on aggressive desires, mediated by attributions of hostile intent (Study 1;
N = 1,102). r = meta-analytic correlation coefﬁcient. The metaanalysis of a paths depicted in Figure 1 includes only the subset
of studies that also measured aggressive desires and so it differs
from the meta-analytic a path reported in the text that included
all studies measuring implicit theories and hostile intent.

Method
Participants
Sample 1 (N = 20) was a racially diverse sample
of ninth-grade students from primarily low-income
households in Oakland, California. Seven percent
self-identiﬁed as White, 32% as Hispanic or Latino,
2% as Asian, and 38% as African American, while

Implicit Theories and Hostile Intent Attributions

the rest marked “Other.” Sixty-seven percent were
female. Sample 2 (N = 43) consisted of primarily
White, non-Hispanic seventh-grade students from
mid- to high-income families in a medium-sized city
in Georgia. Sixty-ﬁve percent self-identiﬁed as White,
3% as Hispanic or Latino, 3% as Asian, 5% as African
American, and the rest marked “Other.” Sixty-seven
percent were female. Participants came from studies
that were conducted only for the present purposes.
Procedure
Experimental manipulation. The incremental theory of personality manipulation was adapted from
previous investigations that have changed implicit
theories in this age group (Yeager et al., 2011;
Yeager, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, in press). The
treatment activity, which lasted roughly 15 min on
average, had three parts: (a) a brief and factually
accurate scientiﬁc article that described neuroscientiﬁc studies showing that people’s behaviors are
controlled by thoughts and feelings in their brains,
which have the constant potential for plasticity; (b)
notes from upperclassmen who described how they
endorsed a malleable view of people’s characteristics; and (c) an exercise in which students wrote
notes to future students drawing on scientiﬁc information to describe the malleability of people’s traits
(i.e., “self-persuasion”; Aronson, 1999; see Walton
& Cohen, 2011; Yeager & Walton, 2011). Importantly, nothing in the manipulation addressed attributions of hostile intent, and no emotions or
behaviors were explicitly endorsed. Moreover, the
intervention did not say that people would change,
only that there is the potential for change (indeed, a
content analysis of students’ writing samples found
almost no instances of saying that peers will
change, and numerous instances of saying that they
might or might not change).
A control group completed a parallel writing activity that emphasized the malleability of academic skills
such as study skills. This comparison group was used
to control for the possibility that simply receiving a
message about malleability or growth could have led
to our ﬁndings. Therefore, the present positive, hopeful control group constituted a rigorous test.

Measures
Tests of Equivalence of Manipulations
To show that the manipulations were parallel, we
compared the experimental and control manipulations
in terms of features unrelated to the experimental

9

message. That is, after completing the activities, participants were asked to rate how much they “enjoyed,”
“understood,” “tried their hardest to read,” and
“agreed with” the manipulation on a 5-point scale
(1 = not at all, 5 = a great deal).
Implicit Theories of Personality
To check the predicted effect of the manipulation
on changes in implicit theories, we measured an
entity theory as in Study 1.
Attributions of Hostile Intent
Participants read the same ambiguous provocation scenario described in Study 1. As in Study 1,
after reading the scenario participants rated on a
7-point scale how much they thought, “They were
being mean to me on purpose” and “They were trying to be mean to me” (1 = not at all, 7 = an extreme
amount), and these two questions were combined
by averaging them (as > .8 in both samples).
Reactions to Ambiguous Provocation
To provide a richer picture of the different psychologies evidenced by those who learned the
incremental theory of personality—one that was not
constrained or contaminated by the limited, negative choices offered by the desire for vengeance rating-scale measure used in Study 1—we asked
participants to write a free-response description of
their reactions to the scenario (answering the question: “How would you feel?”). Their responses were
reliably coded for positive, neutral, or negative
reactions toward the offending peer. Speciﬁcally,
each student’s entire open-ended response was
coded for the presence of statements that fell into
the positive or negative categories (percent agreement for each category > 92%; Krippendorff’s
alphas for each category = .86, .90) by two independent coders who were blind to hypotheses and
experimental condition. A detailed codebook and
procedure description is available on request. Some
participants’ responses were coded as negative
(24%) because they included at least one statement
that expressed negative emotions or desired behaviors toward the transgressor, such as anger or a
desire for revenge (e.g., they felt “like punching
them”) and contained no positive statements. Next,
some participants’ responses were coded as positive
(35%) because they involved positive reactions
toward the transgressor, such as trying to understand, empathize with, or prosocially confront the

10

Yeager, Miu, Powers, and Dweck

transgressor (e.g., “At least they thought about
helping me, but I guess they didn’t want to [be]
late”), and contained no negative statements. Some
participants’ responses did not include any statements that could be classiﬁed as positive or negative with regard to the transgressor and so they
were classiﬁed as neutral (35%; i.e., “I would ignore
it”; this also included negative responses that were
not directed toward the transgressor, e.g., “I would
be frustrated”). Last, some participants’ responses
were classiﬁed as ambivalent (6%) because their
responses had been coded as including both positive statements and negative statements. For analyses, participants’ responses were given ordered
categories such that higher values corresponded to
more negative statements (1 = negative: participant
wrote at least one negative statement and no positive statements, 0 = participant’s response was neutral or ambivalent, 1 = positive: participant wrote at
least one positive statement and no negative statements; see the Method section of Study 3 for validity evidence).

Results and Discussion
We conducted analyses using least squares and
ordered logistic regressions. No result was signiﬁcantly moderated by sample (all Sample 9 Condition
interaction, ts < 1, ps > .35) and so the subsamples
were combined for all analyses. As in Study 1, no
Sex 9 Condition interactions were found (ts < 1, ps >
.35). Regression models included a dummy variable
indicating sample, however, to account for variance
due to sample (models that did not control for sample
produced identical statistical signiﬁcance). Note that
all analyses were also rerun when controlling for
reported levels of peer victimization (see Study 1
for measures). As in Study 1, this had no effect on
any of our conclusions. Therefore, we report the
more parsimonious models that did not control for
victimization.

Preliminary Analyses
The experimental and control groups were
equivalent on preexperimental variables (sex, race,
and peer victimization; all ps > .30). Participants
rated the treatment and control group activities
equally in terms of enjoyment, ability to understand
the message, effort put forth in reading the message, and agreement with the message, all ts < 1.1,
ps > .30. Last, and most critically, the experimental
manipulation led to a lower belief in an entity

theory about people’s traits compared to the control
group, (control: M = 0.43, SD = 0.21; treatment:
M = 0.31, SD = 0.19), t(62) = 2.33, p = .02, d = .59.
Did the Incremental Theory of Personality Reduce
Attributions of Hostile Intent?
The experimental group, which learned a theory
that personality traits have the potential for change,
exhibited fewer attributions of hostile intent following
the ambiguous provocation scenario (control: M =
0.37, SD = 0.24; treatment: M = 0.22, SD = 0.18), t(62)
= 2.81, p = .007, d = .71. As noted, the treatment
effect was statistically the same size across the two
samples: Sample 1, t(19) = 1.85, p = .08, d = .84;
Sample 2, t(42) = 2.15, p = .04, d = .66; Sample 9
Condition interaction, t(59) = 0.87, p = 0.39.
Does an Incremental Theory of Personality Change
Responses to Ambiguous Provocations?
In an ordered logistic regression predicting negative versus positive reactions to the ambiguous
provocation scenario, the experimental condition
showed a lower probability of negative reactions
and a greater probability of positive reactions,
unstandardized logistic b = 1.05, SE = 0.49,
Z = 2.14, p = .03 (see Figure 2a). More concretely,
the experimental group was half as likely to spontaneously describe retaliatory aggression such as “I
would be [angry] and say foul stuff and probably
hit the person.” Instead of anger or aggression, the
experimental group was more likely to say they
would understand the peer’s actions, such as
“Everyone’s trying to get to class and so am I, no
one wants to be late, I would of [sic] done the
same.”
Test of Mediation
We next tested whether the changes in reactions
to the ambiguous provocation were mediated by
changes in attributions of hostile intent. In an
ordered logistic regression, attributions of hostile
intent predicted more negative and fewer positive
reactions to the provocation, b = 3.22, SE = 1.30,
Z = 2.49, p = .01. Next, in a model with both attributions of intent and experimental condition, intent
remained signiﬁcant, b = 2.70, SE = 1.34, Z = 2.01,
p = .04, but the experimental condition dropped to
nonsigniﬁcance, b = .75, SE = 0.52, Z = 1.45,
p = .15. In a causal mediation analysis (Imai et al.,
2010; Imai et al., 2011), the indirect effect of condition on the polytomous outcome mediated through

Implicit Theories and Hostile Intent Attributions
(b)
70%

70%

(a)

60%
40%

50%

Ordered Logistic p = .004

23%

42%

Positive

43%

42%

Neutral or Ambivalent

34%

16%

Negative

0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

Percent of Participants

50%

Ordered Logistic p = .03

10%
0%

Control (Malleability of Athletic Skills)
Experimental (Malleability of Personality)

30%

60%

Control (Malleability of Study Skills)
Experimental (Malleability of Personality)

20%

Percent of Participants

11

Responses to Ambiguous Pro vocation
(Study 2)

5%

22%

Positive

35%

44%

Neutral or Ambivalent

59%

34%

Negative

Responses to Ambiguous Pro vocation
(Study 3)

Figure 2. Effect of incremental (malleable) theory of personality manipulation on open-ended responses to an ambiguous peer provocation.
Positive = understanding or prosocial responses to the peer’s provocation; Negative = angry or vengeful responses to the peer’s provocation; Neutral or ambivalent = other responses or participants who mentioned both a positive and a negative response. Values are raw, unadjusted percentages. (a) Study 2, N = 63, a short-term (one class-session) experiment; (b) Study 3, N = 78, a longitudinal (8-month) intervention.

attributions of hostile intent was signiﬁcantly different from zero, indirect effect = .06 (Quasi-Bayesian 95% CI [ 1.65, .001]). Hence, it was in part by
reducing attributions of hostile intent that the incremental theory of personality manipulation reduced
negative reactions to the ambiguous provocation
scenario.

Study 3
Study 2 showed that changing implicit theories
toward more of an incremental view could reduce
attributions of hostile intent assessed a short time
later in an urban context and in a suburban context. However, an important question is whether
an incremental theory intervention can change
attributions of hostile intent and aggressive desires
over longer periods of time. As a ﬁrst test of this
possibility, we took advantage of an ongoing longitudinal experiment that was examining the
impact of an implicit theories intervention (nearly
identical to Study 2’s manipulation) on several
outcomes over the 1st year of high school. On the
ﬁnal survey for this study, we were able to
administer the ambiguous provocation scenario
employed in Study 2 and we assessed the effect of
an incremental theory on hostile intent and vengeful desires.

Method
Participants
The experiment was conducted with all ninthgrade students enrolled in Algebra 1 at a secondary
school in the San Francisco Bay Area (N = 82; all
students assented, and all but 4 participants provided
complete data, leaving N = 78 for analysis). Parental
consent and student assent were obtained for all participants. The student body was largely White or
Asian and relatively afﬂuent (44% White, 44% Asian
American, 12% Latino). As noted, this sample will
provide data to test other hypotheses, but, critically,
the data presented were collected expressly for this
study and have not appeared in any other manuscript. Next, although this suburban sample may have
been predicted to experience less of an attributional
bias based on past theory (Dodge, 2006), recall that
Studies 1 and 2 found the effect of implicit theories on
hostile intent attributions did not vary in strength
across urban and suburban samples, making this an
informative sample in which to conduct a ﬁrst test of
whether an implicit theories manipulation can produce lasting effects in at least one setting.
Procedure
Surveys were administered at baseline, during the
2nd week of school and again 2 days postintervention

12

Yeager, Miu, Powers, and Dweck

The same measure to assess students’ beliefs in
an entity theory of personality (described in Study
1) was administered 1 week preintervention, 2 days
postintervention, and on the year-end survey (for
analyses of the latter, see online Supporting Information).

said the peer was not at all being mean on purpose
and hence showed a completely nonhostile attribution—62%—is comparable with and not signiﬁcantly different from answers provided on an
identical measure by Study 1’s participants (e.g.,
the largely low-income, racial minority Sample 7
reported in Study 1, had a nonhostile attribution
rate of 54%). In this study, when the control and
treatment groups were combined, the posttreatment
attributional measure was highly skewed, with 71%
of students choosing the lowest point on the scale,
indicating that they believed the peer’s negative
action was completely accidental. Due to skew, we
dichotomized the hostile intent postexperimental
outcome such that a score of 0 indicated that a student perceived no hostile intent whatsoever (i.e.,
average of not at all mean on purpose) and a score
of 1 indicated a student perceived at least some
hostile intent (average greater than not at all; note
that Study 1’s and 2’s results were unchanged
when we reanalyzed them with a dichotomized
hostile intent variable).
Next, so as to test the potential causal relation suggested by the correlational tests in Study 1, we administered the Study 1 rating scale measure of a desire for
vengeance following the ambiguous hypothetical
provocation (asking, e.g., how much they would feel
like “hurting,” “getting back at,” or “punishing” the
transgressor; see Yeager et al., 2011, for validity data).
This continuous measure had high internal consistency reliability (a = .81) and was not skewed.
At the same time, we sought to replicate longitudinally Study 2’s effect of an incremental theory
manipulation on open-ended reactions to the provocation scenario. Therefore, we again asked participants to write free responses about how they would
feel after the provocation, and two independent coders (blind to condition and hypotheses) followed our
extensive coding process to reliably categorize the
free responses as positive, negative, or neutral or
ambivalent (percent agreement for each > 92%; Krippendorff’s as = .84, .84). In support of the validity
of this measure, it was signiﬁcantly correlated with
ratings of a desire for vengeance, r = .30, p = .009.

Attributions of Hostile Intent and Desire for Vengeance

Results and Discussion

Eight months after the intervention, we measured hostile intent attributions following the same
hypothetical scenario employed in Studies 1 and 2
(i.e., depicting an ambiguously intended collision
with a peer in the hallway). We note that although
the present sample was a relatively afﬂuent one,
the percent of students in the control group who

To reduce error variance, regressions in Study 3
included dummy variables for participant race, participant gender, and classroom, while also controlling for
baseline entity theories. These reduced the standard
errors associated with treatment effects, although models that did not control for any covariates produced a
virtually identical overall pattern of results.

(to obtain manipulation checks), as well as 8 months
later, in the last month of school (to measure the key
dependent variables). The intervention procedure
was as follows: During the 1st week of school,
Algebra 1 teachers gave an overview to both the
treatment and control groups of how the brain
changes and learns, and this provided background
for both the treatment and control messages. About
2 weeks later, students received envelopes (randomly assigned within classes) containing either a
treatment activity or a control activity, which they
completed silently during class time. The treatment
activity was identical to the treatment activity
described in Study 2 (i.e., it involved reading a
scientiﬁc article that summarized neuroscientiﬁc
information, reading quotes from upperclassmen,
and writing a persuasive message to future students
endorsing the incremental theory). Recall that this
activity made no mention of intent in general and
more speciﬁcally it did not address accidental
or ambiguous actions. Instead, it focused on the
function and malleability of the brain and the implications of this for understanding people’s character
traits.
The control activity was nearly identical to the
control activity employed in Study 2, except that it
endorsed a different malleable theory: one about
athletic skills, rather than study skills, which was
used in Study 2. This was done because an additional objective of this study (to be reported in
another manuscript) was to investigate the effect of
the intervention on academic performance, and so a
nonacademic control group was required.

Measures
Implicit Theories of Personality

Implicit Theories and Hostile Intent Attributions

Preliminary Analyses
Randomization was effective. There were no
baseline differences between the groups in terms of
gender, race, mother’s education, primary language
at home, eighth-grade math and English achievement, eighth-grade absences, belief in an entity
theory of personality, or peer exclusion or victimization (statistical tests available on request). Also, as
predicted, the incremental theory intervention led
students to express less of a belief in an entity theory of
personal traits (control M [covariate adjusted] = 2.86,
SD = 1.20; treatment M = 2.39, SD = 1.09), t(76) =
2.05, p = .04, d = .39, controlling for baseline levels.
Thus, our experiment constituted a fair test of whether
implicit theories could change attributions of hostile
intent.
Did the Intervention Affect Reactions to an Ambiguous
Provocation 8 Months Postintervention?
Experimental group participants, who learned
during the 1st month of school that people have the
potential to change, were signiﬁcantly less likely to
attribute a hypothetical peer’s negative action to hostile intent at the end of the school year, 8 months
later (control = 38%; experimental = 22%; percentages are raw, unadjusted values), unstandardized
logistic b = 1.13, SE = 0.56, Z = 1.99, p = .047.
Next, and perhaps more importantly, experimental
group participants also showed greatly lower ratings
of a desire for revenge 8 months later compared to
the control group, unstandardized b = .09,
SE = 0.03, t(76) = 2.72, p = .008, d = .62.
We predicted that the intervention would have
these effects because it led participants to hold less
of an entity theory compared to the control group,
and this is what a mediational analysis showed. An
entity theory of personality measured 1–2 days
postintervention predicted greater attributions of
hostile intent and desire for vengeance 8 months
postintervention, r = .25, p = .03, and r = .35,
p = .001, respectively. Crucially, the treatment effect
on immediate changes in an entity theory (1–2 days
postintervention) statistically mediated the longitudinal treatment effect on both attributions and
desire for vengeance 8 months postintervention,
indirect b = .03 (95% CI [ .09, .001]), indirect
b = .02 (95% CI [ .05, .001]), respectively, and
in both cases the treatment effect on these dependent variables was reduced to nonsigniﬁcance
when accounting for immediate change in entity
theories. This mediational result supports our claim
that it was the immediate difference in implicit the-

13

ories produced by the intervention that led to longterm effects on hostile intent attributions and a
desire for vengeance.
Did Attributions of Hostile Intent Mediate the
Intervention’s Effects on the Desire for Vengeance?
Next, we sought to replicate Study 1’s ﬁnding
that the effect of implicit theories on attributions of
hostile intent would mediate the relation with the
desire for vengeance. As expected, attributions of
intent were highly signiﬁcantly correlated with
higher ratings of a desire for vengeance, r = .41,
p < .001. In a formal test of mediation, there was a
signiﬁcant indirect effect of the intervention on ratings of vengeance mediated by attributions of intent
b = .03 (95% CI [ .08, .005]), and this amounted
to roughly 32% of the effect of the intervention on
vengeance. In this model, the intervention effect on
vengeance was reduced to marginal signiﬁcance,
b = .06, t(76) = 1.931, p = .058. Hence, a signiﬁcant proportion of the relation between the incremental theory intervention and ratings of a desire
for vengeance was accounted for by the reduction
in attributions of hostile intent.
Replication of Effect on Open-Ended Comments
Finally, we sought to replicate Study 2’s effect on
open-ended-positive and -negative reactions to the
provocation scenario. This analysis showed that the
experimental group students wrote more positive and
fewer negative free responses than control students at
the end of the year, ordered logistic b = 1.47,
SE = 0.51, t(76) = 2.93, p = .004. More concretely,
the experimental group was 43% less likely to write
negative, angry responses to the scenario 8 months
postintervention (control = 59%; experimental = 34%;
see Figure 2b), such as “I would be extremely angry”
or “I would call him names.” And the intervention
group was more than 4 times more likely to write
positive, understanding responses 8 months postintervention (control = 5%; experimental = 22%; see
Figure 2b), such as “I would ﬁrst expect them to say
sorry and I myself would say sorry to them. I would
not be that mad because they were in a hurry to get to
class and we were in a hurry.”
Summary
In sum, Study 3 provided causal evidence for
Study 1’s correlational relation between implicit
theories and ratings of a desire for vengeance, mediated by the hostile attributional bias. In addition,

14

Yeager, Miu, Powers, and Dweck

Study 3 replicated the experimental ﬁndings in
Study 2 over an entire school year and in doing so
provided early evidence for a new method to supplement existing strategies to reduce attributions of
hostile intent in real-world settings.

General Discussion
As we noted at the outset, the hostile attributional
bias (Dodge, 1980, 2006) has been one of the most
generative and inﬂuential constructs in the study of
reactive aggression, and its discovery has led to
many successful interventions that reduce youth
aggression in real-world settings (Wilson & Lipsey,
2006). Yet to more effectively prevent the development of this attributional bias—and to more effectively reduce it throughout the life span—we require
a fuller picture of its origins. Although past research
has shown that negative experiences (such as abuse
or victimization) and hostile schemas (such as the
chronic accessibility of aggressive thoughts) can predict the hostile attributional bias, we sought to
expand the theoretical account of its development in
adolescence to include beliefs that need not have
arisen from negative or hostile inﬂuences. Speciﬁcally, we proposed that implicit theories of personality—underlying beliefs about whether personality
traits are ﬁxed or are malleable—could shape adolescents’ patterns of attributions following ambiguous
provocations and predict their aggressive reactions.
In a meta-analytic summary of 11 original correlational tests of the hypothesis, in an experiment replicated in two independent samples, and in a
longitudinal intervention, we found support for this
proposal. Study 1’s tests showed that an entity theory
of personality predicted attributions of hostile intent
nearly as strongly as (and not signiﬁcantly different
from) the more hostile schemas and experiences that
have been highlighted in summaries of past research
(Dodge, 2006). An entity theory predicted hostile
intent attributions even when controlling for adolescents’ past experiences with peer victimization,
suggesting that this link was not due to a shared relation with peer victimization. Study 1 also showed that
implicit theories predicted hostile attributions
equally for males and females, for students from
communities with higher levels of violence and
from communities with lower levels of violence, and
even for students who reported a complete absence
of hostile schemas about people in general.
In Study 2 we addressed the causal question
more directly by showing that experimentally
changing implicit theories toward more of an

incremental view could substantially reduce attributions of hostile intent during the same testing
session. This was true both in a suburban neighborhood with low levels of violence and in an urban
neighborhood with higher levels of violence. This
suggests that even in generally nonhostile environments an incremental theory of personality can
ameliorate an attributional precursor to aggressive
behavior, and it shows that even in a context with
higher levels of violence adolescents’ hostile intent
attributions could be changed. Study 3 extended
this research by showing that an incremental theory, learned in only two class sessions at the beginning of the school year, could produce more benign
intent attributions 8 months postintervention, and,
because of this, greatly reduce the desire for
revenge at the end of the school year. Note that
Study 3 was only an initial test of this intervention
in a high-income suburban school, and it will be
important to continue to examine its effects on
actual aggressive behavior among students from
more hostile neighborhoods in the future (although
see Yeager et al., in press). Nevertheless, as Figure 2b
shows, even the relatively afﬂuent sample in Study
3 showed substantial negative responses to the
provocation scenario, suggesting that interventions
may be beneﬁcial for such samples.
Because entity beliefs about traits can increase
the probability of aggressive responses to provocations, it is possible that even adolescents who live
in largely nonhostile environments, but nevertheless
learn that traits are ﬁxed, can have a latent vulnerability that leads them to desire violent revenge
toward peers who transgress against them. Of
course, this desire for revenge may remain latent as
long as adolescents successfully employ self-regulation skills to restrain their desires (DeWall &
Anderson, 2011). Yet this hidden propensity for
aggressive fantasies is alarming because it may go
unaddressed. The present ﬁndings might lead us to
think more broadly about the factors that contribute
to youth aggression and about methods to prevent
it, even in populations not typically thought of as
“at risk” for hostile attributional biases.
We also hope our ﬁndings will lead the ﬁeld to
think carefully about the messages that we as a
society convey to students about the ﬁxedness of
people’s character traits. New research might examine what messages parents, media, teachers, and
caregivers give to children and adolescents about
the nature of traits, and might test whether changing those messages might promote greater resilience
over time. For instance, in an effort to boost selfesteem, parents or teachers may use ﬁxed labels to

Implicit Theories and Hostile Intent Attributions

comfort socially excluded teens (e.g., “don’t worry,
you’re a good person”) and to describe aggressive
peers (e.g., “they’re bad people” or “they’re evil”)
so as to ward off victims’ self-blaming attributions.
These messages, although designed to be helpful,
may actually be fostering more vengeful responses
to future social conﬂicts by leading students to live
in an entity theory framework (cf. Mueller &
Dweck, 1998; Rattan, Good, & Dweck, 2012, for
analogous research in the academic domain).
Hence, by directing future research toward understanding the seemingly nonhostile or purportedly
positive messages from parents or educators, we
may uncover unexpected psychological causes of
aggression.
What might be some ways of comforting children and adolescents without implying that the
aggressor is someone who is inherently bad and
cannot change? Research has not conclusively
answered this question. However, based on the
present ﬁndings we propose that it could be helpful
to emphasize that people do not bully others
because they are unchangeably “bad,” but because
of their thoughts and feelings—thoughts and feelings that live in the brain and that have the potential to change. For instance, a child could be
reminded that some peers bully others because they
are insecure about their social status and see
bullying as a way to climb the social hierarchy. In
fact, compelling research demonstrates that these
insecurities produce bullying (Cohen & Prinstein,
2006; Faris & Felmlee, 2011). More research is
needed to arrive at effective methods for deﬂecting
self-blaming attributions and acknowledging the
injustice of peer aggression without incurring the
cost of promoting an entity theory of traits.
Next, although we have focused on the pathway
from implicit theories to aggression through hostile
intent attributions, we do not believe that these hostile attributions are the only mediator between
implicit theories and aggression. Our past research
and theory suggests that those with more of an
entity theory, in addition to the transgressorfocused attributions and emotions, also experience
more negative self-focused emotions and attributions. For instance, in the face of social adversity,
those with more of an entity theory are more likely
to think that perhaps they are not likable people
(Erdley et al., 1997), to say they felt bad about
themselves (Yeager et al., 2011, Study 1), and to
report feeling more ashamed (Yeager et al., 2011,
Study 3). Yeager et al. (2011) showed that these
negative feelings about the self, in turn, led to a

15

desire for vengeance, an effect that was independent of negative attributions about the transgressor.
Thus, we view implicit theories as a broad construct
that can have multiple pathways to aggression.
The present research may have implications for
practice. Although past research has consistently
shown that a hostile attributional bias can predict
vengeful responses among older adolescents in
middle school and high school (a conclusion supported by the present studies as well), past interventions designed to change this bias have been
less consistently successful in reducing aggression
in older age groups than among younger, elementary school-aged children (e.g., Metropolitan Area
Child Study Research Group, 2002; for a meta-analysis, see Wilson & Lipsey, 2006). Future research
can determine whether our implicit theories intervention can serve as a helpful addition to socialinformation processing interventions for adolescents.
Limitations
A notable limitation of this research, like much
of the research on the hostile attributional bias, is
that it relied on self-report measures of attributions
and aggressive desires. Because these attributions
are a subjective interpretation of an ambiguous
stimulus, self-report is the preferred method to elicit
them (e.g., Dodge, 1980, Study 2), and it often
yields useful predictors of aggressive behavior
(e.g., Pettit et al., 2010). Nevertheless, it will be
important to continue to document the impact of
implicit theories of personality on the behavioral
consequences of these attributions. Interestingly,
some research is beginning to ﬁnd that changes in
implicit theories can result in differences in behavioral aggression among low-income students
attending an urban public high school (Yeager
et al., in press). Hence, we think the results shown
here for self-reported desire for vengeance are
likely to be found in future analyses of behavioral
aggression.
Next, the conclusions of the present research are
limited to judgments of peers about whom an adolescent has no prior information. As noted, this was
done to replicate the procedures used in classic
studies (e.g., Dodge, 1980). However, attributions of
intent can differ when considering peers about
whom one already feels positively or negatively
(Peets, Hodges, Kikas, & Salmivalli, 2007). Therefore, future studies might vary the participants’
prior knowledge of the provoking peer and assess
differential effects of implicit theories.

16

Yeager, Miu, Powers, and Dweck

Conclusion
Social-cognitive theories of aggression have typically assumed that aggressive behavior comes from
aggressive inputs. This assumption dates from the
earliest social learning theories (Bandura, Ross, &
Ross, 1961), which emphasized viewing and internalizing aggressive behavior, to the contemporary
social information processing and general aggression models (Anderson & Bushman, 2001; Bushman
& Huesmann, 2010; DeWall and Anderson, 2011;
Dodge et al., 2006), which have highlighted aggressive inputs such as hostile environments, aggressive
scripts, and violent media. As noted, we do not
debate these ﬁndings, but we also believe it is critical to understand that aggressive behaviors come
from aggressive interpretations of social stimuli.
These interpretations can arise from a variety of
inputs, perhaps even well-intentioned, seemingly
helpful messages from valued caregivers who convey an entity theory of traits. When we shift our
perspective to focus on overall mindsets that give
rise to aggressive interpretations and on the messages that reinforce them, then we may be able to
more fully map out the range of experiences and
messages that can prepare adolescents to respond
resiliently to life’s social adversities.
References
Anderson, C. A., & Bushman, B. J. (2001). Effects of violent video games on aggressive behavior, aggressive
cognition, aggressive affect, physiological arousal, and
prosocial behavior: A meta-analytic review of the scientiﬁc literature. Psychological Science, 12, 353–359.
Aronson, E. (1999). The power of self-persuasion. American Psychologist, 54, 875–884.
Aronson, J., Fried, C., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the
effects of stereotype threat on African American college
students by shaping theories of intelligence. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 113–125.
Bandura, A., Ross, D., & Ross, A. (1961). Transmission of
aggression through imitation of aggressive models.
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 63, 575–582.
Baumeister, R. F., Vohs, K. D., DeWall, C. N., & Zhang,
L. (2007). How emotion shapes behavior: Feedback,
anticipation, and reﬂection, rather than direct causation.
Personality and Social Psychology Review, 11, 167–203.
Blackwell, L. S., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007).
Implicit theories of intelligence predict achievement
across an adolescent transition: A longitudinal study and
an intervention. Child Development, 78, 246–263.
Burks, S. V., Laird, R. D., Dodge, K. A., Pettit, G. S., &
Bates, J. E. (1999). Knowledge structures, social information processing, and children’s aggressive behavior.
Social Development, 8, 220–236.

Bushman, B. J., & Huesmann, L. R. (2010). Aggression. In
S. T. Fiske, D. T. Gilbert, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of
social psychology (5th ed., pp. 833–863). New York: Wiley.
Chiu, C., Hong, Y., & Dweck, C. S. (1997). Lay dispositionism and implicit theories of personality. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 19–30.
Cohen, G. L., & Prinstein, M. J. (2006). Peer contagion of
aggression and health-risk behavior among adolescent
males: An experimental investigation of effects on public conduct and private attitudes. Child Development, 77,
967–983.
DeWall, C. N., & Anderson, C. A. (2011). The general
aggression model. In M. Mikulincer & P. R. Shaver
(Eds.), Understanding and reducing aggression, violence,
and their consequences (pp. 15–33). Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Dodge, K. A. (1980). Social cognition and children’s
aggressive behavior. Child Development, 51, 162–170.
Dodge, K. A. (2006). Translational science in action: Hostile
attributional style and the development of aggressive
behavior problems. Development and Psychopathology, 18,
791–814.
Dodge, K. A., Bates, J. E., & Pettit, G. S. (1990). Mechanisms in the cycle of violence. Science, 250, 1678–1683.
Dodge, K. A., Coie, J. D., & Lynam, D. (2006). Aggression
and antisocial behavior in youth. In W. Damon, (Series
Ed.) & N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and personality development (6th ed., pp. 719–788). New York: Wiley.
Dodge, K. A., Laird, R., Lochman, J. E., & Zelli, A. (2002).
Multidimensional latent-construct analysis of children’s
social information processing patterns: Correlations
with aggressive behavior problems. Psychological Assessment, 14, 60–73.
Dweck, C. S. (2006). Mindset: The new psychology of success.
New York: Random House.
Dweck, C. S., Chiu, C., & Hong, Y. (1995). Implicit theories and their role in judgments and reactions: A world
from two perspectives. Psychological Inquiry, 6, 267–285.
Erdley, C., Cain, K., Loomis, C., Dumas-Hines, F., &
Dweck, C. S. (1997). The relations among children’s
social goals, implicit personality theories and response
to social failure. Developmental Psychology, 33, 263–272.
Erdley, C. A., & Dweck, C. S. (1993). Children’s implicit
personality theories as predictors of their social judgments. Child Development, 64, 863–878.
Faris, R., & Felmlee, D. (2011). Status struggles: Network
centrality and gender segregation in same- and cross-gender aggression. American Sociological Review, 76, 48–73.
Graham, S., & Juvonen, J. (1998). Self-blame and peer victimization in middle school: An attributional analysis.
Developmental Psychology, 34, 587–599.
Heider, F., & Simmel, M. (1944). An experimental study
of apparent behavior. American Journal of Psychology, 57,
243–259.
Hong, Y., Chiu, C., Dweck, C. S., & Sacks, R. (1997). Implicit theories and evaluative processes in person cognition.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 33, 296–323.

Implicit Theories and Hostile Intent Attributions
Hudley, C., & Graham, S. (1993). An attributional intervention to reduce peer-directed aggression among African-American boys. Child Development, 64, 124–138.
Imai, K., Keele, L., & Tingley, D. (2010). A general
approach to causal mediation analysis. Psychological
Methods, 15, 309–334.
Imai, K., Keele, L., Tingley, D., & Yamamoto, T. (2011).
Unpacking the black box of causality: Learning about
causal mechanisms from experimental and observational
studies. American Political Science Review, 105, 765–789.
Levy, S. R., & Dweck, C. S. (1999). The impact of children’s static versus dynamic conceptions of people on
stereotype formation. Child Development, 70, 1163–1180.
MacBrayer, E. K., Milich, R., & Hundley, M. (2003). Attributional biases in aggressive children and their mothers. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 112, 698–708.
Mueller, C. M., & Dweck, C. S. (1998). Praise for intelligence can undermine children’s motivation and performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75,
33–52.
Peets, K., Hodges, E. V. E., Kikas, E., & Salmivalli, C.
(2007). Hostile attributions and behavioral strategies in
children: Does relationship type matter? Developmental
Psychology, 43, 889–900.
Pettit, G. S., Lansford, J. E., Malone, P. S., Dodge, K. A.,
& Bates, J. E. (2010). Domain speciﬁcity in relationship
history, social-information processing, and violent
behavior in early adulthood. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 98, 190–200.
R Development Core Team. (2008). R: A language and
environment for statistical computing. Vienna: R Foundation for Statistical Computing.
Rattan, A., Good, C., & Dweck, C. S. (2012). “It’s ok—
Not everyone can be good at math”: Instructors with
an entity theory comfort (and demotivate) students.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48, 731–737.
Schooler, J. (2011). Unpublished results hide the decline
effect. Nature, 470, 437.
Simmons, J. P., Nelson, L. D., & Simonsohn, U. (2011). Falsepositive psychology. Psychological Science, 22, 1359–1366.
United States Department of Justice, Federal Bureau
of Investigation. (2011). Crime in the United States, 2010.
Retrieved January 22, 2012, from http://www.fbi.gov/
about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-in-the-u.s/2010/crime-in-the-u.s.
-2010/violent-crime/violent-crime
Viechtbauer, W. (2010). Conducting meta-analyses in R
with the metafor package. Journal of Statistical Software,
36, 1–48.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A brief socialbelonging intervention improves academic and health

17

outcomes of minority students. Science, 331, 1447–
1451.
Williams, K. D. (2009). Ostracism: A temporal need-threat
model. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 41,
275–314.
Williams, K. S., Yeager, D. S., Cheung, C. K. T., & Choi,
W. (2012). Cyberball (version 4.0) [Software]. Retrieved
January 10, 2012, from https://cyberball.wikispaces.com
Wilson, S. J., & Lipsey, M. W. (2006). The effects of school-based
social information processing interventions on aggressive
behavior, Part I: Universal programs. A Campbell Collaboration Systematic Review. Retrieved January 10, 2012, from
www.campbellcollaboration.org/lib/download/73/
Yeager, D. S., & Krosnick, J. (2011). Does mentioning
“some people” and “other people” in a survey question
increase the accuracy of adolescents’ self-reports? Developmental Psychology, 47, 1674–1679.
Yeager, D. S., & Krosnick, J. (2012). Does mentioning
“some people” and “other people” in an attitude question improve measurement quality? Public Opinion
Quarterly, 76, 131–141.
Yeager, D. S., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (in
press). An implicit theories of personality intervention
reduces adolescent aggression in response to victimization and exclusion. Child Development.
Yeager, D. S., Trzesniewski, K. H., Tirri, K., Nokelainen,
P., & Dweck, C. S. (2011). Adolescents’ implicit theories
predict desire for vengeance after peer conﬂicts: Correlational and experimental evidence. Developmental Psychology, 47, 1090–1107.
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. (2011). Social-psychological
interventions in education: They’re not magic. Review of
Educational Research, 81, 267–301.
Yeung, R. S., & Leadbeater, B. J. (2007). Does hostile attributional bias for relational provocations mediate the
short-term association between relational victimization
and aggression in preadolescence? Journal of Youth and
Adolescence, 36, 973.

Supporting Information
Additional supporting information may be found in
the online version of this article at the publisher’s
website:
Table S1. Summary of Correlational Relationships Between Implicit Theories, Attributions of
Hostile Intent, and Aggressive Desires Across Eight
Samples and Eleven Studies (Study 1).

Journal of Educational Psychology
2016, Vol. 108, No. 3, 374 –391

© 2016 American Psychological Association
0022-0663/16/$12.00 http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/edu0000098

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Using Design Thinking to Improve Psychological Interventions:
The Case of the Growth Mindset During the Transition to High School
David S. Yeager

Carissa Romero and Dave Paunesku

University of Texas at Austin

Stanford University

Christopher S. Hulleman

Barbara Schneider

University of Virginia

Michigan State University

Cintia Hinojosa, Hae Yeon Lee, and Joseph O’Brien

Kate Flint, Alice Roberts, and Jill Trott

University of Texas at Austin

ICF International, Fairfax, Virginia

Daniel Greene, Gregory M. Walton, and Carol S. Dweck
Stanford University
There are many promising psychological interventions on the horizon, but there is no clear methodology
for preparing them to be scaled up. Drawing on design thinking, the present research formalizes a
methodology for redesigning and tailoring initial interventions. We test the methodology using the case
of fixed versus growth mindsets during the transition to high school. Qualitative inquiry and rapid,
iterative, randomized “A/B” experiments were conducted with ⬃3,000 participants to inform intervention revisions for this population. Next, 2 experimental evaluations showed that the revised growth
mindset intervention was an improvement over previous versions in terms of short-term proxy outcomes
(Study 1, N ⫽ 7,501), and it improved 9th grade core-course GPA and reduced D/F GPAs for lower
achieving students when delivered via the Internet under routine conditions with ⬃95% of students at 10
schools (Study 2, N ⫽ 3,676). Although the intervention could still be improved even further, the current
research provides a model for how to improve and scale interventions that begin to address pressing
educational problems. It also provides insight into how to teach a growth mindset more effectively.
Keywords: adolescence, growth mindset, incremental theory of intelligence, motivation, psychological
intervention

One of the most promising developments in educational psychology in recent years has been the finding that self-administered
psychological interventions can initiate lasting improvements in
student achievement (Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Garcia & Cohen,
2012; Walton, 2014; Wilson, 2002; Yeager & Walton, 2011).
These interventions do not provide new instructional materials or
pedagogies. Instead, they capitalize on the insights of expert teachers (see Lepper & Woolverton, 2001; Treisman, 1992) by addressing students’ subjective construals of themselves and school—

how students view their abilities, their experiences in school, their
relationships with peers and teachers, and their learning tasks (see
Ross & Nisbett, 1991).
For instance, students can show greater motivation to learn
when they are led to construe their learning situation as one in
which they have the potential to develop their abilities (Dweck,
1999; Dweck, 2006), in which they feel psychologically safe and
connected to others (Cohen, Garcia, Apfel, & Master, 2006; Stephens, Hamedani, & Destin, 2014; Walton & Cohen, 2007), and in

David S. Yeager, Department of Psychology, University of Texas at Austin;
Carissa Romero and Dave Paunesku, PERTS and Department of Psychology,
Stanford University; Christopher S. Hulleman, School of Education, University of
Virginia; Barbara Schneider, School of Education Michigan State University;
Cintia Hinojosa, Hae Yeon Lee, and Joseph O’Brien, Department of Psychology,
University of Texas at Austin; Kate Flint, Alice Roberts, and Jill Trott, ICF
International, Fairfax, Virginia; Daniel Greene, Gregory M. Walton, and Carol S.
Dweck, Department of Psychology, Stanford University.
We thank the teachers, principals, administrators, and students who
participated in this research. This research was supported by generous funding
from the Spencer Foundation, the William T. Grant Foundation, the Bezos
Foundation, the Houston Endowment, the Character Lab, the President and

Dean of Humanities and Social Sciences at Stanford University, Angela
Duckworth, a William T. Grant scholars award, and a fellowship from the
Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences (CASBS) to the first
and fourth authors. The authors are grateful to Angela Duckworth, Elizabeth
Tipton, Michael Weiss, Tim Wilson, Robert Crosnoe, Chandra Muller, Ronald
Ferguson, Ellen Konar, Elliott Whitney, Paul Hanselman, Jeff Kosovich,
Andrew Sokatch, Katharine Meyer, Patricia Chen, Chris Macrander, Jacquie
Beaubien, and Rachel Herter for their assistance. The look and feel of the
revised intervention was developed by Matthew Kandler.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to David S.
Yeager, Department of Psychology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin,
TX 78712. E-mail: dyeager@utexas.edu or gwalton@stanford.edu
374

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

DESIGN THINKING AND PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS

which putting forth effort has meaning and value (Hulleman &
Harackiewicz, 2009; Yeager et al., 2014; see Eccles & Wigfield,
2002; also see Elliot & Dweck, 2005; Lepper, Woolverton,
Mumme, & Gurtner, 1993; Stipek, 2002). Such subjective construals—and interventions or teacher practices that affect them—
can affect behavior over time because they can become selfconfirming. When students doubt their capacities in school—for
example, when they see a failed math test as evidence that they are
not a “math person”—they behave in ways that can make this true,
for example, by studying less rather than more or by avoiding
future math challenges they might learn from. By changing initial
construals and behaviors, psychological interventions can set in
motion recursive processes that alter students’ achievement into
the future (see Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Garcia & Cohen, 2012;
Walton, 2014; Yeager & Walton, 2011).
Although promising, self-administered psychological interventions have not often been tested in ways that are sufficiently
relevant for policy and practice. For example, rigorous randomized
trials have been conducted with only limited samples of students
within schools—those who could be conveniently recruited. These
studies have been extremely useful for testing of novel theoretical
claims (e.g., Aronson, Fried, & Good, 2002; Blackwell, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2007; Good, Aronson, & Inzlicht, 2003). Some
studies have subsequently taken a step toward scale by developing
methods for delivering intervention materials to large samples via
the Internet without requiring professional development (e.g.,
Paunesku et al., 2015; Yeager et al., 2014). However, such tests are
limited in relevance for policy and practice because they did not
attempt to improve the outcomes of an entire student body or entire
subgroups of students.
There is not currently a methodology for adapting materials that
were effective in initial experiments so they can be improved and
made more effective for populations of students who are facing
particular issues at specific points in their academic lives. We seek
to develop this methodology here. To do so, we focus on students
at diverse schools but at a similar developmental stage, and who
therefore may encounter similar academic and psychological challenges and may benefit from an intervention to help them navigate
those challenges. We test whether the tradition of “design thinking,” combined with advances in psychological theory, can facilitate the development of improved intervention materials for a
given population.1
As explained later, the policy problem we address is core
academic performance of 9th graders transitioning to public high
schools in the United States and the specific intervention we
redesign is the growth mindset of intelligence intervention (also
called an incremental theory of intelligence intervention; Aronson
et al., 2002; Blackwell et al., 2007; Good et al., 2003; Paunesku et
al., 2015). The growth mindset intervention counteracts the fixed
mindset (also called an entity theory of intelligence), which is the
belief that intelligence is a fixed entity that cannot be changed with
experience and learning. The intervention teaches scientific facts
about the malleability of the brain, to show how intelligence can be
developed. It then uses writing assignments to help students internalize the messages (see the pilot study methods for detail). The
growth mindset intervention aims to increase students’ desires to
take on challenges and to enhance their persistence, by forestalling
attributions that academic struggles and setbacks mean one is “not
smart” (Blackwell et al., 2007, Study 1; see Burnette et al., 2013;

375

Yeager & Dweck, 2012). These psychological processes can result
in academic resilience.

Design Thinking and Psychological Interventions
To develop psychological interventions, expertise in theory is
crucial. But theory alone does not help a designer discover how to
connect with students facing a particular set of motivational barriers. Doing that, we believe, is easier when combining theoretical
expertise with a design-based approach (Razzouk & Shute, 2012;
also see Bryk, 2009; Yeager & Walton, 2011). Design thinking is
“problem-centered.” That is, effective design seeks to solve predictable problems for specified user groups (Kelley & Kelley,
2013; also see Bryk, 2009; Razzouk & Shute, 2012). Our hypothesis is that this problem-specific customization, guided by theory,
can increase the likelihood that an intervention will be more
effective for a predefined population.
We apply two design traditions, user-centered design and A/B
testing. Theories of user-centered design were pioneered by firms
such as IDEO (Kelley & Kelley, 2013; see Razzouk & Shute,
2012). The design process privileges the user’s subjective perspective—in the present case, 9th grade students. To do so, it often
employs qualitative research methods such as ethnographic observations of people’s mundane goal pursuit in their natural habitats
(Kelley & Kelley, 2013). User-centered design also has a bias
toward action. Designers test minimally viable products early in
the design phase in an effort to learn from users how to improve
them (see Ries, 2011). Applied to psychological intervention, this
can help prevent running a large, costly experiment with an intervention that has easily discoverable flaws. In sum, our aim was to
acquire insights about the barriers to students’ adoption of a
growth mindset during the transition to high school as quickly as
possible, using data that were readily obtainable, without waiting
for a full-scale, long-term evaluation.
User-centered design typically does not ask users what they
desire or would find compelling. Individuals may not always have
access to that information (Wilson, 2002). However, users may be
excellent reporters on what they dislike or are confused by. Thus,
user-centered designers do not often ask, “What kind of software
would you like?” Rather, they often show users prototypes and let
them say what seems wrong or right. Similarly, we did not ask
students, “What would make you adopt a growth mindset?” But we
did ask for positive and negative reactions to prototypes of growth
mindset materials. We then used those responses to formulate
changes for the next iteration.
Qualitative user-centered design can lead to novel insights, but
how would one know if those insights were actually improvements? Experimentation can help. Therefore we drew on a second
tradition, that of “A/B testing” (see, e.g., Kohavi & Longbotham,
2015). The logic is simple. Because it is easy to be wrong about
what will be persuasive to a user, rather than guess, test. We used
the methodology of low-cost, short-term, large-sample, randomassignment experiments to test revisions to intervention content.
Although each experiment may not, on its own, offer a theoretical
1
Previous research has shown how design thinking can improve instructional materials but not yet psychological interventions (see Razzouk &
Shute, 2012).

YEAGER ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

376

advance or a definitive conclusion, in the aggregate they may
improve an intervention for a population of interest.
Showing that this design process has produced intervention
materials that are more ready for scaling requires meeting at least
two conditions: (a) the redesigned intervention should be more
effective for the target population than a previous iteration when
examining short-term proxy outcomes, and (b) the redesigned
intervention should address the policy-relevant aim: namely, it
should benefit student achievement when delivered to entire populations of students within schools. Interestingly, although a great
deal has been written about best practices in design (e.g., Razzouk
& Shute, 2012), we do not know of any set of experiments that has
evaluated the end-product of a design process by collecting both
types of evidence.

Focus of the Present Investigation
As a first test case, we redesign a growth mindset of intelligence
intervention to improve it and to make it more effective for the
transition to high school (Aronson et al., 2002; Blackwell et al.,
2007; Good et al., 2003; Paunesku et al., 2015; see Dweck, 2006;
Yeager & Dweck, 2012). This is an informative case study because
(a) previous research has found that growth mindsets can predict
success across educational transitions, and previous growth mindset interventions have shown some effectiveness; (b) there is
a clearly defined psychological process model explaining how a
growth mindset relates to student performance supported by a
large amount of correlational and laboratory experimental research
(see a meta-analysis by Burnette et al., 2013), which informs
decisions about which “proxy” measures would be most useful for
shorter-term evaluations. The growth mindset is thus a good place
to start.
As noted, our defined user group was students making the
transition to high school. New 9th graders represent a large
population of students—approximately 4 million individuals
each year (Davis & Bauman, 2013). Although entering 9th
graders’ experiences can vary, there are some common challenges: high school freshmen often take more rigorous classes
than previously and their performance can affect their chances
for college; they have to form relationships with new teachers
and school staff; and they have to think more seriously about
their goals in life. Students who do not successfully complete
9th grade core courses have a dramatically lower rate of high
school graduation, and much poorer life prospects (Allensworth
& Easton, 2005). Improving the transition to high school is an
important policy objective.
Previous growth mindset interventions might be better tailored
for the transition to high school in several ways. First, past growth
mindset interventions were not designed for the specific challenges
that occur in the transition to high school. Rather they were often
written to address challenges that a learner in any context might
face, or they were aimed at middle school (Blackwell et al., 2007;
Good et al., 2003) or college (Aronson et al., 2002). Second,
interventions were not written for the vocabulary, conceptual sophistication, and interests of adolescents entering high school.
Third, when they were created, they did not have in mind arguments that might be most relevant or persuasive for 14- to 15year-olds.

Despite this potential lack of fit, prior growth mindset interventions have already shown initial effectiveness in high schools.
Paunesku et al. (2015) conducted a double-blind, randomized
experimental evaluation of a growth mindset intervention with
over 1,500 high school students via the Internet. The authors found
a significant Intervention ⫻ Prior achievement interaction, such
that lower-performing students benefitted most from the growth
mindset intervention in terms of their GPA. Lower-achievers both
may have had more room to grow (given range restriction for
higher achievers) and also may have faced greater concerns about
their academic ability (see analogous benefits for lower-achievers
in Cohen, Garcia, Purdie-Vaughns, Apfel, & Brzustoski, 2009;
Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009; Wilson & Linville, 1982; Yeager, Henderson, et al., 2014). Looking at grade improvement with
a different measure, Paunesku et al. also found that previously
low-achieving treated students were also less likely to receive “D”
and “F” grades in core classes (e.g., English, math, science). We
examine whether these results could be replicated with a redesigned intervention.

Overview of Studies
The present research, first, involved design thinking to create a
newer version of a growth mindset intervention, presented here as
a pilot study. Next, Study 1 tested whether the design process
produced growth mindset materials that were an improvement over
original materials when examining proxy outcomes, such as beliefs, goals, attributions, and challenge-seeking behavior (see
Blackwell et al., 2007 or Burnette et al., 2013 for justification).
The study required a great deal of power to detect a significant
intervention contrast because the generic intervention (called the
“original” intervention here; Paunesku et al., 2015) also taught a
growth mindset.
Note that we did not view the redesigned intervention as “final,”
as ready for universal scaling, or as representing the best possible
version of a growth mindset. Instead our goal was more modest:
we simply sought to document that a design process could create
materials that were a significant improvement relative to their
predecessor.
Study 2 tested whether we had developed a revised growth
mindset intervention that was actually effective at changing
achievement when delivered to a census of students (⬎95%) in 10
different schools across the country.2 The focal research hypothesis was an effect on core course GPA and D/F averages among
previously lower-performing students, which would replicate the
Intervention ⫻ Prior achievement interaction found by Paunesku
et al. (2015).
Study 2 was, to our knowledge, the first preregistered replication of a psychological intervention effect, the first to have data
collected and cleaned by an independent research firm, and the
first to employ a census (⬎95% response rates). Hence, it was a
rigorous test of the hypothesis.

2
A census is defined as an attempt to reach all individuals in an
organization, and is contrasted with a sample, which does not.

DESIGN THINKING AND PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS

Pilot: Using Design Thinking to Improve a Growth
Mindset Intervention

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Method
Data. During the design phase, the goal was to learn as much
as possible, as rapidly as possible, given data that were readily
available. Thus, no intentional sampling was done and no demographic data on participants were collected. For informal qualitative data—focus groups, one-on-one interviews, and other types of
feedback— high school students were contacted through personal
connections and invited to provide feedback on a new program for
high school students.
Quantitative data—the rapid “A/B” experiments—were collected from college-aged and older adults on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk platform. Although adults are not an ideal data source for
a transition to high school intervention, the A/B experiments
required great statistical power because we were testing minor
variations. Data from Mechanical Turk provided this and allowed
us to iterate quickly. Conclusions from those tests were tempered
by the qualitative feedback from high school students. At the end
of this process, we conducted a final rapid A/B randomized experiment with high school students using the Qualtrics user panel
(not discussed further).
The “original” mindset intervention. The original intervention was the starting point for our revision. It involved three
elements. First, participants read a scientific article titled “You
Can Grow Your Intelligence,” written by researchers, used in the
Blackwell et al. (2007) experiment, and slightly revised for the
Paunesku et al. (2015) experiments. It described the idea that
the brain can get smarter the more it is challenged, like a muscle.
As scientific background for this idea, the article explained what
neurons are and how they form a network in the brain. It then
provided summaries of studies showing that animals or people
(e.g., rats, babies, or London taxi drivers) who have greater experience or learning develop denser networks of neurons in their
brains.
After reading this four-page article, participants were asked to
generate a personal example of learning and getting smarter—a
time when they used to not know something, but then they practiced and got better at it. Finally, participants were asked to author
a letter encouraging a future student who might be struggling in
school and may feel “dumb.” This is a “saying-is-believing” exercise (E. Aronson, 1999; J. Aronson et al., 2002; Walton &
Cohen, 2011; Walton, 2014).
“Saying-is-believing” is thought to be effective for several reasons. First, it is thought to make the information (in this case, about
the brain and its ability to grow) more self-relevant, which may
make it easier to recall (Bower & Gilligan, 1979; Hulleman &
Harackiewicz, 2009; Lord, 1980). Prior research has found that
students can benefit more from social-psychological intervention
materials when they author reasons why the content is relevant, as
opposed to being told why they are relevant to their own lives
(Godes, Hulleman, & Harackiewicz, 2007). Second, by mentally
rehearsing how one should respond when struggling, it can be
easier to enact those thoughts or behaviors later (Gollwitzer,
1999). Third, when students are asked to communicate the message to someone else—and not directly asked to believe it themselves—it can feel less controlling, it can avoid implying that

377

students are deficient, and it can lead students to convince themselves of the truth of the proposition via cognitive dissonance
processes (see research on self-persuasion, Aronson, 1999; also
see Bem, 1965; Cooper & Fazio, 1984).

Procedures and Results: Revising the Mindset
Intervention
Design methodology.
User-centered design. We (a) met one-on-one with 9th graders, (b) met with groups of 2 to 10 students, and (c) piloted with
groups of 20 to 25 9th graders. In these piloting sessions we first
asked students to go through a “minimally viable” version of the
intervention (i.e., early draft revisions of the “original” materials)
as if they were receiving it as a new freshman in high school. We
then led them in guided discussions of what they disliked, what
they liked, and what was confusing. We also asked students to
summarize the content of the message back to us, under the
assumption that a person’s inaccurate summary of a message is an
indication of where the clarity could be improved. The informal
feedback was suggestive, not definitive. However, a consistent
message from the students allowed the research team to identify, in
advance, predictable failures of the message to connect or instruct,
and potential improvements worth testing.
Through this we developed insights that might seem minor
taken individually, but, in the aggregate, may be important. These
were: to include quotes from admired adults and celebrities; to
include more and more diverse writing exercises; to weave purposes for why one should grow one’s brain together with statements that one could grow one’s brain; to use bullet points instead
of paragraphs; to reduce the amount of information on each page;
to show actual data from past scientific research in figures rather
than summarize them generically (because it felt more respectful);
to change examples that appear less relevant to high school students (e.g., replacing a study about rats growing their brains with
a summary of science about teenagers’ brains), and more.
A/B testing. A series of randomized experiments tested specific variations on the mindset intervention. In each, we randomized participants to versions of a mindset intervention and assessed
changes from pre- to posttest in self-reported fixed mindsets (see
measures below in Study 1; also see Dweck, 1999). Mindset
self-reports are an imperfect measure, as will be shown in the two
studies. Yet they are informative in the sense that if mindsets are
not changed— or if they were changed in the wrong direction—
then it is reason for concern. Self-reports give the data “a chance
to object” (cf. Latour, 2005).
Two studies involved a total of 7 factors, fully crossed, testing
5 research questions across N ⫽ 3,004 participants. These factors
and their effects on self-reported fixed mindsets are summarized in
Table 1.
One question tested in both A/B experiments was whether it was
more effective to tell research participants that the growth mindset
intervention was designed to help them (a “direct” framing), versus
a framing in which participants were asked to help evaluate and
contribute content for future 9th grade students (an “indirect”
framing). Research on the “saying-is-believing” tactic (E. Aronson, 1999; J. Aronson et al., 2002; Walton & Cohen, 2011; Yeager
& Walton, 2011) and theory about “stealth” interventions more
broadly (Robinson, 2010) suggest that the latter might be more

YEAGER ET AL.

378

Table 1
Designing The Revised Mindset Intervention: Manipulations and Results From Rapid, A/B Experiments of Growth Mindset
Intervention Elements Conducted on MTurk

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Effect on pre–
post mindset ⌬
A/B Study

Total N

1

1851

Manipulation and coding

Sample text

␤

p

Direct ⫽ 1 (this will help
you) framing vs.
Indirect ⫽ 0 (help
other people) framing

Direct: “Would you like to be smarter? Being smarter helps teens become the
person they want to be in life . . . In this program, we share the research
on how people can get smarter.” vs. Indirect: “Students often do a great
job explaining ideas to their peers because they see the world in similar
ways. On the following pages, you will read some scientific findings about
the human brain. . . . We would like your help to explain this information
in more personal ways that students will be able to understand. We’ll use
what we learn to help us improve the way we talk about these ideas with
students in the future.”
Refutation: Some people seem to learn more quickly than others, for
example, in math. You may think, “Oh, they’re just smarter.” But you
don’t realize that they may be working really hard at it (harder than you
think).
Benefits of mindset: People with a growth mindset know that mistakes and
setbacks are opportunities to learn. They know that their brains can grow
the most when they do something difficult and make mistakes. We studied
all the 10th graders in the nation of Chile. The students who had a growth
mindset were 3 times more likely to score in the top 20% of their class.
Those with a fixed mindset were more likely to score in the bottom 20%
Rats/Jugglers: Scientists used a brain scanner (it’s like a camera that looks
into your brain) to compare the brains of the two groups of people. They
found that the people who learned how to juggle actually grew the parts of
their brains that control juggling skills vs. Teenagers: Many of the
[teenagers] in the study showed large changes in their intelligence scores.
And these same students also showed big changes in their brain. . . . This
shows that teenagers’ brains can literally change and become smarter—if
you know how to make it happen.

⫺.234

.056

⫺.402

.002

.357

.006

⫺.122

.352

Direct: Why does getting smarter matter? Because when people get smarter,
they become more capable of doing the things they care about. Not only
can they earn higher grades and get better jobs, they can have a bigger
impact on the world and on the people they care about . . . In this
program, you’ll learn what science says about the brain and about making
it smarter. Vs. Indirect: (see above).
Refutation: Some people look around and say “How come school is so easy
for them, but I have to work hard? Are they smarter than me?” . . . They
key is not to focus on whether you’re smarter than other people. Instead,
focus on whether you’re smarter today than you were yesterday and how
you can get smarter tomorrow than you are today.
Celebrity: Endorsements from Scott Forstall, LeBron James, and Michelle
Obama.

⫺.319

.036

.002

.990

.273

.073

Refuting fixed mindset ⫽
1 vs. Not ⫽ 0
Labeling and explaining
benefits of “growth
mindset” ⫽ 1 vs.
Not ⫽ 0
Rats/jugglers scientific
evidence ⫽ 1 vs.
Teenagers ⫽ 0

2

1153
Direct (this will help
you) framing ⫽ 1 vs.
Indirect (help other
people) framing ⫽ 0
Refuting fixed mindset ⫽
1 vs. Not ⫽ 0

Celebrity endorsements ⫽
1 vs. Not ⫽ 0

Note. ␤ ⫽ standardized regression coefficient for condition contrast in multiple linear regression.

helpful, as noted above. Indeed, Table 1 shows that in both A/B
Study 1 and A/B Study 2 the direct framing led to smaller changes
in mindsets— corresponding to lower effectiveness—than indirect
framing (see rows 1 and 5 in Table 1). Thus, the indirect framing
was used throughout the revised intervention. To our knowledge
this is the first experimental test of the effectiveness of the indirect
framing in psychological interventions, even though it is often
standard practice (J. Aronson et al., 2002; Walton & Cohen, 2011;
Yeager & Walton, 2011).
The second question was: Is it more effective to present and
refute the fixed mindset view? Or is it more effective to only
teach evidence for the growth mindset view? On the one hand,
refuting the fixed mindset might more directly discredit the
problematic belief. On the other hand, it might give credence

and voice to the fixed mindset message, for instance by conveying that the fixed mindset is a reasonable perspective to hold
(perhaps even the norm), giving it an “illusion of truth”
(Skurnik, Yoon, Park, & Schwarz, 2005). This might cause
participants who hold a fixed mindset to become entrenched in
their beliefs. Consistent with the latter possibility, in A/B Study
1, refuting the fixed mindset view led to smaller changes in
mindsets— corresponding to lower effectiveness—as compared
with not doing so (see row 2 in Table 1). Furthermore, the
refutation manipulation caused participants who held a stronger
fixed mindset at baseline to show an increase in fixed mindset
postmessage, main effect p ⫽ .003, interaction effect p ⫽ .01.
That is, refuting a fixed mindset seemed to exacerbate fixed
mindset beliefs for those who already held them.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

DESIGN THINKING AND PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS

Following this discovery, we wrote a more subtle and indirect
refutation of fixed mindset thinking and tested it in A/B Study 2.
The revised content encouraged participants to replace thoughts
about between-person comparisons (that person is smarter than
me) with within-person comparisons (I can become even smarter
tomorrow than I am today). This no longer caused reduced effectiveness (see row 6 in Table 1). The final version emphasized
within-person comparisons as a means to discrediting betweenperson comparisons. As an additional precaution, beyond what we
had tested, the final materials never named or defined a “fixed
mindset.”
We also tested the impact of using well-known or successful
adults as role models of a growth mindset. For instance, the
intervention conveyed the true story of Scott Forstall, who, with
his team, developed the first iPhone at Apple. Forstall used growth
mindset research to select team members who were not afraid of
failure but were ready for a challenge. It furthermore included an
audio excerpt from a speech given by First Lady Michelle Obama,
in which she summarized the basic concepts of growth mindset
research. These increased adoption of a growth mindset compared
to versions that did not include these endorsements (see Table 1).
Other elements were tested as well (see Table 1).
Guided by theory. The redesign also relied on psychological
theory. These changes, which were not subjected to A/B testing,
are summarized here. Several theoretical elements were relevant:
(a) theories about how growth mindset beliefs affect student behavior in practice; (b) theories of cultural values that may appear
to be in contrast with growth mindset messages; and (c) theories of
how best to induce internalization of attitudes among adolescents.
Emphasizing “strategies,” not just “hard work.” We were
concerned that the “original” intervention too greatly emphasized
“hard work” as the opposite of raw ability, and underemphasized
the need to change strategies or ask adults for advice on improved
strategies for learning. This is because just working harder with
ineffective strategies will not lead to increased learning. So, for
example, the revised intervention said “Sometimes people want to
learn something challenging, and they try hard. But they get stuck.
That’s when they need to try new strategies—new ways to approach the problem” (also see Yeager & Dweck, 2012). Our goal
was to remove any stigma of needing to ask for help or having to
switch one’s approach.
Addressing a culture of independence. We were concerned
that the notion that you can grow your intelligence would perhaps
be perceived as too “independent,” and threaten the more communal, interdependent values that many students might emphasize,
especially students from working class backgrounds and some
racial/ethnic minority groups (Fryberg, Covarrubias, & Burack,
2013; Stephens et al., 2014). Therefore we included more prosocial, beyond-the-self motives for adopting and using a growth
mindset (see Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009; Yeager et al.,
2014). For example, the new intervention said:
People tell us that they are excited to learn about a growth mindset
because it helps them achieve the goals that matter to them and to people
they care about. They use the mindset to learn in school so they can give
back to the community and make a difference in the world later.

Aligning norms. Adolescents may be especially likely to conform to peers (Cohen & Prinstein, 2006), and so we created a norm

379

around the use of a growth mindset (Cialdini et al., 1991). For
instance, the end of the second session said “People everywhere are
working to become smarter. They are starting to understand that
struggling and learning are what put them on a path to where they
want to go.” The intervention furthermore presented a series of stories
from older peers who endorsed the growth mindset concepts.
Harnessing reactance. We sought to use adolescent reactance, or the tendency to reject mainstream or external exhortations to change personal choices (Brehm, 1966; Erikson, 1968;
Hasebe, Nucci, & Nucci, 2004; Nucci, Killen, & Smetana, 1996),
as an asset rather than as a source of resistance to the message. We
did this by initially framing the mindset message as a reaction to
adult control. For instance, at the very beginning of the intervention adolescents read this story from an upper year student:
I hate how people put you in a box and say ‘you’re smart at this’ or
‘not smart at that.’ After this program, I realized the truth about labels:
they’re made up. . . . Now I do not let other people box me in. . . . It’s
up to me to put in the work to strengthen my brain.

Self-persuasion. The revised intervention increased the number of opportunities for participants to write their own opinions
and stories. This was believed to increase the probability that more
of the benefits of “saying-is-believing” would be achieved.

Study 1: Does a Revised Growth Mindset Intervention
Outperform a Previous Effective Intervention?
Study 1 evaluated whether the design process resulted in materials
that were an improvement over the originals. As criteria, Study 1 used
short-term measures of psychological processes that are wellestablished to follow from a growth mindset: person versus processfocused attributions for difficulty (low ability vs. strategy or effort),
performance avoidance goals (overconcern about making mistakes or
looking incompetent), and challenge-seeking behavior (Blackwell et
al., 2007; Mueller & Dweck, 1998; see Burnette et al., 2013; Dweck
& Leggett, 1988; Yeager & Dweck, 2012). Note that the goal of this
research was not to test whether any individual revision, by itself,
caused greater efficacy, but rather to investigate all of the changes, in
the aggregate, in comparison with the original intervention.

Method
Data. A total of 69 high schools in the United States and
Canada were recruited, and 7,501 9th grade students (predominately ages 14 –15) provided data during the session when dependent measures were collected (Time 2), although not all finished
the session.3 Participants were diverse: 17% were Hispanic/Latino,
6% were black/African American, 3% were Native American/
American Indian, 48% were White, non-Hispanic, 5% were Asian/
Asian American, and the rest were from another or multiple racial
groups. Forty-eight percent were female, and 53% reported that
their mothers had earned a bachelor’s degree or greater.
Procedures.
School recruitment. Schools were recruited via advertisements in prominent educational publications, through social media
3
This experiment involved a third condition of equal cell size that was
developed to test other questions. Results involving that condition will be
presented in a future report, but they are fully consistent with all of the
findings presented here.

YEAGER ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

380

(e.g., Twitter), and through recruitment talks to school districts or
other school administrators. Schools were informed that they
would have access to a free growth mindset intervention for their
students. Because of this recruitment strategy, all participating
students indeed received a version of a growth mindset intervention. The focal comparison was between an “original” version of a
growth mindset intervention (Paunesku et al., 2015, which was
adapted from materials in Blackwell et al., 2007), and a “revised”
version, created via the user-centered, rapid-prototyping design
process summarized above. See screenshots in Figure 1.
The original intervention. Minor revisions were made to the
original intervention to make it more parallel to the revised intervention, such as the option for the text to be read to students.
Survey sessions. In the winter of 2015, school coordinators
brought their students to the computer labs for two sessions, 1 to
4 weeks apart (researchers never visited the schools). The Time 1
session involved baseline survey items, a randomized mindset intervention, some fidelity measures, and brief demographics. Random
assignment happened in real time and was conducted by a web server,
and so all staff were blind to condition. The Time 2 session involved
a second round of content for the revised mindset intervention, and
control exercises for the original mindset condition. At the end of
session two, students completed proxy outcome measures.
Measures. In order to minimize respondent burden and increase
efficiency at scale, we used or developed 1- to 3-item self-report
measures of our focal constructs (see a discussion of “practical measurement” in Yeager & Bryk, 2015). We also developed a brief
behavioral task.
Fixed mindset. Three items at Time 1 and Time 2 assessed
fixed mindsets: “You have a certain amount of intelligence, and
you really can’t do much to change it,” “Your intelligence is
something about you that you can’t change very much,” and
“Being a “math person” or not is something that you really cannot
change. Some people are good at math and other people aren’t.”
(Response options: 1 ⫽ Strongly disagree, 2 ⫽ Disagree, 3 ⫽
Mostly disagree, 4 ⫽ Mostly agree, 5 ⫽ Agree, 6 ⫽ Strongly
agree). These were averaged into a single scale with higher values
corresponding to more fixed mindsets (␣ ⫽ .74).
Challenge-seeking: The “Make-a-Math-Worksheet” Task.
We created a novel behavioral task to assess a known behavioral
consequence of a growth mindset: challenge-seeking (Blackwell et
al., 2007; Mueller & Dweck, 1998). This task may allow for a
detection of effects for previously high-achieving students, because GPA may have a range restriction at the high end. It used
Algebra and Geometry problems obtained from the Khan Academy website and was designed to have more options than previous
measures (Mueller & Dweck, 1998) to produce a continuous
measure of challenge seeking. Participants read these instructions:
We are interested in what kinds of problems high school math students prefer to work on. On the next few pages, we would like you to
create your own math worksheet. If there is time, at the end of the
survey you will have the opportunity to answer these math problems.
On the next few pages there are problems from 4 different math
chapters. Choose between 2 and 6 problems for each chapter.

You can choose from problems that are:
Very challenging but you might learn a lot; Somewhat challenging and
you might learn a medium amount; Not very challenging and you

probably will not learn very much; Do not try to answer the math
problems. Just click on the problems you’d like to try later if there’s time.

See Figure 2. There were three topic areas (Introduction to Algebra, Advanced Algebra, and Geometry), and within each topic area
there were four “chapters” (e.g., rational and irrational numbers,
quadratic equations, etc.), and within each chapter there were six
problems, each labeled “Not very challenging,” “Somewhat challenging,” or “Very challenging” (two per type).4 Each page showed the six
problems for a given chapter and, as noted, students were instructed
to select “at least 2 and up to 6 problems” on each page.
The total number of “Very challenging” (i.e., hard) problems
chosen across the 12 pages was calculated for each student (Range:
0 –24) as was the total number of “Not very challenging” (i.e.,
easy) problems (Range: 0 –24). The final measure was the number
of easy problems minus the number of hard problems selected.
Visually, the final measure approximated a normal distribution.
Challenge-seeking: Hypothetical scenario. Participants were
presented with the following scenario, based on a measure in
Mueller and Dweck (1998):
Imagine that, later today or tomorrow, your math teacher hands out
two extra credit assignments. You get to choose which one to do. You
get the same number of points for trying either one. One choice is an
easy review—it has math problems you already know how to solve,
and you will probably get most of the answers right without having to
think very much. It takes 30 minutes. The other choice is a hard
challenge—it has math problems you don’t know how to solve, and
you will probably get most of the problems wrong, but you might
learn something new. It also takes 30 minutes. If you had to pick right
now, which would you pick?

Participants chose one of two options (1 ⫽ The easy math
assignment where I would get most problems right, 0 ⫽ The hard
math assignment where I would possibly learn something new).
Higher values corresponded to the avoidance of challenge, and so
this measure should be positively correlated with fixed mindset
and be reduced by the mindset intervention.
Fixed-trait attributions. Fixed mindset beliefs are known predictors of person-focused versus process-focused attributional
styles (e.g., Henderson & Dweck, 1990; Robins & Pals, 2002). We
adapted prior measures (Blackwell et al., 2007) to develop a
briefer assessment. Participants read this scenario: “Pretend that,
later today or tomorrow, you got a bad grade on a very important
math assignment. Honestly, if that happened, how likely would
you be to think these thoughts?” Participants then rated this fixedtrait, person-focused response “This means I’m probably not very
smart at math” and this malleable, process-focused response “I can
get a higher score next time if I find a better way to study
(reverse-scored)” (response options: 1 ⫽ Not at all likely, 2 ⫽
Slightly likely, 3 ⫽ Somewhat likely, 4 ⫽ Very likely, 5 ⫽ Extremely likely). The two items were averaged into a single composite, with higher values corresponding to more fixed-trait,
person-focused attributional responses.
4
A screening question also asked students to list what math course they
are currently taking. Supplementary analyses found results were no different when limiting the worksheet task data only to the “chapters” that
correspond to the course a student was enrolled in.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

DESIGN THINKING AND PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS

381

Figure 1. Screenshots of the “original” and “revised” mindset interventions. See the online article for the color
version of this figure.

Performance avoidance goals. Because fixed mindset beliefs
are known to predict the goal of hiding one’s lack of knowledge
(Dweck & Leggett, 1988), we measured performance-avoidance
goals with a single item (Elliot & McGregor, 2001; performance
approach goals were not measured). Participants read “What
are your goals in school from now until the end of the year? Below,
say how much you agree or disagree with this statement. One of
my main goals for the rest of the school year is to avoid looking
stupid in my classes” (Response options: 1 ⫽ Strongly disagree,
2 ⫽ Disagree, 3 ⫽ Mostly disagree, 4 ⫽ Mostly agree, 5 ⫽ Agree,

Figure 2.
figure.

6 ⫽ Strongly agree). Higher values correspond to greater performance avoidance goals.
Fidelity measures. To examine fidelity of implementation
across conditions, students were asked to report on distraction in
the classroom, both peers’ distraction (“Consider the students
around you . . . How many students would you say were working
carefully and quietly on this activity today?” Response options:
1 ⫽ Fewer than half of students, 2 ⫽ About half of students, 3 ⫽
Most students, 4 ⫽ Almost all students, with just a few exceptions,
5 ⫽ All students) and one’s own distraction (“How distracted were

Screenshots from the “make a worksheet” task. See the online article for the color version of this

YEAGER ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

382

you, personally, by other students in the room as you completed
this activity today?” Response options: 1 ⫽ Not distracted at all,
2 ⫽ Slightly distracted, 3 ⫽ Somewhat distracted, 4 ⫽ Very
distracted, 5 ⫽ Extremely distracted).
Next, participants in both conditions rated how interesting the
materials were (“For you personally, how interesting was the
activity you completed in this period today?” Response options:
1 ⫽ Not interesting at all, 2 ⫽ Slightly interesting, 3 ⫽ Somewhat
interesting, 4 ⫽ Very interesting, 5 ⫽ Extremely interesting), and
how much they learned from the materials (“How much do you
feel that you learned from the activity you completed in this period
today?” Response options: 1 ⫽ Nothing at all, 2 ⫽ A little, 3 ⫽ A
medium amount, 4 ⫽ A lot, 5 ⫽ An extreme amount).
Prior achievement. School records were not available for this
sample. Prior achievement was indexed by a composite of selfreports of typical grades and expected grades. The two items were
“Thinking about this school year and the last school year, what
grades do you usually get in core classes? By core classes, we
mean: English, math, and science. We don’t mean electives, like
P.E. or art” (Response options: 1 ⫽ Mostly Fs, 2 ⫽ Mostly Ds, 3 ⫽
Mostly Cs, 4 ⫽ Mostly Bs, 5 ⫽ Mostly As) and “Thinking about
your skills and the difficulty of your classes, how do you think
you’ll do in math in high school? (Response options: 1 ⫽ Extremely poorly, 2 ⫽ Very poorly, 3 ⫽ Somewhat poorly, 4 ⫽
Neither well nor poorly, 5 ⫽ Somewhat well, 6 ⫽ Very well, 7 ⫽
Extremely well). Items were z scored within schools and then
averaged, with higher values corresponding to higher prior
achievement (␣ ⫽ .74).
Attitudes to validate the “Make-a-Math-Worksheet” Task.
Additional self-reports were assessed at Time 1 to validate the
Time 2 challenge-seeking behaviors. These were all expected to be
correlated with challenge-seeking behavior. These were the short
grit scale (Duckworth & Quinn, 2009), the academic self-control
scale (Tsukayama, Duckworth, & Kim, 2013), a single item of
interest in math (“In your opinion, how interesting is the subject of
math in high school?” response options: 1 ⫽ Not at all interesting,
2 ⫽ Slightly interesting, 3 ⫽ Somewhat interesting, 4 ⫽ Very
interesting, 5 ⫽ Extremely interesting), and a single item of math
anxiety (“In general, how much does the subject of math in high
school make you feel nervous, worried, or full of anxiety?” Re-

sponse options: 1 ⫽ Not at all, 2 ⫽ A little, 3 ⫽ A medium amount,
4 ⫽ A lot, 5 ⫽ An extreme amount).

Results
Preliminary analyses. We tested for violations of assumptions of linear models (e.g., outliers, nonlinearity). Variables either
did not violate linearity, or when transforming or dropping outliers, significance of results were unchanged.
Correlational analyses. Before examining the impact of the
intervention, we conducted correlational tests to replicate the basic
findings from prior research on fixed versus growth mindsets.
Table 2 shows that measured fixed mindset significantly predicted
fixed-trait, person-focused attributions, r(6636) ⫽ .28, performance avoidance goals, r(6636) ⫽ .23, and hypothetically choosing easy problems over hard problems, r(6636) ⫽ .12 (all ps ⬍
.001). The sizes of these correlations correspond to the sizes in a
meta-analysis of many past studies (Burnette et al., 2013). Thus, a
fixed mindset was associated with thinking that difficulty means
you are “not smart,” with having the goal of not looking “dumb,”
and with avoiding hard problems that you might get wrong, as in
prior research (see Dweck, 2006; Dweck & Leggett, 1988; Yeager
& Dweck, 2012).
Validating the “Make-a-math-worksheet” challenge-seeking
task. As shown in Table 2, the choice of a greater number of easy
problems as compared to hard problems at Time 2 was modestly
correlated with grit, self-control, prior performance, interest in
math, math anxiety measured at Time 1, 1 to 4 weeks earlier, and
all in the expected direction (all ps ⬍ .001, given large sample
size; see Table 2).
In addition, measured fixed mindset, fixed-trait attributions, and
performance avoidance goals predicted choices of more easy problems and fewer hard problems. The worksheet task behavior correlated with the single dichotomous hypothetical choice. Thus,
participants’ choices on this task appear to reflect their individual
differences in challenge-seeking tendencies.
Random assignment. Random assignment to condition was
effective. There were no differences between conditions in terms
of demographics (gender, race, ethnicity, special education, parental education) or in terms of prior achievement (all ps ⬎ .1),

Table 2
Correlations Among Measures in Study 1 Replicate Prior Growth Mindset Effects and Validate the “Make-a-Worksheet” Task

Measure
Grit
Self-control
Fixed mindset (Time 2)
Prior performance
Fixed trait attributions
Performance avoidance goals
Interest in math
Math anxiety
Hypothetical willingness to select
the easy (not hard) math
problem.
Note.

Actual easy
(minus hard)
problems selected

Grit

Selfcontrol

Fixed mindset
(Time 2)

Fixed trait
attributions

Performance
avoidance
goals

Prior
performance

Interest
in math

⫺.16
⫺.14
.13
⫺.17
.17
.10
⫺.23
.11

.51
⫺.16
.40
⫺.27
⫺.13
.27
⫺.07

⫺.16
.37
⫺.22
⫺.14
.29
⫺.08

⫺.25
.28
.23
⫺.14
.12

⫺.30
⫺.14
.48
⫺.35

.21
⫺.27
.23

⫺.10
.14

⫺.29

.29

⫺.19

⫺.16

.12

⫺.14

.25

.12

⫺.26

Ns range from 6,883 to 7,251; all ps ⬍ .01. Data are from both conditions; correlations did not differ across experimental conditions.

Math
anxiety

.12

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

DESIGN THINKING AND PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS

despite 80% power to detect effects as small as d ⫽ .06. Furthermore, as shown in Table 3, there were no preintervention differences between conditions in terms of fixed mindset.
Fidelity. Students in the revised and original intervention conditions did not differ in terms of their ratings of their peers’
distraction during the testing session, t(6454) ⫽ 0.35, p ⫽ .72, or
in terms of their own personal distraction, t(6454) ⫽ 1.92, p ⫽ .06.
Although there was a trend toward greater distraction in the
original intervention group, this was likely a result of very large
sample size. Regardless, distraction was low for both groups (at or
below a 2 on a 5-point scale).
Next, the revised intervention was rated as more interesting,
t(6454) ⫽ 4.44, p ⬍ .001, and also as more likely to cause
participants to feel as though they learned something, t(6454) ⫽
6.25, p ⬍ .001. This means the design process was successful in
making the new intervention engaging. Yet this meant that in
Study 2 it was important to ensure that the control condition was
also interesting.
Self-reported fixed mindset. The revised mindset intervention
was more effective at reducing reports of a fixed mindset as
compared to the original mindset intervention. See Table 3. The
original mindset group showed a change score of ⌬ ⫽ ⫺0.22 scale
points (of 6), as compared with ⌬ ⫽ ⫺0.48 scale point (of 6) for
the revised mindset group. Both change scores were significant at
p ⬍ .001, and they were significantly different from one another
(see Table 2).
In moderation analyses, students who already had more of a
growth mindset at baseline changed their beliefs less, Intervention ⫻ Preintervention fixed mindset interaction, t(6687) ⫽ ⫺3.385,
p ⫽ .0007, ␤ ⫽ .04, which is consistent with a ceiling effect
among those who already held a growth mindset. There was no
Intervention ⫻ Prior achievement interaction, t(6687) ⫽ 1.184,
p ⫽ .24, ␤ ⫽ .01, suggesting that the intervention was effective in
changing mindsets across all levels of achievement.
Primary analyses.
The “make-a-math-worksheet” task. Our primary outcome of
interest was challenge-seeking behavior. Compared with the orig-

383

inal growth mindset intervention, the revised growth mindset intervention reduced the tendency to choose more easy than hard
math problems, 4.62 versus 2.42, a significant difference,
t(6884) ⫽ 8.03, p ⬍ .001, d ⫽ .19 (see Table 3). This intervention
effect on behavior was not moderated by prior achievement,
t(6884) ⫽ ⫺.65, p ⫽ .52, ␤ ⫽ .01, or preintervention fixed
mindset, t(6884) ⫽ .63, p ⫽ .53, ␤ ⫽ .01, showing that the
intervention led high and low achievers alike to demonstrate
greater challenge-seeking.
It was also possible to test whether the revised growth mindset
intervention increased the overall number of challenging problems,
decreased the number of easy problems, or increased the proportion of problems chosen that were challenging. Supplementary
analyses showed that all of these intervention contrasts were also
significant, t(6884) ⫽ 3.95, p ⬍ .001, t(6884) ⫽ 8.60, p ⬍ .001,
t(6884) ⫽ 7.60, p ⬍ .001, respectively.
Secondary analyses.
Hypothetical challenge-seeking scenario. Compared with the
original mindset intervention, the revised mindset intervention
reduced the proportion of students saying they would choose the
“easy” math homework assignment versus the “hard” assignment
from 60% to 51%, logistic regression z ⫽ 7.951, p ⬍ .001, d ⫽ .19.
See Table 3. The intervention effect was not significantly moderated by prior achievement, z ⫽ ⫺1.82, p ⫽ .07, ␤ ⫽ .04, or
preintervention fixed mindset, z ⫽ 0.51, p ⫽ .61, ␤ ⫽ .01.
Attributions and goals. The revised intervention significantly
reduced fixed-trait, person-focused attributions as well as performance avoidance goals, compared with the original intervention,
ps ⬍ .01 (see Table 3). These effects were small, ds ⫽ .07 and 06,
but recall that this is the group difference between two growth
mindset interventions. Neither of these outcomes showed a significant Intervention ⫻ Preintervention fixed mindset interaction,
t(6647) ⫽ ⫺.62, p ⫽ .54, ␤ ⫽ .01, and t(6631) ⫽ ⫺.72, p ⫽ .47,
␤ ⫽ .01, for attributions and goals respectively. For attributions,
there was no Intervention ⫻ Prior achievement interaction,
t(6647) ⫽ .32, p ⫽ .74, ␤ ⫽ .001. For performance avoidance
goals, there was a small but significant Intervention ⫻ Prior achieve-

Table 3
Effects of Condition on Fixed Mindset, Attributions, Performance–Avoidance Goals, and Challenge-Seeking in Studies 1 and 2
Study 1
Original mindset
intervention
Measure
Pre-intervention (Time 1) fixed
mindset
Post-intervention (Time 2) fixed
mindset
Change from Time 1 to Time 2
Fixed trait attributions
Performance avoidance goals
Actual easy (minus hard) math
problems selected at Time 2
Hypothetical willingness to select the
easy (not hard) math problem at
Time 2
N (both Time 1 and 2)⫽

Study 2

Revised mindset
intervention

Revised mindset
intervention

M

SD

M

SD

Comparison

M

SD

M

SD

Comparison

3.20

1.15

3.22

1.15

t ⫽ 1.18

3.07

1.12

3.09

1.14

t ⫽ .30

2.98
⫺.22
2.14
3.40

1.21

1.21

t ⫽ 9.32ⴱⴱⴱ

t ⫽ 12.16ⴱⴱⴱ

t ⫽ 2.71ⴱⴱ
t ⫽ 2.60ⴱⴱ

2.54
⫺.55
2.03
3.42

1.16

.82
1.52

2.89
⫺.17
2.12
3.57

1.14

.87
1.51

2.74
⫺.48
2.08
3.31

.82
1.56

t ⫽ 3.58ⴱⴱⴱ
t ⫽ 2.95ⴱⴱ

4.62

11.52

2.42

11.38

60.4%
3665

51.2%
3480

Note. Mindset change scores from Time 1 to Time 2 significant at p ⬍ .001.
p ⬍ .01. ⴱⴱⴱ p ⬍ .001.

ⴱⴱ

Placebo control

—
t ⫽ 7.95ⴱⴱⴱ

54.4%
1646

.86
1.55
—

—
45.3%
1630

—
t ⫽ 5.71ⴱⴱⴱ

YEAGER ET AL.

384

ment interaction, in the direction that students with higher levels of
prior achievement benefitted slightly more, t(6631) ⫽ ⫺2.23, p ⫽
.03, ␤ ⫽ .03.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Study 2: Does a Redesigned Intervention
Improve Grades?
In Study 1, the revised growth mindset intervention outperformed its predecessor in terms of changes in immediate selfreports and behavior. In Study 2 we examined whether this revised
intervention would improve actual grades among 9th graders just
beginning high school and replicate the effects of prior studies.
We carried out this experiment with a census (⬎95%) of students in 10 schools. In addition, instead of conducting the experiment ourselves (as in Study 1 and prior research), we contracted
a third-party research firm specializing in government-sponsored
public health surveys to collect and clean all data.
These procedural improvements have scientific value. First, in
prior research that served as the basis for the present investigation
(Paunesku et al., 2015), the average proportion of students in the
high school who completed the Time 1 session was 17%. The goal
of that research (and Study 1) was to achieve sample size, not
within-school representativeness.5 Thus, the present study may
include more of the kinds of students that may have been underrepresented in prior studies.
Next, achieving a census of students is informative for policy.
As noted at the outset, schools, districts, and states are often
interested in raising the achievement for entire schools or for entire
defined subgroups, not for groups of students whose teachers or
schools may have selected them into the experiment on the basis of
their likelihood of being affected by the intervention.
Finally, ambiguity about seemingly mundane methodological
choices is one important source of the nonreplication of psychological experiments (see, e.g., Schooler, 2014). Therefore, it is
important for replication purposes to be able to train third-party
researchers in study procedures, and have an arms-length relationship with data cleaning, which was done here.

Method
Data. Participants were a maximum of 3,676 students from a
national convenience sample of 10 schools in California, New
York, Texas, Virginia, and North Carolina. One additional school
was recruited, but validated student achievement records could not
be obtained. The schools were selected from a national sampling
frame based on the Common Core of Data, with these criteria:
public high school, 9th grade enrollment between 100 and 600
students, within the medium range for poverty indicators (e.g., free
or reduce price lunch %), and moderate representation of students
of color (Hispanic/Latino or Black/African American). Schools
selected from the sampling frame were then recruited by a third
party firm. School characteristics—for example, demographics,
achievement, and average fixed mindset score—are in Table 4.
Student participants were somewhat more diverse than Study 1:
29% were Hispanic/Latino, 17% were black/African American,
3% were Native American/American Indian, 30% were White,
non-Hispanic, 6% were Asian/Asian American, and the rest were
from another or multiple racial groups. Forty-eight percent were
female, and 52% reported that their mothers had earned a bachelor’s degree or greater.

The response rate for all eligible 9th grade students in the 10
participating schools for the Time 1 session was 96%. A total of
183 students did not enter their names accurately and were not
matched at Time 2. All of these unmatched students received
control exercises at Time 2. An additional 291 students completed
Time 1 materials but not Time 2 materials, and this did not vary by
condition (Control ⫽ 148, Intervention ⫽ 143). There were no
data exclusions. Students were retained as long as they began the
Time 1 survey, regardless of Time 2 participation or quality of
responses—that is, we estimated “intent-to-treat” (ITT) effects.
ITT effects are conservative tests of the hypothesis, they afford
greater internal validity (preventing possible differential attrition
from affecting results), and they are more policy-relevant because
they demonstrate the effect of offering an intervention, which is
what institutions can control.
Procedures. The firm collected all data directly from the
school partners, and cleaned and merged it, without influence of
researchers. Before the final dataset was delivered, the research
team preregistered the primary hypothesis and analytic approach
via the Open Science Framework (OSF). The preregistered hypothesis, a replication of Paunesku et al.’s (2015) interaction
effect, was that prior achievement, indexed by a composite of 8th
Grade GPA and test scores, would moderate mindset intervention
effects on 9th grade core course GPA and D/F averages (see:
osf.io/aerpt; deviations from the preanalysis plan are disclosed in
the Appendix).
Intervention delivery. Student participation consisted of two
one-period online sessions conducted at the school, during regular
class periods, in a school computer lab or classroom. The sessions
were 1 to 4 weeks apart, beginning in the first 10 weeks of the
school year. Sessions consisted of survey questions and the intervention or control intervention. Students were randomly assigned
by the software, in real time, to the intervention or control group.
A script was read to students by their teachers at the start of each
computer session.
Mindset Intervention. This was identical to the revised mindset intervention in Study 1.
Control activity. The control activity was designed to be parallel to the intervention activity. It, too, was framed as providing
helpful information about the transition to high school, and participants were asked to read and retain this information so as to
write their opinions and help future students. Because the revised
mindset intervention had been shown to be more interesting that
previous versions, great effort was made to make the control group
at least as interesting as the intervention.
The control activity involved the same type of graphic art (e.g.,
images of the brain, animations), as well as compelling stories
(e.g., about Phineas Gage). It taught basic information about the
brain, which might have been useful to students taking 9th grade
biology. It also provided stories from upperclassmen, reporting
their opinions about the content. The celebrity stories and quotes in
Time 2 were matched but they differed in content. For instance, in
the control activity Michelle Obama talked about the White
5
In Study 1 we were not able to estimate the % of students within each
school who participated because schools did not provide any official data
for the study. Yet using historical numbers from the common core of data
as a denominator for a subsample of schools that could be matched, the
median response rate was approximately 40%.

DESIGN THINKING AND PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS

385

Table 4
School Characteristics in Study 2

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

School year
School
start date
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

8/18/14
8/18/14
9/3/14
8/25/14
8/25/14
8/25/14
8/26/14
8/25/14
8/25/14
9/2/14

Modal start
date for
Greatschools.org
Time 1
rating
10/6/14
10/3/14
10/23/14
9/30/14
10/6/14
10/7/14
9/23/14
9/18/14
10/8/14
10/29/14

4
2
2
7
5
2
7
4
8
6

Average preintervention
fixed mindset

%
White

3.13
3.22
3.23
2.65
3.11
2.95
3.00
3.21
3.07
3.43

20
3
10
62
41
29
78
11
52
55

House’s BRAIN initiative, an investment in neuroscience. Finally,
as in the intervention, there were a number of opportunities for
interactivity; students were asked open-ended questions and they
provided their reactions.
Measures.
9th grade GPA. Final grades for the end of the first semester
of 9th grade were collected. Schools that provided grades on a
0 –100 scale were asked which level of performance corresponded
to which letter grade (A⫹ to F), and letter grades were then
converted to a 0 to 4.33 scale. Using full course names from
transcripts, researchers, blind to students’ condition or grades,
coded the courses as science, math or English (i.e., core courses)
or not. End of term grades for the core subjects were averaged.
When a student was enrolled in more than one course in a given
subject (e.g., both Algebra and Geometry), the student’s grades in
both were averaged, and then the composite was averaged into
their final grade variable.
As a second measure using the same outcome data, we created
a dichotomous variable to indicate poor performance (1 ⫽ an
average GPA of D⫹ or below, 0 ⫽ not; this dichotomization
cutpoint was preregistered: osf.io/aerpt).
Prior achievement. The 8th grade prior achievement variable
was an unweighted average of 8th Grade GPA and 8th grade state
test scores, which is standard measure in prior intervention experiments with incoming 9th graders (e.g., Yeager, Johnson, et al.,
2014). The high schools in the present study were from different
states and taught students from different feeder schools. We therefore z scored 8th Grade GPA and state test scores. Because this
removes the mean from each school, we later tested whether
adding fixed effects for school to statistical models changed results
(it did not; see Table 6).6 A small proportion was missing both
prior achievement measures and they were assigned a value of
zero; we then included a dummy-variable indicating missing data,
which increases transparency and is the prevailing recommendation in program evaluation (Puma, Olsen, Bell, & Price, 2009).
Hypothetical challenge-seeking. This measure was identical
to Study 1. The make-a-worksheet task was not administered in
this study because it was not yet developed when Study 2 was
launched.
Fixed mindset, attributions, and performance goals. These
measures were identical to Study 1.
Fidelity measures. Measures of distraction, interest, and selfreported learning were the same as Study 1.

% Hispanic/
% Black/
Latino
African-American
26
57
13
19
17
19
21
78
27
16

32
33
74
10
40
48
1
6
11
26

%
Asian
22
7
3
9
1
2
0
4
9
3

% living below
poverty line
(in district)
State
18.3
18.3
41.0
10.8
13.7
13.7
11.6
27.8
27.8
5.9

CA
CA
NY
NC
NC
NC
TX
TX
TX
VA

Results
Preliminary analyses.
Random assignment. Random assignment to condition was
effective. There were no differences between conditions in terms
of demographics (gender, race, ethnicity, special education, parental education) or in terms of prior achievement within any of the 10
schools or in the full sample (all ps ⬎ .1). As shown in Table 3,
there were no preintervention differences between conditions in
terms of fixed mindset.
Fidelity. Several measures suggest high fidelity of implementation. On average, 94% of treated and control students answered
the open-ended questions at both Time 1 and 2, and this did not
differ by conditions or time. During the Time 1 session, both
treated and control students saw an average of 96% of the screens
in the intervention. Among those who completed the Time 2
session, treated students saw 99% of screens, compared with 97%
for control students. Thus, both conditions saw and responded to
their respective content to an equal (and high) extent.
Open-ended responses from students confirm that they were, in
general, processing the mindset message. Here are some examples
of student responses to the final writing prompt at Time 2, in which
they were asked to list the next steps they could take on their
growth mindset paths:
I can always tell myself that mistakes are evidence of learning. I
will always find difficult courses to take them. I’ll ask for help
when I need it.
To get a positive growth in mindset, you should always ask questions
and be curious. Don’t ever feel like there is a limit to your knowledge
and when feeling stuck, take a few deep breaths and relax. Nothing is
easy.
Step 1: Erase the phrase ‘I give up’ and all similar phrases from your
vocabulary. Step 2: Enter your hardest class of the day (math, for
example). Step 3: When presented with a brain-frying worksheet, ask
questions about what you don’t know.

6
Some prior research (Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009) used selfreported expectancies, not prior GPA, as a baseline moderator. We too
measured these (see Study 1 for measure). When added to the composite,
our moderation results were the same and slightly stronger. We did not
ultimately include this measure in our baseline composite in the main text
because we did not preregister it.

YEAGER ET AL.

386

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

When I grow up I want to be a dentist which involves science. I am
not good at science . . . yet. So I am going to have to pay more
attention in class and be more focused and pay attention and learn in
class instead of fooling around.

Next, students across the two conditions reported no differences
in levels of distraction: own distraction, t(3438) ⫽ 0.15, p ⫽ .88;
others’ distraction, t(3438) ⫽ 0.37, p ⫽ .71. Finally, control
participants actually rated their content as more interesting, and
said that they felt like they learned more, as compared to treated
participants, t(3438) ⫽ 7.76 and 8.26, Cohen’s ds ⫽ .25 and .27,
respectively, ps ⬍ .001. This was surprising but it does not
threaten our primary inferences. Instead it points to the conservative nature of the control group. Control students received a
positive, interesting, informative experience that held their attention and exposed them to novel scientific information relevant to
their high school biology classes (e.g., the brain) that was endorsed
by influential role models (e.g., Michele Obama, LeBron James).
Self-reported fixed mindset. As an additional manipulation
check, students reported their fixed mindset beliefs. As shown in
Table 3, both the intervention and control conditions changed in
the direction of a growth mindset between Times 1 and 2 (change
score ps ⬍ .001). However, those in the intervention condition
changed much more (Control ⌬ ⫽ ⫺.17 scale points of 6, Intervention ⌬ ⫽ ⫺.55 scale points of 6). These change scores differed
significantly from each other, p ⬍ .001. Table 5 reports regressions
predicting postintervention fixed mindset as a function of condition, and shows that choices of covariates did not affect this result.

Moderator analyses in Table 5 show that previously higherachieving students, and, to a much lesser extent, students who held
more of a fixed mindset at baseline, changed more in the direction
of a growth mindset.
It is interesting that the control condition showed a significant
change in growth mindset—almost identical to the original mindset condition in Study 1. Perhaps teachers were regularly discussing growth mindset concepts, perhaps treated students behaved in
a more growth-mindset-oriented way, spilling over to control
students, or perhaps the control condition itself— by creating
strong interest in the science of the brain and making students feel
as though they learned something—implicitly taught a growth
mindset. In any of these cases, this would make the treatment
effect on grades conservative.
Primary analyses.
9th grade GPA. Our first preregistered confirmatory analysis was to examine the effects of the intervention on 9th Grade
GPA, moderated by prior achievement. In the full sample, there
was a significant Intervention ⫻ Prior Achievement interaction,
t(3419) ⫽ 2.66, p ⫽ .007, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.05, replicating prior research
(Paunesku et al., 2015; Yeager et al., 2014; also see Wilson &
Linville, 1982, 1985). Table 6 shows that the significance of
this result did not depend on the covariates selected. Tests at ⫾1
SD of prior performance showed an estimated intervention
benefit of 0.13 grade points, t(3419) ⫽ 2.90, p ⫽ .003, d ⫽ .10,
for those who were at ⫺1 SD of prior performance, and no
effect among those at ⫹1 SD of prior performance, b ⫽ ⫺0.04

Table 5
Regressions Predicting Post-Intervention (Time 2) Fixed Mindset, Study 2
Variable
Intercept
Revised mindset intervention
Prior achievement (z scored,
centered at 0)
Intervention ⫻ Prior achievement
(z scored, centered at 0)
Female

Base model

Plus school
fixed effects

2.959ⴱⴱⴱ
(.028)
⫺.389ⴱⴱⴱ
(.039)
⫺.156ⴱⴱⴱ
(.028)
⫺.181ⴱⴱⴱ
(.040)

2.933ⴱⴱⴱ
(.079)
⫺.394ⴱⴱⴱ
(.039)
⫺.182ⴱⴱⴱ
(.029)
⫺.177ⴱⴱⴱ
(.039)

Asian
Hispanic/Latino
Black/African-American
Repeating freshman year
Pre-intervention fixed mindset (z
scored, centered at 0)
Intervention ⫻ Pre-intervention
fixed mindset (z scored,
centered at 0)
Adjusted R2
AIC
N

.076
10103.731
3279

.099
10030.747
3279

Plus demographic
covariates
2.943ⴱⴱⴱ
(.086)
⫺.397ⴱⴱⴱ
(.039)
⫺.173ⴱⴱⴱ
(.029)
⫺.176ⴱⴱⴱ
(.039)
.020
(.039)
⫺.115
(.084)
⫺.024
(.051)
.036
(.058)
.356ⴱⴱ
(.137)

.100
10015.772
3274

Plus pre-intervention
mindset
2.989ⴱⴱⴱ
(.071)
⫺.391ⴱⴱⴱ
(.032)
⫺.036
(.025)
⫺.183ⴱⴱⴱ
(.033)
⫺.031
(.032)
⫺.150ⴱ
(.069)
⫺.000
(.043)
⫺.008
(.048)
.180
(.114)
.704ⴱⴱⴱ
(.023)
⫺.120ⴱⴱⴱ
(.033)
.383
8759.446
3267

Note. OLS regressions. Unstandardized coefficients above standard errors (in parentheses). School fixed
effects included in model but suppressed from regression table.
ⴱ
p ⬍ .05. ⴱⴱ p ⬍ .01. ⴱⴱⴱ p ⬍ .001.

DESIGN THINKING AND PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS

387

Table 6
Regressions Predicting End-of-Term GPA In Math, Science, and English, Study 2
Variable
Intercept

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Revised mindset intervention (among
low prior-achievers, ⫺1 SD)
Prior achievement (z scored, centered
at ⫺1 SD)
Intervention ⫻ Prior achievement (z
scored, centered at ⫺1 SD)
Female

Plus school Plus demographic Plus pre-intervention
Base model fixed effects
covariates
mindset
1.556ⴱⴱⴱ
(.035)
.119ⴱ
(.049)
.693ⴱⴱⴱ
(.024)
⫺.079ⴱ
(.034)

1.584ⴱⴱⴱ
(.063)
.125ⴱⴱ
(.047)
.721ⴱⴱⴱ
(.024)
⫺.082ⴱ
(.033)

Asian
Hispanic/Latino
Black/African-American
Repeating freshman year
Pre-intervention fixed mindset (z
scored, centered at 0)
Intervention ⫻ Pre-intervention fixed
mindset (z scored, centered at 0)
Adjusted R2
AIC
N

.295
9781.892
3448

.358
9467.187
3448

1.581ⴱⴱⴱ
(.067)
.123ⴱⴱ
(.045)
.663ⴱⴱⴱ
(.023)
⫺.080ⴱ
(.032)
.327ⴱⴱⴱ
(.031)
.189ⴱⴱ
(.067)
⫺.287ⴱⴱⴱ
(.041)
⫺.322ⴱⴱⴱ
(.046)
⫺.922ⴱⴱⴱ
(.108)

.407
9196.462
3448

1.589ⴱⴱⴱ
(.066)
.135ⴱⴱ
(.046)
.641ⴱⴱⴱ
(.024)
⫺.091ⴱⴱ
(.032)
.338ⴱⴱⴱ
(.031)
.190ⴱⴱ
(.067)
⫺.284ⴱⴱⴱ
(.041)
⫺.309ⴱⴱⴱ
(.046)
⫺.894ⴱⴱⴱ
(.108)
⫺.110ⴱⴱⴱ
(.022)
⫺.018
(.032)
.416
9112.995
3438

Note. OLS regressions. Unstandardized coefficients above standard errors (in parentheses). School fixed
effects included in model but suppressed from regression table.
ⴱ
p ⬍ .05. ⴱⴱ p ⬍ .01. ⴱⴱⴱ p ⬍ .001.

grade points, t(3419) ⫽ 0.99, p ⫽ .33, d ⫽ .03. This may be
because higher achieving students have less room to improve,
or because they may manifest their increased growth mindset in
challenging-seeking rather than in seeking easy A’s.
Poor performance rates. In a second preregistered confirmatory analysis, we analyzed rates of poor performance (D or F
averages). This analysis mirrors past research (Cohen et al., 2009;
Paunesku et al., 2015; Wilson & Linville, 1982, 1985; Yeager,
Purdie-Vaughns, et al., 2014), and helps test the theoretically
predicted finding that the intervention is beneficial by stopping a
recursive process by which poor performance begets worse performance over time (Cohen et al., 2009; see Cohen & Sherman,
2014; Yeager & Walton, 2011).
There was a significant overall main effect of intervention on a
reduced rate of poor performance of 4 percentage points, z ⫽ 2.95,
p ⫽ .003, d ⫽ .10. Next, as with the full continuous GPA metric,
in a logistic regression predicting poor performance there was a
significant Intervention ⫻ Prior Achievement interaction, z ⫽
2.45, p ⫽ .014, ␤ ⫽ .05. At ⫺1 SD of prior achievement the
intervention effect was estimated to be 7 percentage points, z ⫽
3.80, p ⬍ .001, d ⫽ .13, whereas at ⫹1 SD there was a
nonsignificant difference of 0.7 percentage points, z ⫽ .42, p ⫽
.67, d ⫽ .01.
Secondary analyses.
Hypothetical challenge-seeking. The mindset intervention
reduced from 54% to 45% the proportion of students saying
they would choose the “easy” math homework assignment (that
they would likely get a high score on) versus the “hard”

assignment (that they might get a low score on; see Table 3).
The intervention effect on hypothetical challenge-seeking was
slightly larger for previously higher-achieving students, Intervention ⫻ Prior Achievement interaction z ⫽ 2.63, p ⫽ .008,
␤ ⫽ .05, and was not moderated by preintervention fixed
mindset, z ⫽ 1.45, p ⫽ .15, ␤ ⫽ .02. Thus, whereas lower
achieving students were more likely than high achieving students to show benefits in grades, higher achieving students were
more likely to show an impact on their challenge-seeking
choices on the hypothetical task.
Attributions and goals. The growth mindset intervention reduced fixed-trait, person-focused attributions, d ⫽ .13, and performance avoidance goals, d ⫽ .11, ps ⬍ .001 (see Table 3), unlike
some prior growth mindset intervention research, which did not
change these measures (Blackwell et al., 2007, Study 2). Thus, the
present study uses a field experiment to replicate much prior
research (Burnette et al., 2013; Dweck, 1999; Dweck, 2006; Yeager & Dweck, 2012).

General Discussion
The present research used “design thinking” to make psychological intervention materials more broadly applicable to students
who may share concerns and construals because they are undergoing similar challenges—in this case, 9th grade students entering
high school. When this was done, the revised intervention was
more effective in changing proxy outcomes such as beliefs and
short-term behaviors than previous materials (Study 1). Further-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

388

YEAGER ET AL.

more, the intervention increased core course grades for previously
low-achieving students (Study 2).
Although we do not consider the revised version to be the final
iteration, the present research provides direct evidence of an exciting possibility: a two-session mindset program, developed
through an iterative, user-centered design process, may be administered to entire classes of 9th graders (⬎95% of students) and
begin to raise the grades of the lowest performers, while increasing
the learning-oriented attitudes and beliefs of low and high performers. This approach illustrates an important step toward taking
growth mindset and other psychological interventions to scale, and
for conducting replication studies.
At a theoretical level, it is interesting to note the parallels
between mindset interventions and expert tutors: both are strongly
focused on students’ construals (see Lepper, Woolverton, Mumme,
& Gurtner, 1993; Treisman, 1992). Working hand-in-hand with
students, expert tutors build relationships of trust with students and
then redirect their construals of academic difficulty as challenges
to be met, not evidence of fixed inability. In this sense, both expert
tutors and mindset interventions recognize the power of construalbased motivational factors in students’ learning. Future interventions might do well to capitalize further on the wealth of knowledge of expert tutors, who constitute one of the most powerful
educational interventions (Bloom, 1984).

Replication
Replication efforts are important for cumulative science
(Funder et al., 2014; Lehrer, 2010; Open Science Collaboration,
2015; Schooler, 2011, 2014; Schimmack, 2012; Simmons et al.,
2011; Pashler & Wagenmakers, 2012; also see Ioannidis, 2005).
However, it would be easy for replications to take a misguided
“magic bullet” approach—that is, to assume that intervention
materials and procedural scripts that worked in one place for
one group should work in another place for another group
(Yeager & Walton, 2011). This is why Yeager and Walton
(2011) stated that experimenters “should [not] hand out the
original materials without considering whether they would convey the intended meaning” for the group in question (p. 291;
also see Wilson, Aronson, & Carlsmith, 2010).
The present research therefore followed a procedure of (a)
beginning with the original materials as a starting point, (b)
using a design methodology to increase the likelihood that they
conveyed the intended meaning in the targeted population (9th
graders), and (c) conducting well-powered randomized experiments in advance to ensure that, in fact, the materials were
appropriate and effective in the target population.
Study 2 showed that, when this was done, the revised mindset
intervention raised grades for previously low-achieving students,
when all data were collected, aggregated, and cleaned by an
independent third-party, and when all involved were blind to
experimental condition. Furthermore, the focal tests were preregistered (though see the Appendix). The present research therefore
provides a rigorous replication of Paunesku et al. (2015). This
directly addresses skepticism about whether a two-session, selfadministered psychological intervention can, under some conditions,
measurably improve the grades for previously low-performing students.

Nevertheless, the preregistered hypothesis reported here does
not advance our theory of mechanisms for psychological intervention effects. Additional analyses of the data— ones that could not
have been preregistered—will be essential for doing this and
further improving the intervention and its impact.

Divergence of Self-Reports and Behavior
One theme in the present study’s results—and a theme dating to
the original psychological interventions in education (Wilson &
Linville, 1982)—is a disconnect between self-reports and actual
behavior. On the basis of only the self-reported fixed mindset
results, we might have concluded that the intervention benefitted
high achievers more. However, on the basis of the GPA results, we
might conclude that the intervention “worked” better for students
who were lower in prior achievement. That is, self-reports and
grades showed moderation by prior performance in the opposite
directions.
What accounts for this? Two possibilities are germane. First,
grades follow a non-normal distribution that suffers from a range
restriction at the top, in part due to grade inflation. Thus higherachievers may not have room to increase their grades. But higherachievers may also be those who read material more carefully and
absorb the messages they are taught. These patterns could explain
smaller GPA effects but larger proxy outcome effects for higherachievers.
Another possibility is that high-achieving students may have
been inspired to take on more challenging work that might not
lead to higher grades but might teach them more. Indeed, the
hypothetical challenge-seeking measure supports this. For this
reason, it might have been informative to analyze scores on a
norm-referenced exam at the end of the term, as in some
intervention studies (Good et al., 2003; Hanselman, Bruch,
Gamoran, & Borman, 2014). If higher-achievers were choosing
harder tasks, their grades might have suffered, but their learning
might have improved. In the present research it was not possible
to administer a norm-referenced test due to the light-touch
nature of the intervention. In addition, curriculum was not held
constant across our diverse sample of schools.
Finally, Study 1’s development of a brief behavioral measure
of challenge seeking—the “make-a-worksheet” task—was a
methodological advance that may help avoid known problems
with using self-reports to evaluate behavioral interventions (see
Duckworth & Yeager, in press). This may make it a practical
proxy outcome in future evaluation of interventions (see Duckworth & Yeager, in press; Yeager & Bryk, 2015).

Limitations
The present research has many limitations. First, we only had
access to grades at the end of the first term of 9th grade—in some
cases, a few weeks after the intervention. It would have been
informative to collect grades over a longer period of time.
Second, we have not attempted here to understand heterogeneity
in effect sizes (cf. Hanselman et al., 2014). Building on the results
of the present study, we are now poised to carry out a systematic
examination of student, teacher, and school factors that cause
heterogeneous intervention effects. Indeed, with further revision to
the intervention materials, we are carrying out a version of Study

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

DESIGN THINKING AND PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS

2 with students in a national sample of randomly selected U.S.
public high schools. The present study provides a basis for this.
Third, it is interesting that, although the revised mindset intervention was more effective at changing short-term beliefs and
behaviors than the original intervention (Study 1), the effect sizes
for grades in Study 2 do not exceed those found in past analogous
studies (e.g., Paunesku et al., 2015; Yeager, Henderson, et al.,
2014). Perhaps the present study, in reaching a census of students,
included more students who were reluctant to participate or who
may have been resistant to the intervention message. We furthermore utilized intent-to-treat analyses—including students who saw
any content at Session 1 regardless of whether they completed
Session 2. Or perhaps the present study enlisted teachers who were
less compliant with procedures than the enthusiastic early adopter
teachers recruited in past studies. With lower experimental control
and a census of students, there may be greater error variance,
resulting in lower effect sizes.
Although the mindset effect sizes may appear to be small—and
they are compared with the magnitude of student engagement
issues in U.S. schools—they conform to expectations,7 and are
nevertheless practically meaningful. Considering that 9th grade
course failure almost perfectly predicts eventual high school graduation rates (Allensworth & Easton, 2005), if the growth mindset
intervention reduces by 4 percentage points the proportion of 9th
graders who earn D/F averages, then a fully scaled and spread
version of this program could in theory prevent 100,000 high
school dropouts in the U.S. per year—while increasing the
learning-oriented behavior of many other students.

Conclusion
This research began with a simple question: is it possible to take an
existing, initially effective psychological intervention and redesign it
to improve the outcomes for a population of students undergoing a
similar life transition? Now that we have shown this is possible for
a growth mindset intervention and now that we have described a
method for doing so, it will be exciting to see how this approach can
be applied to other interventions. If they too can be improved, would
it be possible to disseminate them in such a way that would actually
reduce the large number of high school dropouts for the nation as a
whole? We look forward to investigating this.

7
The correlations with fixed mindset beliefs in Table 2 ranged from r ⫽
.12 to r ⫽ .40, which matches a meta-analysis of implicit theories effects
(range of r ⫽ .15 to r ⫽ .24; Burnette et al., 2013). The present effects also
match to the average of social-psychological effects more generally, r ⫽
.21 (Richard, Bond, & Stokes-Zoota, 2003).

References
Allensworth, E. M., & Easton, J. Q. (2005). The on-track indicator as a
predictor of high school graduation. Chicago, IL: Consortium on Chicago School Research, University of Chicago.
Aronson, E. (1999). The power of self-persuasion. American Psychologist,
54, 875– 884. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0088188
Aronson, J., Fried, C., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the effects of stereotype threat on African American college students by shaping theories of
intelligence. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 113–125.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/jesp.2001.1491

389

Bem, D. J. (1965). An experimental analysis of self-persuasion. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 1, 199 –218. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
0022-1031(65)90026-0
Blackwell, L. A., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Implicit
theories of intelligence predict achievement across an adolescent transition: A longitudinal study and an intervention. Child Development, 78,
246 –263. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2007.00995.x
Bloom, B. (1984). The 2 sigma problem: The search for methods of group
instruction as effective as one-to-one tutoring. Educational Researcher,
13, 4 –16.
Bower, G. H., & Gilligan, S. G. (1979). Remembering information related
to one’s self. Journal of Research in Personality, 13, 420 – 432. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/0092-6566(79)90005-9
Brehm, J. W. (1966). A theory of psychological reactance. New York, NY:
Academic Press.
Bryk, A. S. (2009). Support a science of performance improvement. Phi Delta
Kappan, 90, 597– 600. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/003172170909000815
Burnette, J. L., O’Boyle, E. H., VanEpps, E. M., Pollack, J. M., & Finkel,
E. J. (2013). Mind-sets matter: A meta-analytic review of implicit
theories and self-regulation. Psychological Bulletin, 139, 655–701.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0029531
Cialdini, R. B., Kallgren, C. A., & Reno, R. R. (1991). A focus theory of
normative conduct: A theoretical refinement and reevaluation of the role
of norms in human behavior. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 24, 201–234. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2601(08)60330-5
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., & Master, A. (2006). Reducing the
racial achievement gap: A social-psychological intervention. Science,
313, 1307–1310. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1128317
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Apfel, N., & Brzustoski, P.
(2009). Recursive processes in self-affirmation: Intervening to close the
minority achievement gap. Science, 324, 400 – 403. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1126/science.1170769
Cohen, G. L., & Prinstein, M. J. (2006). Peer contagion of aggression and
health risk behavior among adolescent males: An experimental investigation of effects on public conduct and private attitudes. Child Development, 77, 967–983. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2006
.00913.x
Cohen, G. L., & Sherman, D. K. (2014). The psychology of change:
Self-affirmation and social psychological intervention. Annual Review of
Psychology, 65, 333–371. http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych010213-115137
Cooper, J., & Fazio, R. H. (1984). A new look at dissonance theory.
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 17, 229 –266. http://dx.doi
.org/10.1016/S0065-2601(08)60121-5
Davis, J., & Bauman, K. (2013). School enrollment in the United States:
2011. Washington, DC: United States Census Bureau.
Duckworth, A. L., & Quinn, P. D. (2009). Development and validation of
the short grit scale (GRIT-S). Journal of Personality Assessment, 91,
166 –174. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223890802634290
Duckworth, A. L., & Yeager, D. S. (in press). Measurement matters:
Assessing personal qualities other than cognitive ability. Educational
Researcher.
Dweck, C. (1999). Self-theories: Their role in motivation, personality, and
development. Philadelphia, PA: Psychology Press.
Dweck, C. S. (2006). Mindset. New York, NY: Random House.
Dweck, C. S., & Leggett, E. L. (1988). A social-cognitive approach to
motivation and personality. Psychological Review, 95, 256 –273. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.95.2.256
Eccles, J. S., & Wigfield, A. (2002). Motivational beliefs, values, and
goals. Annual Review of Psychology, 53, 109 –132. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1146/annurev.psych.53.100901.135153
Elliot, A. J., & Dweck, C. S. (Eds.). (2005). Handbook of competence and
motivation. New York, NY: Guilford Press.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

390

YEAGER ET AL.

Elliot, A. J., & McGregor, H. A. (2001). A 2 ⫻ 2 achievement goal
framework. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 501–519.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.80.3.501
Erikson, E. H. (1968). Identity: Youth and crisis. New York, NY: Norton.
Fryberg, S. A., Covarrubias, R., & Burack, J. (2013). Cultural models of
education and academic performance for Native American and European
American students. School Psychology International, 34, 439 – 452.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0143034312446892
Funder, D. C., Levine, J. M., Mackie, D. M., Morf, C. C., Sansone, C.,
Vazire, S., & West, S. G. (2014). Improving the dependability of
research in personality and social psychology: Recommendations for
research and educational practice. Personality and Social Psychology
Review, 18, 3–12. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1088868313507536
Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (2012). Social psychology and educational
intervention. In E. Shafir (Ed.), Behavioral foundations of policy. New
York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Godes, O., Hulleman, C. S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2007). Boosting
students’ interest in math with utility value: Two experimental tests.
Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Chicago, IL.
Gollwitzer, P. M. (1999). Implementation intentions: Strong effects of
simple plans. American Psychologist, 54, 493–503. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1037/0003-066X.54.7.493
Good, C., Aronson, J., & Inzlicht, M. (2003). Improving adolescents’
standardized test performance: An intervention to reduce the effects of
stereotype threat. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 24,
645– 662. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.appdev.2003.09.002
Hanselman, P., Bruch, S. K., Gamoran, A., & Borman, G. D. (2014).
Threat in context: School moderation of the impact of social identity
threat on racial/ethnic achievement gaps. Sociology of Education, 87,
106 –124. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0038040714525970
Hasebe, Y., Nucci, L., & Nucci, M. S. (2004). Parental control of the
personal domain and adolescent symptoms of psychopathology: A crossnational study in the United States and Japan. Child Development, 75,
815– 828. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2004.00708.x
Henderson, V. L., & Dweck, C. S. (1990). Motivation and achievement. In
S. S. Feldman & G. R. Elliott (Eds.), At the threshold: The developing
adolescent (pp. 308 –329). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hulleman, C. S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2009). Promoting interest and
performance in high school science classes. Science, 326, 1410 –1412.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1177067
Ioannidis, J. P. (2005). Why most published research findings are false.
PLoS ONE, 18, 40 – 47. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.0020124
Kelley, T., & Kelley, D. (2013). Creative confidence: Unleashing the
creative potential within us all. New York, NY: Crown Business.
Kohavi, R., & Longbotham, R. (2015). Online controlled experiments and
A/B tests. In C. Sammut & G. Webb (Eds.), Encyclopedia of machine
learning and data mining. New York, NY: Springer.
Kuncel, N. R., Crede, M., & Thomas, L. L. (2005). The validity of
self-reported grade point averages, class ranks, and test scores: A metaanalysis and review of the literature. Review of Educational Research,
75, 63– 82. http://dx.doi.org/10.3102/00346543075001063
Latour, B. (2005). Reassembling the social: An introduction to actornetwork theory. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Lehrer, J. (2010). The truth wears off. The New Yorker, 13, 52.
Lepper, M. R., & Woolverton, M. (2001). The wisdom of practice: Lessons
learned from the study of highly effective tutors. In J. Aronson (Ed.),
Improving academic achievement: Contributions of social psychology
(pp. 133–156). Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Lepper, M. R., Woolverton, M., Mumme, D. L., & Gurtner, J. L. (1993).
Motivational techniques of expert human tutors: Lessons for the design
of computer-based tutors. In S. P. Lajoie & S. J. Derry (Eds.), Computers
as cognitive tools: Technology in education. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Lord, C. G. (1980). Schemas and images as memory aids: Two modes of
processing social information. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 38, 257–269. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.38.2.257
Mueller, C. M., & Dweck, C. S. (1998). Praise for intelligence can
undermine children’s motivation and performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 33–52. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/00223514.75.1.33
Nucci, L. P., Killen, M., & Smetana, J. G. (1996). Autonomy and the
personal: Negotiation and social reciprocity in adult-child social exchanges. New Directions for Child and Adolescent Development, 1996,
7–24. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/cd.23219967303
Open Science Collaboration. (2015). Estimating the reproducibility of
psychological science. Science, 349, aac4716. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/
science.aac4716
Pashler, H., & Wagenmakers, E. J. (2012). Editors’ introduction to the
special section on replicability in psychological science: A crisis of
confidence? Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7, 528 –530. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1177/1745691612465253
Paunesku, D., Walton, G. M., Romero, C., Smith, E. N., Yeager, D. S., &
Dweck, C. S. (2015). Mind-set interventions are a scalable treatment for
academic underachievement. Psychological Science, 26, 784 –793.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0956797615571017
Puma, M. J., Olsen, R. B., Bell, S. H., & Price, C. (2009). What to do when
data are missing in group randomized controlled trials (NCEE 2009 –
0049). Washington, DC: National Center for Education Evaluation and
Regional Assistance, Institute of Education Sciences, U. S. Department
of Education.
Razzouk, R., & Shute, V. (2012). What is design thinking and why is it
important? Review of Educational Research, 82, 330 –348.
Richard, F. D., Bond, C. F., & Stokes-Zoota, J. J. (2003). One hundred
years of social psychology quantitatively described. Review of General
Psychology, 7, 331–363. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/1089-2680.7.4.331
Ries, E. (2011). The lean startup: How today’s entrepreneurs use continuous innovation to create radically successful businesses. New York,
NY: Random House LLC.
Robins, R. W., & Pals, J. L. (2002). Implicit self-theories in the academic
domain: Implications for goal orientation, attributions, affect, and selfesteem change. Self and Identity, 1, 313–336. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
15298860290106805
Robinson, T. N. (2010). Stealth interventions for obesity prevention and
control: Motivating behavior change. In L. Dube, A. Bechara, A.
Dagher, A. Drewnowski, J. LeBel, P. James, . . . R. Yada (Eds.), Obesity
prevention: The role of brain and society on individual behavior. New
York, NY: Elsevier.
Ross, L., & Nisbett, R. E. (1991). The person and the situation: Perspectives of social psychology. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Schimmack, U. (2012). The ironic effect of significant results on the
credibility of multiple-study articles. Psychological Methods, 17, 551–
566. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0029487
Schooler, J. (2011). Unpublished results hide the decline effect. Nature,
470, 437.
Schooler, J. W. (2014). Turning the lens of science on itself: Verbal overshadowing, replication, and metascience. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 9, 579 –584. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1745691614547878
Simmons, J. P., Nelson, L. D., & Simonsohn, U. (2011). False-positive
psychology: Undisclosed flexibility in data collection and analysis allows presenting anything as significant. Psychological Science, 22,
1359 –1366. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0956797611417632
Skurnik, I., Yoon, C., Park, D. C., & Schwarz, N. (2005). How warnings
about false claims become recommendations. Journal of Consumer
Research, 31, 713–724. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/426605
Stephens, N. M., Hamedani, M. G., & Destin, M. (2014). Closing the
social-class achievement gap: A difference-education intervention improves first-generation students’ academic performance and all students’

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

DESIGN THINKING AND PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS
college transition. Psychological Science, 25, 943–953. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1177/0956797613518349
Stipek, D. (2002). Motivation to learn: From theory to practice (4th ed.).
Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Treisman, U. (1992). Studying students studying calculus: A look at the
lives of minority mathematics students in college. A Mary P. Dolciani
Lecture. The College Mathematics Journal, 23, 362–372. http://dx.doi
.org/10.2307/2686410
Tsukayama, E., Duckworth, A. L., & Kim, B. (2013). Domain-specific impulsivity in school-age children. Developmental Science, 16, 879 – 893.
Walton, G. M. (2014). The new science of wise psychological interventions. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 23, 73– 82. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1177/0963721413512856
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2007). A question of belonging: Race,
social fit, and achievement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 82–96. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.92.1.82
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A brief social-belonging intervention improves academic and health outcomes of minority students.
Science, 331, 1447–1451. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1198364
Wilson, T. D. (2002). Strangers to ourselves: Discovering the adaptive
unconscious. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wilson, T. D., Aronson, E., & Carlsmith, K. (2010). Experimentation in
social psychology. In S. T. Fiske, D. T. Gilbert, & G. Lindzey (Eds.),
Handbook of social psychology (pp. 51– 81). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. (1982). Improving the academic performance of college freshmen: Attribution therapy revisited. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 42, 367–376. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1037/0022-3514.42.2.367

391

Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. (1985). Improving the performance of
college freshmen with attributional techniques. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 49, 287–293. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/00223514.49.1.287
Yeager, D. S., & Bryk, A. (2015). Practical measurement. Unpublished
Manuscript, University of Texas at Austin.
Yeager, D. S., & Dweck, C. S. (2012). Mindsets that promote resilience:
When students believe that personal characteristics can be developed.
Educational Psychologist, 47, 302–314. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
00461520.2012.722805
Yeager, D. S., Henderson, M. D., Paunesku, D., Walton, G. M., D’Mello,
S., Spitzer, B. J., & Duckworth, A. L. (2014). Boring but important: A
self-transcendent purpose for learning fosters academic self-regulation.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 107, 559 –580. http://dx
.doi.org/10.1037/a0037637
Yeager, D. S., Johnson, R., Spitzer, B. J., Trzesniewski, K. H., Powers, J.,
& Dweck, C. S. (2014). The far-reaching effects of believing people can
change: Implicit theories of personality shape stress, health, and achievement during adolescence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
106, 867– 884. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0036335
Yeager, D. S., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., Brzustoski, P.,
Master, A., . . . Cohen, G. L. (2014). Breaking the cycle of mistrust:
Wise interventions to provide critical feedback across the racial divide.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 143, 804 – 824. http://dx
.doi.org/10.1037/a0033906
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. (2011). Social-psychological interventions in
education: They’re not magic. Review of Educational Research, 81,
267–301. http://dx.doi.org/10.3102/0034654311405999

Appendix
Deviations From Preregistered Analysis Plan
The study was preregistered before the delivery of the dataset
to the researchers by the third-party research firm (osf.io/aerpt).
However, after viewing the data but before testing for the
effects of the intervention variable, we discovered that some of
the preregistered methods were not possible to carry out. Because at this time there are no standards for preregistration in
psychological science, the research team used its best judgment
to make minor adjustments. In the end, we selected analyses
that were closest to a replication of the Intervention ⫻ Prior
achievement interaction reported by Paunesku et al. (2015)
(Paunesku et al. also report a main effect of intervention on
grades, but the primary effect that is interpreted and highlighted
in the paper is the interaction). The deviations from the preanalysis plan were as follows:
• We initially expected to exclude students on an individualized special education plan, but that variable was not
delivered to us for any schools.
• We preregistered a second way of coding prior performance: by including self-reported prior grades in the composite. However, we later discovered a meta-analysis
showing that this is inappropriate for use in tests of mod-

•

•

eration because lower-performing students show greater
bias and measurement error, making it an inappropriate
moderator, even though self-reported grades are an effective linear covariate (Kuncel, Crede, & Thomas, 2005).
We hoped to include social studies grades as a core
subject, but schools did not define which classes were
social studies and they could not be contacted to clarify,
and so we only classified math, science, and English as
core classes.
We preregistered other analyses that will be the subject
of other working papers: effects on stress (which were
described as exploratory in our preregistered plan), and
moderation of intervention effects by race/ethnicity and
gender (which were not found in Paunesku et al., 2015
and so, strictly speaking, they are not a part of the
replication reported here).
Received April 21, 2015
Revision received December 7, 2015
Accepted December 8, 2015 䡲

How Can We Instill Productive Mindsets at Scale?
A Review of the Evidence and an Initial R&D Agenda
David S. Yeager
University of Texas at Austin
Dave Paunesku
Project for Education Research That Scales and Stanford University
Gregory M. Walton
Stanford University
Carol S. Dweck
Stanford University

Revised June 10, 2013
A White Paper prepared for the White House meeting on
Excellence in Education: The Importance of Academic Mindsets

David Yeager is a Fellow at the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching and a
Faculty Research Fellow at the Charles A. Dana Center at the University of Texas at Austin.
The authors wish to thank the students, teachers, and school staff who participated in the
research described in this white paper. We also thank Geoffrey Cohen and Sian Beilock for their
advice and/or comments. Please address correspondence to David Yeager
(dyeager@utexas.edu).

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

2	
  

Executive Summary
Research has increasingly shown that there is more to student success than cognitive ability,
curriculum and instruction. Students’ mindsets—their beliefs about themselves and the school
setting—can powerfully affect whether students learn and grow in school. For example, when
students have a fixed mindset, they believe that their intelligence is something that is finite and
unchangeable. This makes them doubt their intelligence when they experience difficulty and it
undermines resilience and learning. However, when students have more of a growth mindset,
they believe that intelligence can be developed. In this mindset, students respond more
resiliently to challenges and show greater learning and achievement in the face of difficulty.
Randomized experimental studies find that even brief interventions that convey a growth mindset
can have important, lasting effects on student learning and performance. For instance:
•

In an experiment with over 250,000 students learning math concepts on the Khan
Academy website, growth mindset encouragement presented at the top of the screen
(e.g., “When you learn a new kind of math problem, you grow your math brain!”)
increased the rate at which students successfully solved math problems even months after
students no longer saw the message, compared to controls who did not see this message.

•

In an experiment conducted with over 1500 students at 13 high schools across the
country, learning the growth mindset for one classroom session over the Internet reduced
the percent of courses failed by low-achieving students by nearly 7 percentage points,
compared to control group students.

•

In an experiment with over 7,500 students at a state university with high dropout rates, a
web-based growth mindset intervention completed the summer before freshman year
increased the percentage of students earning >12 credits in the first term by 3-4
percentage points (vs. controls), an effect that was larger for African American students
(10 percentage points). Earning >12 credits strongly predicts on-time graduation.

How can we deploy research on students’ mindsets to help more students succeed in school?
While it can be helpful to redirect students’ mindsets using brief interventions, it may also be
helpful to create everyday experiences that reinforce productive mindsets. Doing so is not
always straightforward, as there are many ways the essential psychological message can be lost
at scale. Scaling responsibly will require dedicated R&D efforts in three areas:
•
•
•

Principles: Understanding how to maximize the effects of mindset interventions.
Practices: Expanding the “toolkit” of day-to-day practices that instill adaptive mindsets.
Assessments: Developing measures that allow for more rapid learning from practice.

With significant investments in these areas, researchers and practitioners can more confidently
apply research on mindsets to effect large-scale changes in education—to make educational
outcomes more equitable by reducing achievement gaps, to make school more enjoyable by
placing the focus on learning and improving rather than on demonstrating raw intelligence, and
to make school more efficient by allowing students to take better advantage of learning resources
already available to them.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

3	
  

About This Document
This document was created to share the state of the field regarding academic mindsets with
education policymakers and private and public funding agencies, in order to help with the
organization of investment agendas. It is shared in the spirit of accelerating learning about
strategies to create infrastructures that successfully address student mindsets. It is not meant as a
final document. Indeed, some of the findings summarized here come from recently-conducted
studies that have not yet been able to be accepted for publication. As a result, we ask that
readers not quote the document or cite the data without written permission of the authors.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

4	
  

How Can We Instill Productive Mindsets at Scale?
A Review of the Evidence and an Initial R&D Agenda
Why do some students shrink from challenges and wilt in the face of difficulty while others
thrive on challenges, achieve, and fulfill their potential? Imagine a low-income student who is
not learning in school, even with a well-trained teacher using appropriate content and pedagogy.
When the student is given hard tasks and critical feedback, the student shuts down, does not ask
for help, and hides misunderstandings. Why? In recent years, a growing body of experimental
research has begun to answer this question.
This research shows that there is more to student success than cognitive ability or the quality of
the classroom curriculum. Students’ mindsets—their beliefs about themselves and their school
environments—can powerfully affect whether students engage and learn in school or do not.1
Students who conclude “I’m dumb at this” or “People like me don’t belong here” may not
exhibit the tenacity needed to persist in school, regardless of their cognitive ability or the quality
of the instruction they receive. Yet when educators are armed with a precise understanding of
the psychology of mindsets, they can create improvements in academic outcomes even among
chronic low performers. Brief but theoretically-grounded interventions, sometimes delivered
over the Internet directly to students and sometimes delivered by teachers in classroom
workshops, can redirect negative thoughts like “I’m not a math person” or “I’m afraid to make
mistakes” and refocus students on learning. When this is done, students often earn higher grades
and are more likely to stay in school, in some cases months or years later. Crucially, many of
these findings come from the strongest kind of research design for making causal inferences—
double-blind field experiments involving large numbers of students each randomly assigned to a
treatment or control condition, with student outcomes obtained from official school records.2
While much research has shown that it is possible to redirect mindsets and raise achievement in
the context of a randomized experiment, the field must understand how to do so reliably, at
scale, for diverse populations of students in diverse contexts. The ultimate goal of these efforts is
to create a specific psychological experience for students—one that removes a major barrier to
learning and allows students to benefit fully from the educational resources in their
environments. As with all research-based educational improvements, many factors can make it
difficult to recreate a psychological experience at scale. The present document provides a
potential R&D agenda that outlines how the field might begin to learn to successfully use
mindset research to remove psychological barriers to learning in diverse contexts.
Although the R&D recommendations outlined here apply to several different research-based
mindset interventions—for instance, interventions to change students’ mindsets about their
social-belonging in school, interventions to reduce the impact of negative stereotypes in school,

	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
1
Garcia and Cohen, 2012; Wilson, 2011; Yeager and Walton, 2011
2
See below for a description.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

5	
  

and interventions to remind students of the relevance of their schoolwork3— the present
document focuses on mindsets about intelligence.4 This is because mindsets about intelligence
have a great deal of data available in terms of implementation at multiple levels by multiple
sources—teachers, researchers, parents, private industry, etc. These data provide a useful case
study for illustrating broad themes relevant to other mindsets and perhaps to the “non-cognitive”
field more generally.
Definitions of Non-Cognitive Skills and Mindsets
In recent years, there has been a growing understanding of the non-cognitive skills that promote
student learning.5 These factors are called “non-cognitive” because they are not the specific or
general intellectual skills that are typically implicated in learning. In another sense these socalled non-cognitive factors are quite “cognitive”—they often involve beliefs or learning
strategies that students have developed. Nonetheless, we, along with the broader academic and
non-academic community, tend to call the broad cluster of “non-intellectual” factors that affect
academic or professional outcomes “non-cognitive skills.”6
One set of non-cognitive factors involves academic mindsets. Academic mindsets, broadly
defined, involve students’ perceptions of themselves and/or their learning environments, and can
affect how students perform and whether they put forth or withdraw effort in the face of
academic adversity. This includes, for instance, a belief that one’s intelligence is fixed versus
can grow and improve, a belief that one belongs and will be valued in a setting, and a belief that
one’s schoolwork has relevance for important life goals. It also involves the negative stereotypes
that give rise to anxiety, which can interfere with performance.7 Past research has found that
successfully addressing each of these mindsets, sometimes using brief (1-2 session) theory-based
interventions (similar to those outlined below), can improve student performance and reduce
achievement gaps in a way that endures over time.8 As noted above, we focus primarily on
mindsets about intelligence, while acknowledging the important influence that other mindsets
have on student outcomes. See the bibliography in Appendix 1 for some prominent examples of
other targeted interventions that address student mindsets and related non-cognitive factors.
What Are Mindsets About Intelligence?
	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
3
See Cohen, Garcia, Purdie-Vaugns, Apfel, and Brzustoski, 2009; Hulleman and Harackeiwicz,
2009; Walton and Cohen, 2011; also see Ramirez and Beilock, 2011. Also see the bibliography
in Appendix 1.
4
Blackwell, Trzesniewski, and Dweck, 2007; Dweck, 2006.
5
See Dweck, Walton, and Cohen, 2011; Farrington, Roderick, Allensowrth, Nagaoka, Keyes,
Johnson, and Beechum 2012; U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Technology,
2013.
6
See the Farrington et al. 2012 report for more background.
7
See Blackwell et al., 2007; Cohen et al., 2009; Ramirez and Beilock, 2011; Hulleman and
Harackeiwicz, 2009; Walton and Cohen, 2011.
8
Also see Garcia and Cohen, 2012; Yeager and Walton, 2011.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

6	
  

Carol Dweck and others have shown that many students have what is called a “fixed mindset.”
This is the idea that your intelligence is a fixed quantity—something you only have a certain
amount of. Students with a fixed mindset tend to agree with survey items like: “You have a
certain amount of intelligence, and there is not much you can do to change that.”
In controlled laboratory experiments and in long-term studies in schools, a fixed mindset has
many consequences.9 See Table 1 for an overview. First, fixed mindset students avoid
challenges. They want easier problems that will make them look and feel smart. Second, a fixed
mindset leads to unproductive beliefs about effort, like “If I have to try hard, I’m not smart” or
“There’s no point in trying if I’m not a natural.” Last, fixed mindset students are not resilient.
Instead, they hide their setbacks and deficiencies, not wanting people to see them as having low
ability. They fail to ask for help and even lie about low scores when asked about their
performance. And so it is not surprising that in a study of urban minority middle school
students, holding a fixed mindset predicted lower math grades over several years.10 The same
findings emerge in many other age groups and contexts.11
Table 1. Fixed and growth mindsets about intelligence.
Fixed mindset

Growth mindset

Goals

Look smart (don’t look dumb)

Learn

Value of effort, help and
strategies?

Lower

Higher

Response to challenge

Tendency to give up

Work harder and smarter

Changes in grades during
times of adversity

Decrease or remain low

Increase

Importantly, many students hold the opposite belief—what is called a “growth mindset.” This is
the idea that your intelligence has the potential to grow and improve in response to effort, good
strategies, and help from others. These students agree with survey items that portray intelligence
as a quality that can be developed. From the perspective of a growth mindset, an academic
challenge is not a threat to your raw ability; it is an opportunity for learning and improvement. In
a growth mindset, effort is a good thing: a student might say “trying harder makes you smarter.”
In the face of a problem they cannot solve, a growth mindset student will be resilient, seeking
appropriate help or switching strategies, rather than hiding their confusion. In longitudinal
studies, a growth mindset predicts an upward trajectory in grades even across difficult school
transitions.12
What is Known About How to Affect Mindsets?
	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
9
See Yeager and Dweck, 2012, for a review of this research.
10
Blackwell et al., 2007
11
Yeager, 2012
12
Blackwell et al., 2007

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

7	
  

There are at least two ways to think about how to influence students’ mindsets in educational
settings. First, everyday interactions with students, such as the way parents and teachers praise
performance, frame critical feedback, structure grading systems, or talk about race and gender,
can have a profound effect on mindsets.13 Second, researchers have developed precise, theorybased interventions that redirect students’ thinking toward a growth mindset. These can
involve classroom- or Internet-based reading, writing, or video activities lasting from one to
several class sessions. Below, we briefly review research demonstrating both ways to affect
student mindsets. Next, we outline the key areas of R&D that will help us to apply the lessons
from this research more broadly.
Everyday interactions. A number of studies have documented that subtle verbal feedback from
adults can put children in a fixed mindset and undermine motivation, and that this can happen
even from valued caregivers who are trying to encourage children. A classic paper by Claudia
Mueller and Carol Dweck showed that praising young adolescents for their intelligence—saying
they were “smart” when they did well—created a fixed mindset and its problems.14 It put
students in a world in which people evaluate intelligence. In contrast, praising the student’s
“process” (their effort or strategies) put children in a growth mindset and fostered resilience.15 In
related research, Aneeta Rattan and Catherine Good showed that comforting struggling math
students by saying the equivalent of “Overall, you’re smart, but it’s okay—some people just
aren’t good at math” taught students a fixed mindset and compromised their motivation. In both
cases, practitioners who say these things may be trying to help students feel good. But ironically,
these well-intended practice undermine resilience.
Thus, how adults talk to students can change their mindsets and increase their academic tenacity.
Can such verbal input, if heard repeatedly, create longer-term changes in a child’s overall
motivational framework? Two new studies suggest that it can. Gunderson and colleagues found
that how parents praise 1-3 year-old children—whether they praise the child’s effort and process
versus ability—predicts whether the child will have a growth mindset and a desire for challenge
5 years later. Similarly, Pomerantz showed that children aged 8 to 12 whose mothers used
person praise (“you are smart”) rather than process praise (“you tried hard”) showed more
change in the direction of a fixed mindset over a six-month period.16 Children whose mothers
praised smartness also tended to avoid challenges and instead chose tasks where they would
learn less but would not fail. It is easy to see how those students, over time, would acquire less
knowledge, especially in the face of the rising difficulty of academic work in the middle school
years.
In sum, both experiments and longitudinal studies show that even brief everyday interactions that
support a growth versus fixed mindset can produce different motivational frameworks in students
and powerfully affect learning.
	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
13
cf. Masten, 2001
14
Mueller and Dweck, 1998
15
Also see Kamins and Dweck, 1999.
16
Pomerantz and Kempner, in press.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

8	
  

Precise, theory-based persuasive interventions. As shown above, daily verbal feedback from
valued adults, even if well-intended, can create a fixed mindset. Yet through precise theorybased interventions it is possible to soften the built-up residue of a fixed mindset and create
lasting changes in motivation and learning. Crucially, this is possible both during adolescence
and even later in adulthood. These interventions teach students about neuroscience studies that
demonstrate the brain’s potential to grow and change as well as the implications of this fact—
that if you get confused or stumble, it does not mean you are “dumb.” The intervention teaches
that, in fact, by coping with difficulty and confusion you can grow new connections in your brain
and become “smarter.” Below, we summarize several interventions that tested this strategy.
Example 1: Classroom-based workshops. Lisa Blackwell and Carol Dweck created an eightsession workshop to teach a growth mindset and study skills and evaluated it with low-income
and minority 7th graders in New York City.17 In it, students learned to think of their brains as
muscles that get stronger as you exercise them. Students visualized new neuronal connections
growing as they completed hard math problems. Treatment group students also received six
sessions of study skills. Blackwell et al. compared this to a control workshop that learned only
study skills for eight sessions. The researchers found that the study skills control group
continued the normal decline in math grades commonly experienced by middle schoolers.
Students who learned the growth mindset with the study skills, however, showed a sharp rebound
in their grades, performing significantly better at the end of the semester. See Figure 1.

Math Grade

Figure 1. Effects of growth mindset training on 7th grade students’ math grades
Source: Blackwell, Trzesniewski, and Dweck, 2007.
2.70
2.65
2.60
2.55
2.50
2.45
2.40
2.35
2.30
2.25
2.20

Growth mindset
+ Study skills
Study skills only

Before workshop

After workshop

Example 2: Internet-delivered one-time reading and writing exercises. Studies such as that
conducted by Blackwell et al. have shown that it is possible to change student mindsets through
informative workshops. However, at scale, it can be difficult to rely on this strategy because it
involves intensive teacher training—something that can introduce heterogeneity in
implementation and also be time and cost-intensive. Furthermore, teachers may prefer even
	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
17
Blackwell et al., 2007

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

9	
  

briefer interventions. In recent years, then, Dave Paunesku, Carissa Romero, Greg Walton, and
David Yeager have tested whether it is possible to distill the essential messages in the classroombased mindset interventions into briefer activities (~ 30 minute) and deliver them over the
Internet directly to students. If effective, this approach would allow researchers and practitioners
to scale mindset interventions to large numbers of students without incurring the human resource
costs of visiting every school with trained facilitators.
In the past two years this strategy has been tested with thousands of students. Each test has
followed the same general procedure. Below we describe the overall intervention materials and
evaluation methods, followed by the results for each population. Because this approach is new,
we cite the working papers reporting these results below.
Overall intervention procedure. In each of the studies summarized below, a growth mindset was
communicated to students via a custom website that students visited either in their school’s
computer lab during school hours or on their own computer at a time of their choosing (for
college students). When students visited this website, the computer randomly assigned them to
be presented either with a growth mindset intervention or a control intervention. When they
completed the intervention, they were thanked and, from their perspective, the study was over.
Student academic records were then obtained from the school or from a national database,
depending on the study.
Students randomly assigned to the growth mindset intervention condition typically read an article
describing the brain's ability to restructure itself as a consequence of effort and changing
strategies. The article focused on the implications of these neuroscientific findings for students'
potential to become more intelligent through study and practice. This message was reinforced
through several writing exercises. In the first, students summarized the scientific findings in their
own words. In the second exercise, they read about a hypothetical student who was becoming
discouraged and starting to think of himself as “not smart enough” to do well in school. Students
were asked to advise this target student based on what they had read about the growth mindset.
In a control condition, students completed an analogous activity, usually one that taught facts
about memory and the brain but did not mention that intellectual ability is malleable. Below, we
describe the effects of this intervention procedure in several different populations.
High school students. Some experiments have tested whether a growth mindset intervention
could affect low-achieving high school students’ GPAs across all academic subjects (Math,
Science, English and History). In the spring of 2012, students at 13 high schools (public, charter,
and private) across the country (N = 1594) participated in a web-based growth mindset
intervention experiment.18 At the end of the term, students’ official grades in academic subjects
were collected. Analyses focused on changes in overall GPA and on the percent of courses
failed.
There were significant but small effects for the whole sample. However, among the lowachieving students (bottom tercile), the growth mindset treatment improved overall GPA by 0.18
	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
18	
  Paunesku, Yeager, Romero, and Walton, 2013.	
  

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

10	
  

grade points, a significant improvement. Much of this effect was explained by preventing
students from failing their courses. Within this high-risk population of students, control-group
students passed 60% of their classes, compared to 67% among growth-mindset treatment group
students. This is depicted in Figure 2.
Figure 2. Effects of growth mindset training on high school students’ course passing rates,
among low-performing students (the bottom third in terms of pre-intervention GPA).
Source: Paunesku, Yeager, Romero, and Walton (2013)

Community college students. Nationally, community college students are disproportionally more
likely to be low-performing, low-income or students of color. Thus an important question for
creating educational equality is whether it is possible to improve these students’ prospects for
completing a college credential. Paunesku, Yeager and colleagues tested this in a study similar to
that described above, conducted with students at a community college in the Los Angeles
metropolitan area (predominately Latino students; N = 715) in the Fall of 2011.19 At the
beginning of the Fall semester, students completed the one-session growth mindset intervention
via the Internet. At the end of the term, researchers obtained official records from the registrar.
The primary outcome was post-intervention GPAs in all academic subjects (Math, Science,
English, History, etc.). Analyses showed that the one-time growth mindset intervention raised
overall GPA by 0.18 grade points compared to the control group who learned facts about the
brain, a significant difference.
	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
19
Yeager, Paunesku, Romero, Brown, Muhich, and Walton, 2013.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

11	
  

A secondary question was whether a growth mindset message might benefit students who might
be most likely to have a strong belief that they are not “math people”—that is, students who have
enrolled in community college but are taking developmental (pre-college) math. Indeed, in a
survey of developmental math students at 21 colleges across the country conducted by the
Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, nearly 70% of students endorsed a fixed
mindset about math ability, saying a person is just a “math person” or not, and there is nothing
they can do about it.20 In the present study, we looked at the effects of the intervention
specifically on math course dropout among the sub-sample of developmental math students (N =
292). The growth mindset treatment reduced dropout from the course by over half (Control:
20% dropped out; Growth mindset treatment: 9% dropped out), a significant difference. Thus,
learning that your “math brain” can grow and develop could benefit even adults who have likely
experienced a lifetime of feeling “dumb” at math.
Students transitioning out of a high-performing charter school. Other recent experiments have
tested whether growth mindset interventions might help address college persistence problems
faced by graduates of high-performing urban charter high schools. Many high-quality charter
schools such as KIPP, YES Prep, Mastery, Aspire, or Achievement First achieve high graduation
and college acceptance rates, relative to similar students at local district schools or lowerperforming charter schools. Yet many of these high-performing charters report that too few of
their students successfully complete college within 6 years—in some cases fewer than half—
even though relative to comparable district schools serving similar students their rate of college
completion is quite high. Some might view the lower persistence rates of these charter students
as a critique of the school curriculum or student body. Another possibility however is a
psychological one. Perhaps the schools are adequately preparing students in terms of academics
but students’ beliefs about whether they will be viewed as having intellectual potential in college
contributes to their difficulty persisting until graduation.
Building on past research by Joshua Aronson, Catherine Good, and Claude Steele,21 a new
intervention conducted by Yeager, Walton, and Dweck rested on the notion that racial minority
students may worry that their intellectual ability will be viewed negatively in college, and that
this worry could be an impediment to persistence in college. If so, then learning that intelligence
is not a fixed trait but can be developed through education might alleviate some of the threat of
negative stereotypes and allow students to more readily embrace the challenges of college.
In light of this possibility, Yeager and colleagues collaborated with staff at an urban charter
school network on the East coast to conduct a growth mindset intervention with all outgoing
seniors at two schools (N = 160) in the spring of 2012.22 Nearly all of the students were African
American and low-income (i.e., received free or reduced-price lunch). In May of senior year
students completed a version of the brief web-based growth mindset materials described above
(randomly assigned at the individual level). Working closely with school staff, the intervention
was customized through a four-month R&D process that drew on extensive focus groups,
	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
20
Silva and White, 2013; Yeager, 2012.
21
See Aronson, Fried, and Good, 2002; Steele, 1997.
22
Yeager, Walton, Powers, House, Keane, Kementz, and Dweck, 2013.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

12	
  

interviews, and pilot tests. The customized intervention emphasized not only that people’s
intelligence can be developed but also that your “know how” in college—your skills in
navigating the environment—can grow and improve as you face new challenges. It
communicated that if you struggle adjusting to college it does not mean you are “dumb” or that
you “don’t belong” but rather that you are growing your “know how” to succeed in college.
Randomly-assigned control students learned brain facts.
No contact was made with students after the intervention was delivered in May of their senior
year. Instead, researchers, working with school officials, measured college persistence rates via
the National Student Clearinghouse (NSC), a non-profit database that tracks full-time enrollment
(at many colleges, full-time enrollment is defined as 12 credits or more; note that the NSC does
not report GPA, so college grades are not available as an outcome in this study). Analyses of
these data are ongoing, but the initial results are striking. Raw data show that 49% of controlcondition students were enrolled full-time in college but 66% of growth-mindset condition
students were, a significant difference. This effect was not diminished and remained significant
when controlling for other predictors of college persistence, like SAT scores. These findings are
supportive of the overall idea that one barrier to college persistence is a concern that one’s
intelligence could be negatively stereotyped and undermined by everyday setbacks. However,
even brief one-time interventions that teach that intelligence is not static but can grow powerfully
affected full-time college enrollment.
Full-scale implementation at a large institution. Is full-scale implementation of a web-based
growth mindset intervention within an institution possible? Yeager, Walton, and Dweck tested
this in a randomized experiment conducted at a large four-year university in Texas. Students at
this university graduate on-time at a lower rate than might be expected based on their academic
credentials (roughly 50%)—rates that are especially low for African American students (39%)—
making it a suitable place to test whether a growth mindset intervention might help increase
those rates both in the general population and among students more likely to face negative
intellectual stereotypes.23
As a part of online freshman orientation activities—in which students filled out medical forms
and learned how to sign up for classes—all incoming students were required to complete a 30minute overview of the “university mindset.” In this activity, students were randomized (at the
individual level) to a version of the growth mindset intervention described above or to a placebo
control group that discussed adjusting to the physical layout of a new city and a college campus.
The growth mindset intervention from past studies was customized for this university by
conducting interviews, focus groups, and pilot tests with current upperclassmen, who wrote
about the difficulties they had making the transition to college.
Over 91% of incoming students successfully completed the intervention (N = 7,342). Research
assistants reliably coded the quality of the open-ended intervention responses and found that
fully 96% provided substantive responses to the prompt. No participants were excluded from
analyses on the basis of their responses, however, so as to estimate an “intent-to-treat” effect,
	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
23
Yeager, Walton, Ritter, and Dweck, 2013.	
  

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

13	
  

which is important in estimating the effect of the treatment in real-world terms. Thus, this study
is close to a census of the freshman class, making it a reasonable demonstration of what a fully
“scaled-up” growth mindset intervention might look like.
Students completed the growth mindset materials between May and July of 2012. It took
roughly 22 minutes to complete and students did so using whatever computer they used to
complete the rest of their orientation materials. Although students will continue to be tracked
through college, for the present analyses credit attainment information was obtained from the
University registrar for the Fall 2012 semester. The focal outcome was the percent of students
who obtained more than the minimum number of credits (>12 gpa-bearing credits: a past analysis
found that this was one of the strongest predictors of on-time graduation).24
The growth mindset intervention increased the rate at which students in the full sample earned
>12 credits from 61% in the control to 64% in the growth mindset treatment, a significant
difference. These effects were larger for African American students, who may face negative
stereotypes about their intellectual ability. While only 45% of African American students in the
control group earned 12+ credits, this number was increased to 55% in the treatment condition,
also a significant difference. This corresponded to a 63% reduction in the achievement gap in
credit earning between White students and African American students, as a function of a onetime growth mindset intervention delivered over the Internet months before school started.
These findings are illustrated in Figure 3. All of these findings remained significant and were
slightly larger when adjusting for covariates that predict credit attainment, like SAT scores, high
school class rank, and sex.
Figure 3. Percent of students earning >12 credits in the first semester of college as a
function of growth mindset treatment, among all students (N = 7,342) and African
American students (N = 356). Source: Yeager, Walton, Ritter, and Dweck (2013).
Control

Growth Mindset

70%
65%

64%
61%

60%
55%
55%
50%
45%
45%
40%
All Students

African American Students

	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
24
Diehl, 2012.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

14	
  

Relation to traditional interventions. Mindset interventions are, of course, only part of the
solution to problems of low achievement and group disparities in education. Mindset
interventions do not replace traditional school reforms; instead, they allow students to take
advantage of educational opportunities available to them. Fully addressing systematic issues in
education thus requires continuing investments in improvements to teaching and instruction as
well as other programs to support children and families. Indeed, well-run schools are a
fundamental human right for students, even apart from their impact on learning.
At the same time, it can be helpful from a policy perspective to put the size of the effects of
mindset interventions into context by comparing them to other non-mindset interventions in the
literature. How do the effects of mindset interventions compare to traditional educational
reforms tested at a similarly large scale? Many interventions are randomized at a school or
classroom level, making them ill-suited for comparison to growth mindset training. However,
one well-designed line of research by Goldrick-Rab and colleagues has examined the impact of
offering entering college students $3,500 scholarships if they remain enrolled as full-time
students. Because a sub-set of students in these studies were randomly assigned at the individual
level to be offered these scholarships, researchers could evaluate the impact of doing this on
analogous student outcomes to those summarized above, making this one interesting case against
which to compare effects of growth mindset training. Goldrick-Rab found that offering students
$3,500 scholarships had full-sample effects on full-time college enrollment of 2.4 percentage
points.25 Comparable effects of growth mindset interventions on college outcomes were 3
percentage points for full-time enrollment in the full sample, and 10 to 17 percentage points for
African American students, who statistically are at higher risk of not persisting through college.
Thus, the available evidence obtained from experiments with many thousands of students
suggests that growth mindset interventions delivered over the Internet at no cost to institutions
can be at least as effective as the effect of offering $3,500 scholarships.26
Summary. These findings demonstrate the possibility that even brief but theoretically informed
methods to communicate a growth mindset to students can affect their academic performance
and resilience. However, additional research is needed to build on these demonstrations and
provide specific guidance for practitioners to reliably affect student mindsets in diverse settings.
Below we outline an R&D agenda that summarizes what more needs to be learned to effectively
and responsibly use mindset research and to positively affect more students.
What Do We Need to Learn to Effectively Scale Mindset Research in Education?
Larger-scale experimental studies are needed to understand the conditions that maximize or
reduce the impact of mindset interventions. For instance, what kinds of students benefit most? In
	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
25
See p. 38 in Goldrick-Rab, Harris, Kelchen, and Benson, 2012;
http://finaidstudy.org/documents/GoldrickRab%20Harris%20Kelchen%20Benson%202012%20FULL.pdf
26
Goldrick-Rab et al., 2012

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

15	
  

what kind of contexts do students benefit most? And what kinds of strategies to impart a growth
mindset are most effective?
These research questions overlap with the interests of educational practitioners. Practitioners
also want to affect student mindsets and raise achievement and they want to do it well. To do so
they need a larger “toolkit” of validated everyday practices for changing mindsets and they need
principles for how to apply these effectively in diverse classrooms. At the same time,
practitioners often ask for assessments so they can learn whether they are effectively changing
mindsets. For reasons we outline below, existing mindset assessments, while suitable for
research purposes, are less suitable for informing rapid improvements in applied settings.
Below, we outline three broad areas for R&D that represent the highest priorities for both
researchers and practitioners: (1) Principles for effective interventions; (2) Everyday practices
that affect mindsets; (3) Assessments that measure short-term changes in mindsets and related
behaviors so as to provide data to inform improvement efforts.
I.

Principles: Understanding how to maximize the effects of mindset interventions.

A crucial area for research and development is to better understand the conditions that allow
mindset interventions to have maximal and sustained effects. Some research and theory can shed
light on these conditions. However, many of these ideas require further testing on a much larger
scale. This is a high priority for research going forward.
Below, we show that past mindset interventions have three essential qualities: They (1)
successfully target students’ beliefs about themselves and their educational environments, (2) are
delivered in a psychologically precise and potent way, and (3) tap into recursive processes in
school (virtuous cycles) that sustain the effects of the initial intervention.27 As we state below,
these principles of effective interventions are grounded in theory and past research but require
further testing to give practitioners more concrete guidance.
Targeting students’ beliefs. Mindset interventions begin by understanding students’ beliefs and
their impact. Mindset interventions may seem small to outside observers, and often they are brief
and low-cost relative to other reforms. However, to a student who worries that a poor test score
means that she is stupid or could be seen as stupid, or who believes that members of his racial
group are not respected in school, learning that the brain is not static but can form new
connections and become smarter when challenged can be powerful. This message assuages the
specific fears that can stifle learning and can thus can have strikingly large effects on student
outcomes.
Because mindset interventions work by targeting student beliefs, research needs to identify the
specific beliefs that matter in a given educational setting to have an impact. In many cases, this
has led researchers to conduct extensive interviews, focus groups, and pilot tests to inform
	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
27
For other discussions of these ideas, see Garcia and Cohen, 2012; Yeager, Walton, and Cohen,
2012; Yeager and Walton, 2011.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

16	
  

alterations to intervention materials. This was the case in the community college, charter school,
and four-year college intervention experiments noted above. In other cases, however, materials
are not customized but, rather, are designed to be effective for a wide-range of students and are
simply administered to many students, as in the high school experiment noted above. It is
important to conduct research on when mindset interventions require customization (and, if so,
how and to what extent) and when they do not—when they are “robust” in different contexts and
with different populations and how they can be made more robust.
The finding that existing mindset interventions have had significant effects with diverse
populations creates a significant opportunity: Can even non-customized mindset interventions be
effective in changing students’ mindsets and improving academic outcomes on a national level?
And what factors could cause it to have differential impact? We can answer these questions
almost immediately, in the next few years. With coordination, we could evaluate an existing
one-time, web-based growth-mindset interventions with a national probability sample of schools
from various grade levels. Of course this would involve some thinking about logistics, but this is
exactly the sort of problem that government-sponsored research routinely solves. The NSF funds
the General Social Survey and the National Election Studies, the latter of which conducted a
representative-sample web-based study in the 2008 election, demonstrating the feasibility of
probability-based web surveys. With a panel of psychologists, education researchers,
government officials, and experts in probability-based sampling, something analogous could be
accomplished for mindsets. This type of free, web-based intervention would not address all
causes of fixed mindsets in school (let alone all psychological causes of underachievement), and
there will undoubtedly be heterogeneity in effect sizes. Thus, the rest of the R&D agenda
outlined below involves ways to address mindsets in more contextually appropriate ways. In the
meantime, however, a high-priority scientific objective we can achieve in the near term is to
estimate how effective a “baseline” growth mindset intervention could be, especially for lowperforming or disadvantaged students, and what contextual or implementation factors predict
differential impact.
Customizing for Native American communities. In some cases research has customized the
typical growth mindset intervention to make it more consistent with the beliefs of a particular
population. Stephanie Fryberg observed that the traditional “individualistic” framing of a growth
mindset—the idea that you can grow your own personal intelligence—was not as motivating for
Native American populations, who tend to focus more on community-based goals like
contributing to family or community. When the growth mindset message was reframed as a
means to achieve valued collective outcomes, such as contributing to family, this seemed to
produce important improvements. For instance, one school community adopted the new,
collectivistic growth mindset framing throughout the school (and beyond)—teachers, principals,
and parents employed the message that “you help your community when you grow your brain.”
Although not evaluated experimentally, analysis of school records showed a remarkable
turnaround—the school went from being one of the lowest-performing schools in the state in
state test scores to a high performing one in only two years. Kindergarten and 1st grade students
now lead the district in oral reading fluency, and the large majority of older students are showing
more than one year of growth in terms of test scores. However, no published research has
directly compared this community-oriented growth mindset framing to the more traditional
independent one. Future research could directly test whether such revised framings are more

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

17	
  

evocative and effective for some populations.
Future directions. There are at least two additional areas of “low hanging fruit” for which it may
be important to customize growth mindset messages. We consider these below.
Early childhood. The interventions summarized above rely on a person’s ability to learn facts
about brain malleability and to understand the relevance of these ideas to schoolwork. How can
such messages be adapted so they are developmentally appropriate for young children?
Research shows that mindsets are operative in young children and affect their challenge-seeking
and persistence. Even subtle hints that people from different groups are “good” or “bad” at
certain tasks can produce in children a fixed mindset about those tasks and undermine resilience.
For instance, Andrei Cimpian and colleagues showed that 4-7 year-old children who hear, for
instance, that “boys are really good at this,” infer that raw ability is necessary to complete a
given task.28 As a consequence, both boys and girls subsequently underperform when they
attempt difficult problems on this task. In addition, as we have noted, praise directed at young
children can affect children’s mindsets, challenge-seeking, and persistence.29 Research that
builds on these findings could inform theories about how to customize messages to instill
productive mindsets in young children. Can we train teachers in Head Start and other early
childhood programs to communicate a growth mindset wisely? Would this be an economically
efficient way to strengthen the long-term effects of early childhood interventions?
Adult vocational education. As the US economy changes and adult workers are increasingly
required to retrain in emerging technologies, it can be especially important for adults to have a
growth mindset—to believe that “old dogs” can learn “new tricks.” In today’s economy, many
employable adults have been laid off, for instance when their jobs became obsolete due to
outsourcing or new technology. Adults with a fixed mindset may feel they cannot acquire
expertise in emerging industries quickly enough to gain new employment. A tailored growth
mindset intervention, however—one that focused on acquiring new job skills—might be a
missing ingredient in adult education programs that seek to help unemployed adults reenter the
workforce. A potential area for innovation is to investigate what would be necessary to apply
growth mindset ideas effectively with this population.
Specific recommendations:
•

•

Use large-scale experiments to learn how robust the effects of a non-customized mindset
intervention are for different groups of students (a “baseline” mindset intervention). For
instance, a population-average effect size could be estimated if a probability-based
sample of K-12 schools and universities participated in individual-level randomized
experimental interventions.
Conduct laboratory and field experiments to learn where it is helpful or necessary to
customize mindset messages to yield larger effects for specific populations (e.g.,
race/ethnic groups; gender groups; age groups; students in specific educational contexts).

	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
28
Cimpian, Mu, and Erickson, 2012
29
Mueller and Dweck, 1998

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda
•

•

18	
  

Use RFPs or other mechanisms to accelerate growth mindset intervention research in
areas ripe for innovation, such as early childhood and adult vocational training. If
successful, consider public policies that facilitate the implementation of growth mindset
interventions in early childhood and adult educational programs.
Conduct research on the best methods for customizing mindset interventions effectively
in diverse applied settings. For instance, can we develop protocols for conducting usercentered design and then train educational professionals to do this work?

Psychologically wise delivery. As noted, mindset interventions change how students think or
feel about themselves in school. If an intervention does not deliver its message in a way that
leads to these changes, it will not be effective. Each intervention summarized earlier used a
delivery mechanism that drew on research about how to make messages stick.
Rather than simply presenting an appeal to a student, mindset interventions frequently enlist
students to generate the intervention itself. These are active experiences, not passive exposures.
For instance, one delivery mechanism involves asking students to write letters to younger
students advocating for the intervention message (e.g., “Tell a younger student why the brain can
grow”). As research on the “saying-is-believing” effect shows, encouraging students to author a
persuasive appeal and advocate for it to a receptive audience is a powerful means of selfpersuasion.30
Similarly, rather than telling students how they should use a growth mindset in their lives,
interventions sometimes ask students to generate how they could. In these respects, the
interventions provide a built-in element of personalization—individual students respond to
intervention prompts in ways that customize the intervention message for themselves, potentially
making the intervention message most relevant to their own personal experience and increasing
the robustness of the intervention across diverse students. However, this element has not been
tested in past research on the growth mindset.31 An important R&D question involves whether
built-in personalization elements increase the robustness of interventions in diverse populations
and how this robustness may be further improved.32
Although these delivery mechanisms are psychologically powerful and reliable, they are often
subtle. The web-based growth mindset interventions did not expose students to an overt
persuasive appeal (e.g., “You should do your homework to grow your brain”) or tell them they
are receiving “an intervention” to help them. Instead, they used a “stealthy” approach to avoid
feeling controlling or stigmatizing—they avoid conveying that student recipients are seen as in
need of help.33 At the same time, some successful in-person growth mindset workshops have
explicitly emphasized to students that the message is intended to benefit them or their class. For
	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
30
Aronson, 1999
31	
  Though see	
  Godes, Hulleman, and Harackeiwicz, 2007, for a test in the context of mindsets
about the relevance of schoolwork.	
  
32
For other examples, see Cohen et al., 2009; Hulleman and Harackeiwicz, 2009; Walton and
Cohen, 2011.
33
Robinson, 2010; Ross and Nisbett, 1991

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

19	
  

instance, in Fryberg’s customization for Native American populations, a growth mindset was an
explicit tool for personal and social change. An important empirical question, then, is when a
growth-mindset intervention should be subtle and stealthy and when it should be more overt and
explicit.
What is the right length for a mindset intervention? This is also an empirical question. A worry
is that excessive repetition of the same message risks conveying that students are seen as in need
of help and risks undermining the credibility of the message (“thou doth protest too much”). At
the same time, it may be helpful to have redundancy in mindset messages, so students who may
be unaffected by an initial intervention have additional opportunities to benefit and so that
students can connect an initial mindset message with ongoing academic experiences. An
important area for R&D is to use randomized experiments to test whether “booster” shots
delivered periodically can provide needed redundancy in the delivery of mindset messages and
thus enhance effects without undermining the original intervention.
Specific recommendations:
•

•

•
•
•

Research that tests whether “personalization” elements increase the robustness of mindset
interventions in diverse student populations and, more broadly, how to increase
robustness.
Research that varies the type of persuasive appeal used in a growth mindset experiments,
comparing methods that are more overt to methods that are “stealthier,” to understand
which approach is more effective in particular situations.
Research that tests whether mindset interventions at multiple levels—students, influential
peers, teachers, parents, principals—produce larger effects.
Research that evaluates “boosters” of an intervention, and that identifies what kind, in
what contexts, and delivered when boosters are effective.
Research on developmentally sensitive methods—for instance, methods that pay attention
to adolescents’ concerns about autonomy—that may be needed to successfully address
student mindsets on a wide scale.

Recursive processes. What can seem especially mysterious is how a brief or one-shot mindset
intervention can generate effects that persist over long periods. A key to understanding the longlasting effects of psychological interventions is to understand how they set in motion selfreinforcing processes.
In education, early success begets more success. When an intervention leads a student to study,
learn, and build academic skills, they are better prepared to learn and perform in the future. As
students feel more comfortable in school, they build better relationships with peers and with
teachers—relationships that support higher levels of achievement in the future. As students
perform well, they are placed in higher-level classes—gateways that raise expectations, expose
them to high-achieving peers, and put them on a trajectory of success. Well-timed, well-targeted
mindset interventions can improve students’ relationships, experiences, and performance at a

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

20	
  

critical stage and thus improve students’ trajectory through their school careers.34
To date, not enough research has directly tested the specific recursive processes that determine
the long-term impact of mindset interventions. Such research is important for psychological and
sociological theories of education, but it is also important for practitioners who aim to optimally
time and tailor interventions to maximize their impact.
For instance, research should assess the optimal timing of interventions. If mindset interventions
help students acquire foundational skills they can use later in school, or if they allow students to
seek out help from teachers sooner, potentially forming better teacher-student relationships,
interventions delivered earlier in school or in the school year may be more effective.35 At the
same time, it may never be too late to teach someone that the brain can grow and be developed
and improve their academic outcomes, as among adults taking developmental math in
community college, summarized above.
Specific recommendations:
•

•

•

II.

Experimental studies that investigate recursive processes directly—that is, that track the
effect of mindset interventions on real-time change in student confidence, challengeseeking, relationships with peers and teachers, learning, and long-term educational
attainment. This will be increasingly possible as learning happens online and student
work and communications are captured in real-time.36
Experimental studies that discover the optimal timing for the delivery of interventions
(both timing within a school year and developmental timing, such as during childhood
versus adolescence) to improve theories of recursive processes and provide more specific
recommendations for practice.
Studies that assess features of social and educational environments that allow mindset
interventions to set in motion virtuous recursive processes or that prevent them from
doing so (e.g., whether students are exposed to high-quality instruction and curriculum,
have opportunities to pursue higher-level coursework, and have opportunities to form
better relationships with peers and teachers). These contextual features may determine
whether mindset interventions can generate long-term change in a given setting or not.
Practices: Expanding the “toolkit” of day-to-day practices that instill productive
mindsets.

Research on mindsets has produced several recommendations for what to say and what not to say
to students to create a growth mindset and to forestall a fixed mindset. But practitioners have
many thousands of conversations with students every academic year, and they need more—and
	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
34
Garcia and Cohen, 2012
35
Cook, Purdie-Vaughns, Garcia, and Cohen, 2012
36
For a discussion of the use of data mining and rapid analytics for R&D in education, see US
Department of Education, Office of Educational Technology, 2012, 2013.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

21	
  

more tailored and more useful—recommendations for everyday practice than the experimental
literature has yet produced.
There are at least three ways to rapidly expand the “toolkit” of day-to-day practices that instill
productive mindsets. The first and most immediately actionable strategy is to dramatically
accelerate the amount of randomized intervention research conducted by psychological
researchers in applied settings. We outline examples of this type of research below, and this
constitutes much of the focus of our specific recommendations.
We acknowledge, however, that randomized experiments may test the efficacy of types of
practices but may not generate enough specific advice for practitioners. Thus, we suggest two
additional potential future directions that are worthy of consideration. One is to create more
ways for practitioners to learn rapidly about the effectiveness of their own classroom practices.
Another is to facilitate a marketplace in which private companies create materials and practices
based in theory and evaluated in rigorous research, which teachers and schools can then use.
After discussing the acceleration of experimental research, we discuss these ideas.
Accelerating field-experimental research on “everyday practices.” Recall that much research
has shown that the everyday ways in which adults talk to children can create mindsets that
support or undermine resilience. For instance, Gunderson and colleagues showed that children
who are praised for “process”—effort or strategies—have more growth-oriented motivational
frameworks up to five years later,37 and Pomerantz and colleagues showed that children who are
praised more for “smartness” showed more fixed mindsets over time.38 These observational,
correlational studies have identified some likely inputs to children’s mindsets.
These examples also reinforce the need for experimental research that isolates the impact of dayto-day verbal feedback on students’ mindsets and achievement—and that gives practitioners
concrete feedback about how to talk to children effectively. Effectively promoting mindsets can
be difficult and counterintuitive for parents and teachers. Past research shows how easy it is for
even well-intentioned efforts to motivate students to backfire and cause harm. As we noted
earlier, this is true when adults praise a child as being “smart at that” or when they comfort a
struggling child by saying “Overall you are smart, but maybe you’re not a math person.”39
Adults may have strong, deeply held intuitions about what to say to students to boost their
confidence. Absent strong experimental research, we may fail to question our intuitions and
instead continue to use verbal feedback we believe to be effective but in fact is either inert or
harmful.
Thus, continued experimentation on the sometimes counterintuitive ways that productive
mindsets can be built or undermined is an essential part of the R&D agenda. Two examples that
have done this are below. However, as we state, much more research is needed.
	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
37
Gunderson, Gripshover, Romero, Dweck, Goldin-Meadow, and Levine, in press.
38
Pomerantz and Kempner, in press.
39
Mueller and Dweck, 1998; Rattan et al., 2012

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

22	
  

First, some research has taken advantage of recent advances in online education to accelerate
learning about effective “everyday practices” that support student mindsets. For instance, Dave
Paunesku and colleagues have conducted randomized experiments on the online learning website
Khan Academy (khanacademy.org) with more than 250,000 students. The Khan Academy
website allows students to watch brief (~ 3 minute) videos about math concepts and then take
diagnostic assessments on those concepts. The Khan Academy website allows students to watch
videos about math concepts and then take diagnostic assessments on those concepts. Over a
period of several months, researchers presented to one groups of students statements embodying
a growth mindset (e.g., “When you learn a new kind of math problem, you grow your math
brain!”) at the top of screens during a unit of fractions, and to another group of students
encouraging statements that did not convey a growth mindset (e.g., “If at first you don’t succeed,
try again.”). The placebo statements represented phrases that educators commonly use to
motivate students and convey an overall positive attitude but they do not spark a growth mindset.
A randomly selected third of students saw no encouraging statements at the top of their screens.
The researchers then tracked the number of problems online learners successfully completed
over the ensuing few months. Growth-mindset feedback increased the percent of correct
problems students solved by 3-5%, depending on the task, compared both to students who
received placebo encouragement and to students who received no encouragement. Moreover, this
effect was fully maintained even after students completed the section on fractions and moved on
to the next set of math concepts during which they no longer saw the growth mindset phrasing.40
All told, this research suggests that a growth mindset can be built using brief but theory-informed
messages—something that positive and supportive but generic statements do not.
Other research has examined day-to-day practices using experiments conducted in brick-andmortar school settings. As one example, research by Geoffrey Cohen, Julio Garcia, Valerie
Purdie-Vaughns and David Yeager examined what method of providing critical feedback would
most effectively communicate to students that teachers see them as having the potential to grow
and improve.41 A common intuition is that the most effective way to provide feedback is to first
compliment students to raise their self-esteem, and then to hit them with critical feedback.
However, Cohen and colleagues began with the premise that what students need is not hollow
self-esteem boosting but the belief that their teacher believes in their potential to learn and grow
and to meet a higher standard. The researchers tested this by conducting a series of experiments
in middle school classrooms. Seventh grade students first wrote drafts of an essay about a
personal hero. Next, teachers marked up these essays with standard critical feedback, including
both substantive criticisms (e.g., comments on organization and content) and bland
encouragement (e.g., “overall nice job.”). Before students received the graded essays,
researchers appended brief notes hand-written previously by teachers. In the treatment condition,
the note emphasized the high standards of the course and conveyed the teacher’s confidence in
the student’s potential to meet this standard (“I’m giving you these comments because I have
high standards and know that you can meet them”). The key dependent variable was whether
students turned in a revised essay in the next week. Findings showed that only 40% of control
students revised the essay but 80% of students who received the high standards and personal
	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
40
.Sohl-Dickstein, Paunesku, Haley, and Williams (2013)
41
Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns et al. (2013)

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

23	
  

assurance note did. The effects were even more striking for African American students (17% in
the control vs. 72% in the treatment).
This type of field-based experimental research on everyday practices affecting mindsets is
relatively rare, unfortunately.42 Why? Many barriers stand in the way. First, there are simply not
enough researchers trained to do it. Most experimental psychologists are not trained to conduct
research in field settings and many educational researchers are not trained to conduct theorydriven, precise experiments. Second, it is logistically difficult and time-intensive to conduct this
research; for instance, it takes time to build trusting partnerships between researchers and
schools. This makes it difficult to conduct more than one such experiment in a school year—far
below the standard rate for a typical experimental psychologist, who might conduct ten or twenty
experiments with undergraduate participants in a year. Hence, conducting practically useful
research on teacher practices seems to be at odds with the professional incentives of
experimental researchers. Third, the analysis and publication process is slow, often requiring
several years of data analysis, writing, and journal submission after a study has been completed.
While it is important to have these types of publications, there is no way for bottom-line findings
from mindset experiments to quickly reach practitioners.
It is crucial then to reduce barriers for researchers to conduct field-experimental research on
teacher practices and to accelerate the analysis and dissemination of that research. Below we
provide specific recommendations for doing so:
Specific recommendations:
• Accelerate the pace of experimentation by using online learning environments such as
MOOCs as laboratories for conducting brief, large, iterative randomized experiments on
methods to improve student mindsets —similar to what software engineers call “A/B
testing.”43
• Consider creating “big science” analogues in psychology and education—how can
researchers pool common resources and relationships with schools to conduct more
experiments and analyze data more quickly? NSF-funded initiatives such as the ANES,
GSS, or TESS may be guides.
• Create alternative outlets for faster dissemination of results of experiments on effective
(and ineffective) “everyday practices,” without undermining the potential for later
publication in disciplinary outlets.
• Continue to support and expand researcher-practitioner networks that produce and
disseminate research-tested methods to improve mindsets.
Future directions. As noted, there are at least two additional ways to accelerate learning about
effective everyday practices to promote productive mindsets: (a) empowering practitioners to
learn from their experiences, and (b) fostering private innovation.

	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
42
For a rare exception, see, e.g., Destin and Oyserman, 2009; 2010.
43
Also see U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Technology, 2013.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

24	
  

A. Create ways for practitioners to partner with researchers and to learn more rapidly what
effectively promotes mindsets. Practitioners are likely to implement mindset ideas in their
classrooms regardless of what researchers produce. A key question, then, is this: How can we
empower practitioners to learn whether their local innovations are helpful or harmful for
students? And how can we help practitioners share and scale innovations that are effective?
This question is especially important because the history of school reform teaches us that
promising ideas, when scaled, frequently lose their essential ingredients. Even when the
materials given to students are replicated across contexts, the psychological or educational heft
of an exercise can be lost. Project-based learning activities that require students to do
independent research and produce a scale model can quickly turn in to a trip to an arts-and-crafts
store or a visit to Wikipedia.44 In some cases innovations became inert versions of their former
selves. In other cases they can be transformed into something harmful. This can potentially
happen to nearly all educational innovations, and it can certainly happen to psychological
interventions.
One well-known example in psychology comes from the self-esteem movement. Researchers
produced an enormous amount of rigorous, large-sample research showing that low self-esteem
is an excellent predictor of poor life outcomes—depression, stress, health, educational
attainment, aggression, etc.45 However the application of this research in educational settings
was to praise children to boost self-esteem. This recommendation rested on the faulty
assumption that doing anything positive to a person would boost self-esteem and improve
academic outcomes—for instance, praising people for being “smart,” complimenting people for
mediocre performance, handing out trophies for last place performances. Ironically, this
misapplication of the research may have led to some of the problems that students now face in
terms of fixed mindsets. And the self-esteem movement is widely viewed as a misinterpretation
of research findings and a misguided attempt to turn them into practice.
It is important to prevent mindset research from being misinterpreted and misused at scale. For
this reason, one priority future direction is to design ways for practitioners to learn more quickly
from their efforts to address mindsets in classrooms. Teachers hoping to instill in children the
belief that they can grow and improve might tell them that they have hidden talent or that
“you’re the best”—both phrases that could imply the importance of fixed ability relative to
peers.46 How can practitioners learn more rapidly whether their efforts to address mindsets in
classrooms have retained the essential psychological message or not?
One future possibility involves training specialists who can help teachers learn about the latest
experimental findings on everyday practices that promote mindsets and then use continuous
improvement processes to make these work reliably in their classrooms.47 Just as it is common
	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
44
See, for instance, a discussion of the “California mission project” in Yeager and Walton, 2011
45
e.g. Donnellan, Trezesniewski, Robins, Moffitt, and Caspi, 2005
46
For research showing this was the case in one growth mindset training study, see Shumow and
Schmidt, 2013.
47
See a discussion of improvement research in Bryk, Gomez, and Grunow, 2011.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

25	
  

for a school to have instructional coaches who use formative assessments to help teachers
appropriately scaffold their instruction, it is possible to imagine “mindset coaches” who use data
to inform improvement in schools. These professionals would not be develop new theories about
mindsets but would, rather, be trained to use formative assessments and then work with teachers
to acquire and respond appropriately to evidence about the effects of their classroom-based
mindset practices.48
In this spirit, organizations such as the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching
have begun to train “improvement specialists” to track data related to motivation and persistence
over time with teachers—like the number of students who ask questions or show up for class—
and then help teachers implement small changes to improve students’ mindsets and increase
learning behaviors.49 By conducting this kind of data-informed, small-scale improvement
research, teachers and improvement specialists have worked to identify, for instance, which
routines seem to make students comfortable asking questions about concepts they do not
understand—a leading indicator of long-term knowledge acquisition. If this feedback process is
repeated over many cycles with many practitioners testing a larger number of classroom
innovations, schools or districts might amass a large, local evidence base for effective
practices.50 In the next section we discuss in greater detail why existing measures of mindsets
may be ill-suited for this task and we outline what kinds of measures might be more suitable.
B. Foster private innovation and large-scale dissemination through rigorous evaluation and
government certification of mindset interventions. In medicine, companies that create safe,
effective “interventions”—like drugs and medical procedures—and that deliver these
interventions on a large scale to address health problems can reap significant financial rewards.
These incentives motivate companies to develop new interventions that are safer, more effective,
and more robust than prior interventions and to scale them rapidly. This marketplace works in
part because the government plays a critical role. Working through the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), the government acts as an honest broker that evaluates the evidence
regarding the safety and effectiveness of new medical interventions and certifies new
interventions that meet relevant standards to the public and the health care industry. This
certification allows companies to sell their product and reap the financial reward.
Perhaps a similar approach would be effective in education. The government could encourage
private companies to develop new mindset interventions designed to be more effective or more
robust than existing interventions or to be better suited for a given student population. Through a
combination of private research, academic research, and government research, evidence could be
acquired evaluating the effectiveness of a given intervention product. Government panels could
then review this evidence and, if the product meets relevant standards, certify the product as safe
and effective for a given population. This certification could then help or allow companies to sell
intervention products to schools or to others in the educational environment (e.g., to parents).
For instance, the federal government could grant states or school districts access to additional
	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
48
See Yeager and Walton, 2011, for a discussion of related ideas.
49
Silva and White, 2013	
  
50
Bryk et al., 2011

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

26	
  

funds (e.g., a new portion of Title I dollars) to be used specifically for certified intervention
products that reliably reduce achievement gaps or benefit low-performing students.
Government certification is especially important because in some cases poorly applied
psychological interventions may cause harm. It is important for vendors of educational products
to show not only that the product is based on solid research, but also to provide evidence that it
actually produces the psychological experience that the research says is important for student
learning and, in turn, affects challenge-seeking, persistence, resilience and learning.
In short, with the proper incentive structure, insights from research on academic mindsets can be
more efficiently turned into reliably effective interventions in partnerships with private industry.
A future challenge to the field is to learn how to do this responsibly.
III.

Assessments: Measures that allow researchers and practitioners to learn more
rapidly from efforts to change mindsets.

One item high on the list of requests from practitioners is a set of measures of academic mindsets
and other non-cognitive factors. Specifically, practitioners want measures so they can (a)
identify teachers or schools who do or do not promote productive mindsets, to inform
evaluations; (b) identify specific students who have a mindset that puts them at risk so they can
be given a personalized intervention; and (c) help thoughtful practitioners learn from their efforts
and optimize their classroom climates to promote mindsets. These different purposes are
accountability, remediation, and improvement.51
Existing measures are sometimes unsuitable for accountability, remediation or
improvement purposes. Unfortunately, the measures of non-cognitive factors commonly
available to practitioners were designed for an entirely different purpose: theory development.
That is, many of the available student self-report measures were designed for testing the relation
between mindsets and outcomes, e.g., the relation of a fixed mindset to GPA—not for diagnosing
mindsets at the individual level or for determining whether an effort to promote a growth
mindset was effective. While measures for theory development are helpful to the extent that they
illuminate average trends that can inform decision-making at an aggregate level, they are less
helpful for the purposes requested by practitioners. Said another way, many existing measures of
non-cognitive factors are not well-suited for accountability, remediation or improvement.
There are many examples of why this might be true. One compelling unpublished example
comes from research by Angela Duckworth, a leader in the field of measures of non-cognitive
factors. She measured levels of self-reported “grit”—or passion and perseverance for long-term
goals—among students attending West Point military academy and found that levels of grit
actually went down significantly over the four years at West Point, despite the fact that this is
highly unlikely to be the case (West Point students undergo tremendous physical and mental
challenges as a part of their training.)52 Instead, according to Duckworth, it is likely that they
	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
51
Also see a discussion of different uses of data in Yeager and Bryk, 2013
52
Angela Duckworth, personal communication.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

27	
  

were now comparing themselves to a very gritty peers or role models and revising their
assessment of themselves accordingly.
There are also examples in the published literature. A team of researchers at Mathematica
recently conducted an evaluation of the effect of KIPP charter schools on student test scores.53
KIPP schools have longer school hours, longer school years, more challenging coursework, and
teachers with more demanding standards than traditional schools. Indeed, in this study, KIPP
students completed 30-50 more minutes of homework per night compared to district students
(depending on the analysis). Simply on the basis of completing more work, students in the KIPP
system were predicted to have made greater gains in their mastery of academic concepts
according to state tests. And, in fact, researchers found that KIPP students, when compared to
students who lost the lottery and went to the district school instead, showed greater mastery of
academic concepts. Importantly, however, the researchers also compared the two groups of
students in terms of their self-reports on a large battery of non-cognitive factors, including school
engagement, self-control, academic self-concept, and effort and persistence in school.
Strikingly, the researchers found no differences between the student populations in terms of these
items. That is, while according to all objective standards—demanding curriculum, number of
hours studying, etc.—KIPP students exhibited more self-control, stayed more engaged in their
schoolwork, and expended more effort, they rated themselves no more highly along these factors.
Again, it is likely that they adjusted their ratings to the new comparison group.
As we have been suggesting, it is possible that the reason for this is a change in the reference that
students are using when answering questions used in these studies, something that has been
noted by several past researchers.54 For instance, when students are asked to agree with the
statement “I try hard in school” they may instead be answering the question “I try hard in school
compared to other people around me” or “… compared to how much harder I could be trying.”
When students are surrounded by very different peers working at very different rates, or when
they have been exposed to the potential to work even harder than they are now, as in an
intervention, then it can be difficult to collect data that is meaningful for the purposes outlined
above (e.g., to evaluate schools). This feature of the psychology of questionnaire design can
potentially undermine any comparisons between classrooms, between schools, or over time
within individuals. In addition, many measures of self-reported mindsets, even if unbiased,
cannot be administered repeatedly and they are not likely to be sensitive to short-term changes in
student behavior because they assess global beliefs rather than concrete actions.
New measures of non-cognitive factors are needed. New measures that would be of great
benefit to the field would have many or all of these features:55
• They would likely assess behaviors that indicate the possession of productive mindsets
or non-cognitive skills. Instead of asking students how much they agree that “I like
trying hard problems where I can learn a lot,” a measure might embed real choices
	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
53
Tuttle, Cleason, Knechtel, Nichols-Barrer, and Resch, 2013
54
Biernat, 2003
55
Yeager and Bryk, 2013

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

•

•
•
•

•

28	
  

between easy and hard problems on a homework assignment and count how often
students choose to work on hard problems instead of easy problems.
They would be valid at the level of analysis they are used for—we could assess the
percent of students who chose hard tasks where they could learn a lot as opposed to easy
tasks where they could get a high score.
They would be repeatable—that is, the meaning and validity of the measure would not
be altered by repeated use.
They would be brief—they cannot be long or redundant, because then practitioners could
not use them repeatedly over time.
They would be convenient and unobtrusive—measures must be easy to collect and
analyze, for instance analyzing whether students review their work or not when doing
homework in an online course management platform.
These might be self-reports, but it would be essential to demonstrate that a particular
self-report measure does not suffer from the biases reported above (i.e., that there is not a
possibility for different reference groups or that this possibility does not undermine
validity).

Ideally, a suite of such measures could be developed in age-appropriate ways. They could be
delivered as stand-alone activities via the Internet or embedded in the web of daily instruction,
for instance by data mining online instructional system data.
These new, briefer, behavioral measures are extremely useful for research-practice partnerships.
If practitioners are going to work with researchers to put their “everyday practices” for
promoting mindsets to the test, they will need measures that can tell them whether, in the short
term, their actions have led to improvements in student mindsets. Thus, to the extent that the
field seeks to create researcher-practitioner partnerships for continuous improvement in the
classroom, creating valid measures to tap this improvement is one of the highest priorities.
It is important to mention, of course, that the types of student behaviors that could be assessed
via the new suite of non-cognitive measures are not only relevant to growth versus fixed
mindsets. Other highly important mindsets—such as mindsets about belonging, about negative
stereotypes, or about relevance of the schoolwork—might also affect similar behaviors such as
effective strategy use, challenge-seeking, persistence, etc. Thus such measures could be usefully
applied to the evaluation of many interventions that seek to enhance students’ engagement with
learning.
Specific recommendations:
• Identify which existing self-report measures are adequate for practitioner purposes, and
which are inadequate.
• Drive toward agreement among relevant stakeholders (researchers and practitioners) to
define a set of important behaviors that new measures should assess.
• Commission a set of measures of behavioral profiles that signal the presence of positive
academic mindsets. These should be brief, scalable (e.g., web-based), repeatable,
relatively unobtrusive, sensitive to short-term changes, comparable across classrooms and
schools, and predictive of long-term outcomes.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

29	
  

Future directions.
Using non-cognitive measures for school or teacher accountability. One long-term future
direction is to consider whether such measures could be designed for accountability purposes.
For instance, at the end of standardized tests, students could have optional problems that could
be explicitly framed as either challenging or easy. Or achievement test performance could be
analyzed to determine how well students bounced back from difficulty or wrong answers. It may
be possible to incentivize schools that produce larger numbers of “learners” rather than
rewarding schools only on the basis of producing “knowers.”
Human Capital Development
To carry out the R&D mission outlined here, it is essential to significantly increase the available
community of researchers skilled in conducting experimental research on mindsets in field
settings in education. A high priority is thus to expand opportunities for advanced training in this
area for psychologists and educational researchers, through postdoctoral fellowships, summer
training institutes, and other initiatives.
In addition, as noted, it may be possible to train a new class of professionals to conduct
continuous improvement research in educational settings, specialized in working with teachers to
remove motivational barriers that harm students, especially at-risk students, and in assessing the
effects of such local innovations. Of course, to train these professionals well it will be essential
to increase our knowledge base of the principles, practices, and assessments that are likely to
affect mindsets in applied settings. Said another way, before we can train these people we need
to know what we should tell them. Therefore we see the building of this human resource
throughout education as depending critically on accomplishing the R&D objectives outlined
here.
How Can We Get Started?
Truly solving problems related to student mindsets will require dedicated efforts to change
teaching and perhaps parenting practices. These efforts can be started immediately and should
be pursued in the long-run. At the same time, the most immediate short-term goal—something
that could be accomplished in the next two years—is to estimate how effective existing growthmindset interventions (“baseline” interventions) can be at a population level, and what factors
lead to variance in intervention effectiveness. As we have argued, this can be done by delivering
interventions via the Internet to a probability sample of students in middle school, high school
and college. Through a web-based platform it would also be easy to compare several different
mindset interventions, to find out what works best and for whom and in what setting or context.
We could also compare what delivery strategy is most effective, and whether certain details of
the delivery, like “stealthiness” and personalization, really matter. The baseline mindset
interventions will of course not benefit every student or every school. But there is enough
evidence for the promise of these interventions to expect to find at least average benefits for lowperforming students or for negatively stereotyped students. This may be a powerful catalyst for
the reduction in achievement gaps, as even small effects in large populations can have important
implications for equity. Given the potential to learn a great deal about the effectiveness and

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

30	
  

limitations of current intervention strategies to address mindsets, as well as to build out
infrastructure that could support future, more customized and ideally more effective
interventions, it is important to consider how to make this initiative a reality in the very short
term.
Second, there is enough evidence that our national obsession with “smartness” and “talent”
undermines student learning and thus our national competitiveness, especially when considering
achievement in STEM-related fields and among students who face negative intellectual
stereotypes. We should ask: Can we redirect the national conversation away from a focus on
“smart” children and toward a focus on “learning” children? As a nation we could eliminate the
phrase “I’m not a math person” from our vocabulary—a phrase that, itself, can contribute to race,
gender, and socioeconomic inequality in STEM fields.56 Such a sea change is not unheard of in
the U.S. As a society we have for the most part eliminated racial epithets from casual
conversation. Can we do the same regarding mindsets? Instead of it being common to hear “I’m
not a math person,” can we make it ubiquitous to hear “I’m a math learner”? With coordinated
PR and social media and with teachers wise to the power of a growth mindset we can imagine a
world in the very near future where no child’s prospect of success in education is diminished by
harmful mindsets about the fixedness of ability.
Conclusion
As anyone who works in education knows, problems facing students and schools are complex
and multi-determined. There are no silver bullets, but mindset interventions can be helpful for
student learning, and even necessary. When we give students the belief that they can grow and
learn in school, that they are not limited by fixed inability, and that they belong and are valued,
we motivate them to take advantage of the social and educational resources in school. We help
them to learn from the teaching and curricula present there, to develop relationships with people
in school, and ultimately to acquire skills they need for long-term success.

	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  
56
See, e.g., Beilock, Gunderson, Ramirez, and Levine, 2010; Rattan et al., 2012

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

31	
  

References
Aronson, E. (1999). The power of self-persuasion. American Psychologist, 54, 875–884.
Aronson, J., Fried, C., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the effects of stereotype threat on African
American college students by shaping theories of intelligence. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 38, 113–125.
Beilock, S.L., Gunderson, E.A., Ramirez, G., & Levine, S.C. (2010). Female teachers’ math
anxiety affects girls’ math achievement. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 107, 1860-1863.
Biernat, M. (2003). Toward a broader view of social stereotyping. American Psychologist, 58,
1019-1027.
Blackwell, L. A., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Implicit Theories of intelligence
and achievement across the junior high school transition: A longitudinal study and an
intervention. Child Development, 78, 246–263.
Bryk, A. S., Gomez, L. M., & Grunow, A. (2011). Getting ideas into action: Building networked
improvement communities. Frontiers in Sociology and Social Research (M. Hallinan,
Ed.). Retrieved May 10, 2013 from
http://www.carnegiefoundation.org/sites/default/files/bryk-gomez_building-nicseducation.pdf
Cimpian, A., Mu, Y., & Erickson, L. C. (2012). Who is good at this game? Linking an activity to
a social category undermines children’s achievement. Psychological Science, 23, 533541.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaugns, V., Apfel, N., & Brzustoski, P. (2009). Recursive
processes in self-affirmation: Intervening to close the minority achievement gap. Science,
324, 400–403.
Cook, J. E., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (2012). Chronic threat and
contingent belonging: Protective benefits of values affirmation on identity
development. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102, 479-496.
Destin, M., & Oyserman, D. (2009). From assets to school outcomes: How finances shape
children’s perceived possibilities and intentions. Psychological Science, 20, 414–418.
Destin, M., & Oyserman, D. (2010). Incentivizing education: Seeing schoolwork as an
investment, not a chore. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 846–849.
Diehl, R. (2012). Final Report on the Task Force on Undergraduate Graduation Rates. Austin,
TX: University of Texas Press. Retrieved May 10, 2013 from
http://www.utexas.edu/graduation-rates/documents/GRAD-REPORT.pdf
Donnellan, M. B., Trzesniewski, K. H., Robins, R. W., Moffitt, T. E., & Caspi, A. (2005). Low
self-esteem is related to aggression, anti-social behavior, and delinquency. Psychological
Science, 16, 328-335.
Dweck, C. S. (2006). Mindset. New York, NY: Random House.
Dweck, C. S., Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. (2011). Academic tenacity. White paper prepared for
the Gates Foundation. Seattle, WA.
Farrington, C. A., Roderick, M., Allensworth, E., Nagaoka, J., Keyes, T. S., Johnson, D. W., &
Beechum, N. O. (2012). Teaching adolescents to become learners. The role of
noncognitive factors in shaping school performance: A critical literature review.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Consortium on Chicago School Research.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

32	
  

Garcia, J. & Cohen, G. L. (2012). A social-psychological approach to educational intervention.
In E. Shafir (Eds.), Behavioral foundations of policy, (pp. 329-350). Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Goldrick-Rab, S., Harris, D. N., Kelchen, R., & Benson, J. (2012). Need-based financial aid and
college persistence: Experimental evidence from Wisconsin. Retrieved May 10, 2013
from http://finaidstudy.org/documents/GoldrickRab%20Harris%20Kelchen%20Benson%202012%20FULL.pdf.
Godes, O., Hulleman, C. S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2007). Boosting students’ interest in math
with utility value: Two experimental tests. Paper presented at the meeting of the
American Educational Research Association, Chicago, IL.
Gunderson, E. A., Gripshover, S. J., Romero, C., Dweck, C. S., Goldin-Meadow, S., & Levine,
S. C. (in press). Parent praise to 1-3 year-olds predicts children’s motivational
frameworks 5 years later. Child Development.
Heyman, G. D., & Dweck, C. S. (1992). Achievement goals and intrinsic motivation: Their
relation and their role in adaptive motivation. Motivation and Emotion, 16, 231–247.
Hulleman, C. S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2009). Making education relevant: Increasing interest
and performance in high school science classes. Science, 326, 1410–1412.
Kamins, M. & Dweck, C. S. (1999). Person vs. process praise and criticism: Implications for
contingent self-worth and coping. Developmental Psychology, 35, 835-847.
Masten, A. S. (2001). Ordinary magic: Resilience processes in development. American
Psychologist, 56, 227-238.
Mueller, C. M., & Dweck, C. S. (1998). Intelligence praise can undermine motivation and
performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 33–52.
Paunesku, D., Yeager, D., Romero, C., & Walton, G., (2013). Brief social-psychological
interventions are a scalable solution for academic underperformance. Unpublished
Manuscript, Stanford University.
Pomerantz, E., & Kempner, S.G. (in press). Mothers’ daily person and process praise:
Implications for children’s theory of intelligence and motivation. Developmental
Psychology.
Ramirez, G., & Beilock, S. (2011). Writing about testing worries boosts exam perfor- mance in
the classroom. Science, 331, 211–213.
Rattan, A., Good, C., & Dweck, C. S. (2012). “It’s ok — Not everyone can be good at math”:
Instructors with an entity theory comfort (and demotivate) students. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 48, 731–737.
Robinson, T. N. (2010). Stealth interventions for obesity prevention and control: Motivating
behavior change. In L. Dube, A. Bechara, A. Dagher, et al., (Eds). Obesity prevention:
The role of brain and society on individual behavior pp. 319-327. New York: Elsevier.
Ross, L., & Nisbett, R. E. (1991). The person and the situation: Perspectives of social
psychology. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Silva, E., & White, T. (2013). Pathways to improvement: Using psychological strategies to help
community college students master developmental math. Retrieved May 10, 2013 from
http://www.carnegiefoundation.org/sites/default/files/pathways_to_improvement.pdf
Sohl-Dickstein, Paunesku, Haley, & Williams. (2013). Motivating online learning with targeted
psychological messages. Unpublished Manuscript, Stanford University.
Steele, C. M. (1997). A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape intellectual identity and
performance. American Psychologist, 52, 613–629.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

33	
  

Shumow, L. & Schmidt, J. A. (2013, April). Exploring teacher effects in outcomes of a growth
mindset intervention in seventh grade science classes. Paper presented at the annual
meeting of the American Educational Research Association, San Francisco, CA.
Tuttle, C. C., Gil, B., Gleason, P., Knechtel, V., Nichols-Barrer, I., & Resch, A. (2013). KIPP
middle schools: Impacts on achievement and other outcomes. Mathematica Policy
Research. Washington, DC.
U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Technology (2012). Enhancing Teaching
and Learning Through Educational Data Mining and Learning Analytics: An Issue Brief,
Washington, DC: Author.
U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Technology. (2013). Promoting grit,
tenacity, and perseverance: Critical factors for success in the 21st century. United States
Department of Education, Office of Educational Technology. Washington, DC.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A brief social-belonging intervention improves academic
and health outcomes among minority students. Science, 331, 1447–1451.
Wilson, T. (2011). Redirect: The surprising new science of psychological change. New York,
NY: Penguin Group.
Yeager, D. S. (April, 2012). Productive persistence: A practical theory of community college
student success. Paper presented at the 2012 Annual Meeting for the American
Educational Research Association, Vancouver, Canada.
Yeager, D.S. & Bryk, A. (2013). The case for practical measurement. Unpublished manuscript,
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX.
Yeager, D. S., & Dweck, C, S. (2012). Mindsets that promote resilience: When students believe
that personal characteristics can be developed. Educational Psychologist, 47, 302-314.
Yeager, D.S., Paunesku, D., Romero, C., Brown, R., Muhich, J., & Walton, G. (2013).
Engineering psychological interventions for scale: The case of the “growth mindset” in
community colleges. Unpublished Manuscript, University of Texas at Austin.
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological interventions in education: They're
not magic. Review of Educational Research, 81, 267-301.
Yeager, D. S., Walton, G., & Cohen, G. L. (2013). Addressing achievement gaps with
psychological interventions. Phi Delta Kappan, 94, 62-65.
Yeager, D.S., Walton, G., Ritter, G., & Dweck, C.S. (2013). Full-scale implementation of
psychological interventions at a large institution: An experimental test. Unpublished
Manuscript, University of Texas at Austin.
Yeager, D.S., Walton, G., Powers, J., House, A., Keane, L., Kementz, D., & Dweck, C.S. (2013).
Addressing beliefs about ability and belonging ease the transition to college for urban
charter students. Unpublished Manuscript, University of Texas at Austin.
Yeager, D.S., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., Pebley, P., Master, A., Hessert, W.,
Williams, M. & Cohen, G.L. (in press). Breaking the cycle of mistrust: Wise
interventions to provide critical feedback across the racial divide. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

34	
  

Appendix 1: A Selective Bibliography of Mindset and Self-Regulation Interventions
Attribution Re-Training
Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. (1982). Improving the academic performance of college
freshmen: Attribution theory revisited, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 42,
367-372.
Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. (1985). Improving the performance of college freshmen
with attributional techinques. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 287-293.
Growth vs. Fixed Mindsets of Intelligence
Aronson, J., Fried., C. B., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the effects of stereotype threat
on African American college students by shaping theories of intelligence. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 113-125.
Good, C., Aronson, J., & Inzlicht, M. (2003). Improving adolescents' standardized test
performance: An intervention to reduce the effects of stereotype threat. Applied
Developmental Psychology, 24, 645-662.
Blackwell, L., Trzesniewski, K., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Implicit theories of intelligence
predict achievement across and adolescent transition: A longitudinal study and an
intervention. Child Development, 78, 246-263
Values Affirmation and Social Belonging
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., & Master, A. (2006). Reducing the racial
achievement gap: A social-psychological intervention. Science, 313, 1307-1310.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Apfel, N., & Brzustoski, P. (2009).
Recursive processes in self-affirmation: Intervening to close the minority achievement
gap. Science, 324, 400-403.
Miyake, A., Kost-Smith, L. E., Finkelstein, N. D., Pollock, S. J., Cohen, G. L., & Ito, T.
A. (2010). Reducing the gender achievement gap in college science: A classroom study
of values affirmation. Science, 330, 1234-1237.
Sherman, D. K., Hartson, K. A., Binning, K. R., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J.,
Taborsky-Barba, S., & Cohen, G. L. (2013). Deflecting the trajectory and changing the
narrative: How self-affirmation affects academic performance and motivation under
identity threat. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 104, 591-618.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2007). A question of belonging: Race, social fit, and
achievement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 82-96.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

35	
  

Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A brief social-belonging intervention improves
academic and health outcome among minority students. Science, 331, 1447-1451.
Possible Selves
Oyserman, D., Bybee, D., and Terry, K. (2006). Possible selves and academic outcomes:
How and when possible selves impel action. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 91, 188 - 204.
Expectancy-Value Theory
Hulleman, C. S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2009). Promoting interest and performance in
high school science classes. Science, 326, 1410-1412.
Goal Setting
Duckworth, A. L., Kirby, T., Gollwitzer, A., & Oettingen, G. (in press). From fantasy to
action: Mental contrasting with implementation intentions (MCII) improves academic
performance in children. Social Psychological and Personality Science.
Morisano, D., Hirsch, J. B., Peterson, J. B., Shore, B., & Pihl, R. O. (2010). Setting,
elaborating, and reflecting on personal goals improves academic performance. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 95, 255 - 264.
Anxiety and Emotion Regulation
Jamieson, J., Mendes, W. B., Blackstock, E., & Schmader, T. (2009). Turning the knots
in your stomach into bows: Repappraising arounsal improves performance on the GRE.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 208-212.
Ramirez, G., & Beilock, S. L. (2011). Writing about test worries boosts exam
performance in the classroom. Science, 331, 211-213.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

36	
  

Appendix 2: Methodological Supplement
High School Figures
Figure A1. A screenshot from the growth mindset intervention uses the metaphor that the
brain is like a muscle.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda
Figure A2. A “saying is believing” exercise at the end of the growth mindset intervention
leads students to endorse the message and self-customize it by tying it to their own life.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

37	
  

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

38	
  

Full-Scale Implementation Figures
Figure A3. Screen shot of web portal directing students to the growth mindset intervention

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda
Figure A4. Screen shot of growth mindset article read by participants in the scaled-up
intervention.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

39	
  

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

40	
  

Appendix 3: Text from Growth Mindset Intervention (Community College Trial)
Think about the article that you just read. What are all the reasons why scientists say that
people's math ability can grow and get better with effort and practice?
Please summarize them briefly below.
[text box]
[page break]
In the article, you learned 3 things:
1. When you work hard and learn new things, your brain grows new connections and you
get smarter.
2. The more you challenge yourself, the smarter you will become.
3. Smart people are the ones who have practiced more—they have built up their reading and
math "muscles."
Think about an example from your own life. What is something you weren’t good at at first.
Then you practiced it using a good strategy and became really good at it. Write about it and
explain how you became good at it.
[text box]
[page break]
Not all math students know that the brain can get smarter, even though it may help them succeed.
And we want to get your help, so we can learn more about how to explain it to them. We're
hoping you can explain--in your own words--that the brain gets smarter when people use good
strategies and try hard.
Imagine a friend who is struggling in school. This friend used to do pretty well in school but now
is having a hard time and is starting to feel dumb. Write a letter to your friend to encourage him
or her—tell them about what you just learned about the brain and why they shouldn’t be
discouraged.
For example, you can tell them:
a) how they can get smarter if they work hard and use a good strategy,
b) how they should work hard to build their reading and math muscles,
c) how they are not dumb, they just need to practice using a good strategy,
d) how they can ask the teacher or other students to help them learn better ways to study.
Or any other tips you have for learning in school and getting smarter.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

41	
  

Appendix 4: Open-ended Responses Written By Students in the Full-Scale Implementation
at a Four-Year University
Example 1
[This] is a huge school and I know that it is going to be filled with a lot of "smart" people.
Although I have not actually experienced this firsthand yet, I had a similar experience in high
school. I opted to go to a small, magnet school that was basically an accumulation of all the
smart people from all the other high schools. I was overwhelmed, but then I realized if I worked
hard I would be able to succeed. I guess, one of the biggest thing for me was to dedicate the time
necessary to each subject so that I could fully grasp the concepts I needed to learn. Trust me,
when you get that assignment, project and test back with the wonderful score...it will pay off.
And later down the road when you're able to recall the concepts, you'll be surprised at how well
you know the subject. So essentially, what I'm trying to say is that there's no such thing as a
"smart" or "dumb" person, the "smart" people just had more practice...but everybody is able to
catch up to that level once they put in the necessary time.
Example 2
Hi there. / I had the same issue with the transition from middle school to high school: I had
straight As in middle school, and all of a sudden I was getting Cs. I felt stupid. New
environments provoke new emotions, I guess. / Even worse, it felt like asking a question meant
that you were admitting you were dumb... but that feeling isn't true at all. / You waste time and
opportunity by thinking like that. That time and opportunity could be used to ask questions and
better yourself. In fact, I think that those who ask questions are the smart ones - the ones that
have the confidence to ask questions, the ones that constantly have the courage to gain more
knowledge. / At one point, you have to get over how uncomfortable you are with seeking help or
approaching a professor. That's already a big step to growing. Imagine all the opportunities you
would have to grow. You don't want to limit your resources, and other brains are some of the
best resources to use to grow your own brain. (Hey, in a new age of technology, natural human
knowledge is so, so valuable.) / I'm a strong believer in hard work, and the things you want don't
come easy without it. To get the things you want, you have to work hard and do things you've
never done. Try new strategies! Talk to new people! Grow that brain! / / You're not dumb. You
just have to realize your potential. And find the right way to do it. (Easier said than done, I
know.)
Example 3
Hi! / I heard you are starting to have a hard time in college. From experience, I know exactly
how you feel. When I started college, I worried about not being "smart" enough for the class and
was often very shy to seek for assistance. But believe me, everybody undergoes the same
thoughts. Just because a class seems hard, it doesn't automatically mean that you are dumb. / As
a matter of fact, I learned that it is never too late to learn! Did you know that the brain is like a
muscle and with enough exercise, it can grow? / Yes, it is true. Just like an athlete exercises to
DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

42	
  

get stronger, if you open your mind to learning new things, your brain grows with more
knowledge on any particular topic. / So although you are struggling in a class, it doesn't mean
that you aren't meant for it. It may be challenging, but I encourage you to find a way to learn.
You may need to concentrate on the topic even more, but it isn't as difficult nor boring as it
sounds. Around the campus, there are many students, Teacher Assistants, and professors who
can give you the best study advice they can give, and I encourage you to go out and seek these
great opportunities and tips that they have to offer. / Well, I wish you the best of luck, and
remember keep exercising that brain!
Example 4
Dear friend, / / As a student who was once in your shoes a few years ago, I too thought I was
prepared for college and would breeze by with the study methods I had in high school. Although,
I realized soon after that I was far from the truth. I want to tell you that every student has his or
her low point in college either by feeling intimidated by their professors or feeling lost in such an
enormous campus; but it's an awakening for them to realize that its only another challenge to
overcome and improve one's study habits and socializing skills. The professors are not going to
hold your hand and expect you be successful in life; just like a coach is not going to spike the
volleyball, make the free throw or jump the hurdle for you. They challenge you to face that
obstacle head on and if you fall, you get back up and try again. When I reached my low point
first semester of my freshman year, I had to seek advice from other students in my classes and
tutors and realized that they too were in the same boat as I was. We later worked together, shared
study habits and soon become great friends. Now, I have confidence in registering for new
classes instead of dreading to type in that ID number just to get it over with. As a friend with
experience, I am telling you to have dedicated and a open mind when you set foot on campus
because it will make you college experience significantly better.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Developmental Psychology
2011, Vol. 47, No. 4, 1090 –1107

© 2011 American Psychological Association
0012-1649/11/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/a0023769

Adolescents’ Implicit Theories Predict Desire for Vengeance After Peer
Conflicts: Correlational and Experimental Evidence
David S. Yeager

Kali H. Trzesniewski

Stanford University

University of California, Davis

Kirsi Tirri

Petri Nokelainen

University of Helsinki

University of Tampere

Carol S. Dweck
Stanford University
Why do some adolescents respond to interpersonal conflicts vengefully, whereas others seek more positive
solutions? Three studies investigated the role of implicit theories of personality in predicting violent or
vengeful responses to peer conflicts among adolescents in Grades 9 and 10. They showed that a greater belief
that traits are fixed (an entity theory) predicted a stronger desire for revenge after a variety of recalled peer
conflicts (Study 1) and after a hypothetical conflict that specifically involved bullying (Study 2). Study 3
experimentally induced a belief in the potential for change (an incremental theory), which resulted in a reduced
desire to seek revenge. This effect was mediated by changes in bad-person attributions about the perpetrators,
feelings of shame and hatred, and the belief that vengeful ideation is an effective emotion-regulation strategy.
Together, the findings illuminate the social– cognitive processes underlying reactions to conflict and suggest
potential avenues for reducing violent retaliation in adolescents.
Keywords: implicit theories, aggression, victimization, shame, emotion regulation

Past research has indeed suggested that a belief in fixed traits
(an entity theory of personality) predicts a greater focus on punishment for a wrongdoer (Chiu, Dweck, Tong, & Fu, 1997; Erdley
& Dweck, 1993; Gervey, Chiu, Hong, & Dweck, 1999; Loeb &
Dweck, 1994; cf. Giles, 2003). In contrast, a belief in the potential
for change (an incremental theory) predicts a greater focus on
negotiation, education, forgiveness, and rehabilitation among children and adults (Chiu, Dweck, Tong, & Fu, 1997; Gervey et al.,
1999; Haselhuhn, Schweitzer, & Wood, 2010; Loeb & Dweck,
1994). Yet, no previous research has shown that adolescents’
implicit theories about people’s potential for change will predict
their vengeful responses to interpersonal conflicts. Therefore, in
the present research, we investigated whether adolescents who
endorse more of an entity theory would give more vengeful responses to recalled and hypothetical conflicts. To deepen our
theoretical understanding of these effects, we also explored, for the
first time, the cognitive and emotional mediators of this process.1

Kenneth Dodge recently argued that when public figures use
fixed labels (such as super predator or morally defective) to
describe aggressive youths, it leads people to focus on extreme
punishment instead of on prevention or rehabilitation (Dodge,
2008). Would this same analysis apply to adolescents’ own reactions to their conflicts with peers?
This article was published Online First May 23, 2011.
David S. Yeager, School of Education and Department of Psychology,
Stanford University; Kali H. Trzesniewski, Department of Human and Community Development, University of California, Davis; Kirsi Tirri, Department
of Teacher Education, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; Petri Nokelainen, School of Education, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland; Carol
S. Dweck, Department of Psychology, Stanford University.
This research was supported in part by a dissertation support grant from the
Stanford University School of Education, a research training grant from the
Spencer Foundation, and a grant from the Thrive Foundation for Youth. Some
of the data were presented at the 2009 annual convention for the Association
for Psychological Science and the 2009 annual meeting of the American
Education Research Association. We are grateful to the following people for
their assistance: Christel Anderson, Patrinia Sandles, Alan Weyland, Allison
Master, Whitney Worthen, Rebecca Johnson, Yana Galperin, Adriana Miu,
Joseph Lester, Matthew Williams, Kate Belden, and Jason Singer. We would
also like to thank S. Shirley Feldman, Ann Porteus, Deborah Stipek, William
Damon, Melanie Killen, Kristin Pauker, Chris Bryan, and members of the
Dweck–Walton lab for their helpful suggestions.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to David S.
Yeager, 271 Jordan Hall, School of Education and Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305. E-mail: dyeager@
stanford.edu

Adolescent Responses to Victimization
Recent incidents of planned violence in American and Finnish
high schools have turned the public’s eye toward issues of coping
1
We use the term conflict in this article as an umbrella term to refer to
conflicts between acquaintances that involve aggression or victimization or
that could be the precursors to aggressive retaliation. We do not mean to
suggest that we are investigating all types of social conflict between
adolescents or that all conflicts involve aggression or victimization.

1090

IMPLICIT THEORIES AND ADOLESCENT VENGEANCE

with peer conflicts in general and peer victimization in particular.
Although such highly violent responses are rare, it is quite common for adolescents to be victims of peer aggression in school
(Kaufman et al., 1999; Nishina & Juvonen, 2005; Olweus, 1993;
for reviews, see Berger, 2007; Swearer, Espelage, Vaillancourt, &
Hymel, 2010) and to subsequently desire revenge (e.g., Juvonen,
Graham, & Schuster, 2003; Kaltiala-Heino, Rimpelä, Marttunen,
Rimpelä, & Rantanen, 1999; Olweus, 1993; Reijntjes et al., in
press; Sourander et al., 2007; Swearer, Song, Cary, Eagle, &
Mickelson, 2001; Thomaes, Bushman, Stegge, & Olthof, 2008).
Thus, it is critical that researchers improve the understanding of
why some adolescents fantasize about revenge after their peer
conflicts, especially those involving victimization, whereas others
seek different solutions.

1091

In summary, theory and research suggest that when students
hold an implicit theory that people’s traits are fixed and not
changeable, they are more likely to see wrongdoing as stemming
from permanent negative qualities of the wrongdoers and to see
their own social failures as resulting from personal deficiencies (cf.
Giles, 2003). In contrast, when students think of people in terms of
malleable qualities— ones that can be developed through effort or
experience—they are more likely to view transgressions as remediable and their own social setbacks as less diagnostic of their
future. We sought to extend this past theory and research by
examining the relationship between implicit theories and vengeful
responses to interpersonal conflicts and by examining the mediators of this relationship.

Limitations of Previous Research
Implicit Theories Predict Responses to Setbacks
Previous research on implicit theories has illuminated their
role in determining how people cope with setbacks in the
academic domain (Blackwell, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2007;
Hong, Chiu, Dweck, Lin, & Wan, 1999; Robins & Pals, 2002)
and, more directly relevant here, the social domain (Beer, 2002;
Erdley, Cain, Loomis, Dumas-Hines, & Dweck, 1997; Loeb &
Dweck, 1994). Previous research has also investigated how
children and adults evaluate others who fail or transgress (Chiu,
Dweck, Tong, & Fu, 1997; Erdley & Dweck, 1993; Gervey et
al., 1999; Haselhuhn et al., 2010; Levy & Dweck, 1999; Levy,
Stroessner, & Dweck, 1998; see also Plaks, Stroessner, Dweck,
& Sherman, 2001).
For example, Erdley et al. (1997) found that when fifth-grade
students experienced social rejection, those who held more of an
entity theory about their personality were more likely to view their
social rejection as evidence of their inability to make friends,
making attributions about themselves such as “maybe I’m not a
likable person.” As a result, those with an entity theory held goals
that predicted defensive and helpless responses to failure. Similarly, Rudolph (2010) found that peer-victimized children who
held more of an entity theory reported more depressive symptoms
than peer-victimized children who held more of an incremental
theory.
Implicit theories have also been shown to predict how people
respond to wrongdoing on the part of others. Specifically,
research has shown that both children (Erdley & Dweck, 1993;
Levy & Dweck, 1999) and college students (Chiu, Dweck,
Tong, & Fu, 1997; Chiu, Hong, & Dweck, 1997; Gervey et al.,
1999; Levy et al., 1998) who hold an entity theory about others’
personalities are more judgmental and punitive when they evaluate a wrongdoer. That is, after learning about a transgression,
they are more likely to indict the target’s moral character (Chiu,
Dweck, Tong, & Fu, 1997; Chiu, Hong, & Dweck, 1997; Erdley
& Dweck, 1993; Levy & Dweck, 1999) and to levy harsher
punishment than are those holding an incremental theory (Chiu,
Dweck, Tong, & Fu, 1997; Erdley & Dweck, 1993; Loeb &
Dweck, 1994; Miller, Burgoon, & Hall, 2007). In contrast,
those with an incremental theory are more likely to suggest
discussion, negotiation, or education (Chiu, Dweck, Tong, &
Fu, 1997; Kray & Haselhuhn, 2007; Loeb & Dweck, 1994; see
also Haselhuhn et al., 2010).

The previous research on implicit theories has several limitations. First, as noted, it has never been shown that adolescents with
more of an entity theory desire to respond more vengefully after
peer conflict than those with more of an incremental theory. Erdley
and Dweck (1993) and other investigators (e.g., Chiu, Dweck,
Tong, & Fu, 1997; Gervey et al., 1999; Levy & Dweck, 1999) have
focused on the role of implicit theories in third-party observers’
judgments of transgressors but not on judgments and reactions
made by parties involved in the conflict. Additionally, although
Erdley et al. (1997) focused on implicit theories and responses to
social rejection, they explored only self-relevant attributions and
reactions and not judgments of and reactions to the transgressor at
the same time. In the one published study to document the relationship between implicit theories and the desire for personal
vengeance (Chiu, Dweck, Tong, & Fu, 1997, Study 4), the transgressor was a college professor, not a peer. Because a norm
violation by an adult may differ considerably from peer bullying or
victimization, it remains unclear whether implicit theories would
be related to high school adolescents’ interpersonal conflicts. We
therefore tested this possibility more extensively in the present
research.
Second, no study has systematically explored mediators of the
relation between implicit theories and desire for vengeance. To
fully understand this relationship and, eventually, to design effective interventions, we must know how and why implicit theories
might lead to a desire for revenge. Thus, in the present research,
we propose to test the role of attributions and emotions in shaping
implicit theories’ effects on responses to conflict.
Third, most previous studies have used correlational methods,
and no experiment to date has been conducted to show the causal
role of implicit theories in shaping adolescents’ responses to
conflict. Thus, it is unclear whether it is possible to change an
adolescent’s implicit theories of personality and whether doing so
could reduce the desire for vengeance and increase the desire to
use more prosocial solutions.
Fourth, the generalizability across populations and age groups of
implicit theories’ effects on responses to conflict has not been adequately tested. Many previous studies have been conducted on samples of mostly White, Midwestern grade-school students (e.g., Erdley
& Dweck, 1993; Erdley et al., 1997; Rudolph, 2010) or on college
students attending elite universities (e.g., Chiu, Dweck, Tong, & Fu,
1997; Haselhuhn et al., 2010; Kammrath & Dweck, 2006; Loeb &
Dweck, 1994). No similar studies have been conducted on samples of

1092

YEAGER, TRZESNIEWSKI, TIRRI, NOKELAINEN, AND DWECK

adolescents from diverse socioeconomic backgrounds attending high
schools in the United States or other countries.
In our research, we included a sample of participants from Finland,
home of much research on adolescents’ social cognitions after victimization or exclusion (e.g., Ojanen, Grönroos, & Salmivalli, 2005;
Peets, Hodges, & Salmivalli, 2008; Salmivalli, Ojanen, Haanpää, &
Peets, 2005; Sourander et al., 2007). Although the results of studies of
such populations are often presumed to generalize to urban American
populations, this assumption has almost never been directly tested.
Finland has one of the highest adolescent suicide rates in the world—
over twice that found in the United States (Lahti et al., 2006; Statistics
Finland, 2009). Thus, Finnish adolescents with more of an entity
theory might have reacted to social challenges with more self-directed
aggression as opposed to other-directed aggression. Therefore, we
sought to explicitly test the generalizability of our findings by examining a socioeconomically diverse but racially homogeneous Finnish
population and also a racially diverse U.S. population.
Recent developmental research has suggested that high school
adolescents may be at a critical point in their understanding of others,
particularly in their understanding about whether others can change.
Specifically, research has suggested that relative to children or
younger adolescents, high school students are coming to hold more
fixed beliefs about aggressive peers (Killen, Crystal, & Watanabe,
2002), are less likely to try to intervene to change bullies (Trach,
Hymel, Waterhouse, & Neale, 2010), and are more likely to rely on
information they have about a peer’s past transgressions when deciding whether the peer is guilty of a subsequent transgression (Killen,
Kelly, Richardson, & Jampol, 2010).
In this light, it is interesting to note that the transition to high
school is also associated with an increased frequency of extreme
reactions to victimization, in the form of suicide or other-directed
violence (Brent, Baugher, Bridge, Chen, & Chiappetta, 1999;
Leary, Kowalski, Smith, & Phillips, 2003; Vossekuil, Fein, Reddy,
Borum, & Modzeleski, 2002; for a review, see Borum, Cornell,
Modzeleski, & Jimerson, 2010). Thus, it may be especially important to understand the role of entity beliefs in predicting more
extreme reactions to victimization among adolescents in this age
group.
Overall, then, the present investigation is unique (a) in examining, with diverse groups of high school adolescents, the relationship between implicit theories and the desire for personal vengeance after peer conflicts, (b) in testing the hypothesis that
implicit theories of personality play a causal role in the desire for
revenge, and (c) in proposing and testing a mediational model
explaining this relationship.
To further explain why adolescents with a greater entity theory
might be more likely to desire vengeance, we now turn to the
hypothesized mediators of this effect: thoughts and emotions about
the transgressors and thoughts and emotions about the self.

Mediators of Implicit Theory Effects on Responses to
Conflict
Bad-Person Attributions
Implicit theories have been found to be associated with adolescents’ attributions about what caused a transgressing peer to act
that way. Adolescents who endorse more of an entity theory may
be more likely to interpret a perpetrator’s actions as evidence that

the offender is a bad person. Specifically, because previous research has documented that an entity theory is related to a greater
use of global character traits when judging others (Chiu, Hong, &
Dweck, 1997; Erdley & Dweck, 1993; Plaks et al., 2001) and to a
greater endorsement of punishment, as opposed to education or
rehabilitation, for a transgressor (Chiu, Dweck, Tong, & Fu, 1997;
Erdley & Dweck, 1993; Gervey et al., 1999; Loeb & Dweck,
1994), we predicted that adolescents with more of an entity theory
would be more inclined to conclude that the offender was characterologically a bad person, to hate the offender, and, because of
this, to desire revenge.
Note that the fixed-trait or bad-person attributions investigated
in the present study differ from the attributions of hostile intent
that are often investigated in studies of adolescents’ social cognitions after conflict (e.g., Crick & Dodge, 1994; Dodge, Coie, &
Lynam, 2006; Killen et al., 2010; McGlothlin & Killen, 2006,
2010; Peets, Hodges, Kikas, & Salmivalli, 2007; Peets et al.,
2008). Studies of hostile intent have mostly investigated children’s
and adolescents’ attributions of intent after an ambiguous event,
whereas our research is concerned with victims’ attributions about
the kind of person a perpetrator is, regardless of the ambiguity of
that event. Indeed, much of the present research focuses on incidents in which the intent is clearly negative, as is the case with
many incidents of bullying (Olweus, 1993).

Bad Feelings About the Self
In addition to thinking about the transgressors as bad people,
adolescents holding more of an entity theory may also experience
more negative feelings about themselves after conflicts, and these
feelings may also contribute to more vengeful responses. That is,
for those who hold an entity theory, even a minor incident—like
being ignored or teased— can be loaded with emotional significance. In an entity framework, such conflicts are not small events
that will soon pass; they are diagnostic, lasting symptoms of one’s
own permanent failings as a person: Does it mean I’m not likable?
That I’m a loser? Under these circumstances, peer conflicts—
especially those involving victimization or rejection— can be
highly charged events, resulting in strong negative emotions. Indeed, previous studies have shown that those who hold more of an
entity theory blame uncontrollable and stable characteristics about
themselves after social conflicts (Erdley et al., 1997) and that
people who engage in these kinds of attributions report more
negative feelings about themselves after victimization (Graham,
Bellmore, & Mize, 2006; Graham & Juvonen, 1998; see also
Janoff-Bulman, 1979).
Shame, rather than another negative emotion, such as sadness, is
particularly likely to be felt by those with more of an entity theory
because of the focus on fixed traits as an explanation for social
failures. Shame occurs after blaming a negative event on one’s
self, as opposed to one’s behavior (Tangney, Miller, Flicker, &
Barlow, 1996; Tangney, Stuewig, & Mashek, 2007), and “shame is
considered the more painful emotion because one’s core self—not
simply one’s behavior—is at stake” (Tangney et al., 2007, p. 346).
Why might these negative attributions and feelings about the
self lead to aggressive responses to conflicts? Leading theories of
aggression contend that negative feelings resulting from peer conflict are especially likely to result in retaliation when they are
accompanied by the belief that one is unlikely to be reincluded

IMPLICIT THEORIES AND ADOLESCENT VENGEANCE

(Williams, 2009). For example, in one experiment, college students who were given feedback that their traits would lead them to
live their lives alone—somewhat analogous to being in an entity
framework— behaved more aggressively in what they believed
was a peer interaction after being made to feel bad through social
rejection (Twenge, Baumeister, Tice, & Stucke, 2001). Using other
methodologies, researchers have found convergent results among
adolescents (Reijntjes et al., in press). Therefore, we propose that
adolescents who hold more of an entity theory feel more ashamed
by victimization and, rather than seeking to improve their relationships with a transgressor, are more likely to desire revenge.

The Present Investigation
In Studies 1 and 2, we measured adolescents’ beliefs about
whether specific types of people, such as bullies, victims, winners,
or losers, can change. In Study 1, we tested whether an entity
theory was correlated with a greater desire for vengeance after a
recalled conflict. In addition, we began to test two mechanisms
underlying the key effect: the attribution that the perpetrator was a
bad person and negative feelings about the self. We administered
identical measures to a countrywide sample from Finland and to a
diverse group of students from low-income families attending an
urban public high school in Oakland, California. We explicitly
tested whether the effects found were the same for participants
who differed in racial/ethnic group, culture, and socioeconomic
status. Thus, Study 1’s samples provided a strict test of generalizability.
In Study 2, we sought to test our hypothesis using a hypothetical
scenario involving bullying. Study 1’s procedure was designed to
elicit a broad array of recalled conflicts with acquaintances. Yet,
not all conflicts involve aggression or victimization. Therefore, in
Study 2, we narrowed our focus to a conflict that included peer
victimization.
In Study 3, we used an experiment to test whether implicit
theories could be changed and whether promoting an incremental
theory might reduce vengeful responses to victimization and promote more positive ones. In this experiment, participants were
randomly assigned to read either an article supporting an incremental theory or a control article. In addition to testing whether the
incremental theory reduced the desire for vengeance, we also
tested whether an expanded set of potential mediating mechanisms
that measured more precise emotions and beliefs might more fully
explain the predicted reduction in the desire for vengeance.

Study 1
Methods
Participants.
Finnish subsample. This subsample consisted of 219 Finnish
adolescents in Grades 9 and 10, ranging in age from 14 to 16 years.
Of the participants, 47% were girls, 95% described themselves as
White, and 94% reported that their parents spoke Finnish at home.
Participants were from a variety of socioeconomic backgrounds;
22% reported that their mothers held a graduate degree, 10% a
college degree, 36% some college education, and the rest (44%) a
high school degree or less. Some (n ⫽ 16) did not provide data on

1093

at least one major measure, so their responses were multiply
imputed.
U.S. subsample. The U.S. subsample was a diverse group of
138 students in Grade 9 (56%) and Grade 10 (44%), who ranged
in age from 14 to 16 years. Among participants, 21% were Black/
African American, 36% were Asian or Asian American, 35% were
Hispanic/Latino, 4% were White, and 4% indicated another race/
ethnicity; 42% were boys, and 58% were girls. Nearly all received
free or reduced price lunch, and only 10% reported mothers who
had a college degree or higher. Some participants (n ⫽ 16) did not
provide data on at least one dependent measure, and so their
responses were imputed as described earlier.
Procedure.
Finnish subsample. Six schools in Finland, sampled from
various regions across the country, were invited to participate in
this study, and all agreed. Three were rural schools, and three were
urban or suburban schools. All schools were from different parts of
the country with varying levels of socioeconomic status. After
consent and assent were obtained, surveys were administered
during school hours to a subset of classrooms in each school. In
this and in subsequent studies, students were assured of the confidentiality of their responses and were told that raw data would
never be shared with anyone at the school. Measures were provided in Finnish. They were translated from an English version by
a research professor who was a native Finnish speaker and were
back-translated into English to check the quality of the translation.
Response rates varied by classroom within each school, but all
were above 70%. After the surveys were completed, students
were thanked for their time but were not yet told the specific
hypotheses of the study because they were later invited to
participate in Study 3.
U.S. subsample. All of the students in Grades 9 and 10 at a
low-income, urban public charter school in Oakland were invited
to participate, and consent and assent were obtained from 78%.
The survey was administered during school hours and took about
30 min to complete. The instructions and debriefing scripts read by
the teachers to the participants were identical to those read to the
Finnish subsample. After completing the survey, participants were
thanked and debriefed.
Measures.
Implicit theories. Six items measuring an entity theory about
bullies, victims, winners, and losers were written specifically for
this study. These were as follows: “Bullies and victims are types of
people that really can’t be changed.” “Everyone is either a winner
or a loser in life.” “You can’t change people who are jerks in
school.” “Bullies can try acting nice, but deep down they’re just
bullies.” “There are two types of people: Bullies and their victims.” Participants were asked to indicate their agreement or disagreement on a 6-point scale (1 ⫽ strongly disagree, 6 ⫽ strongly
agree). In an exploratory factor analysis of these items in which we
used maximum likelihood estimation, the first unrotated factor
accounted for 84% of the variance, and all six items loaded on this
factor at .59 or above. We tested for measurement invariance
across subsamples by conducting a multigroup confirmatory factor
analysis and constraining the factor loadings from the manifest
indicators of the latent implicit theories variable to be equal in the
two samples. We found that this did not significantly reduce model
fit, ⌬␹2(5) ⫽ 7.17, ns, suggesting that the underlying construct is
the same across subsamples. Having concluded that the six items

1094

YEAGER, TRZESNIEWSKI, TIRRI, NOKELAINEN, AND DWECK

measured a single construct in both subsamples, these items were
averaged and combined into a single scale, with higher values
corresponding to more of an entity theory (␣ ⫽ .82).2 In a study
conducted with an ethnically diverse sample in the United States,
we found that responses to the implicit theories measure were
relatively stable over a 2-month period (from Time 1 to Time 2,
r ⫽ .51, N ⫽ 194, p ⬍ .05).
Desire for vengeance. To measure the desire for vengeance
after an actual, recalled conflict, we asked participants to “tell us
about a time that an acquaintance upset you in the past month or
so” either in school or outside of school. We then asked participants to rate how much they “felt like doing” each of seven options
on a 5-point scale (1 ⫽ not at all, 5 ⫽ a great deal). The items
were as follows: “hurting this person,” “never forgiving them,”
“trying to get back at them in any way I could,” “finding a way to
punish this person,” “dreaming about a way to give them what they
deserve,” “wishing that somebody would hurt them,” and “imagining them getting hurt.” Participants also rated several positively
worded filler items. To test whether the seven vengeful items were
measuring a single construct, we used maximum likelihood estimation to conduct an exploratory factor analysis and found that the
seven items had loadings of .66 or above on a single unrotated
factor that accounted for 91% of the variance. We used the method
described earlier to test whether the construct of desire for vengeance was invariant across the subsamples, and we found that it
was, ⌬␹2(6) ⫽ 7.95, ns. The final measure was an unweighted
average of the seven vengeful items, with higher values corresponding to a greater desire for vengeance (␣ ⫽ .92).
We also coded the types of incidents respondents recalled. Two
independent coders, who were unaware of participants’ other responses, coded participants’ descriptions of the conflicts into categories, on the basis of a list of common peer conflicts described
by Olweus (1993). The most frequently named categories were
verbal aggression and insults (22.7%), spreading rumors/lies
(19.8%), and shunning/ignoring (16.1%). About one fourth of
participants wrote about more minor conflicts that were not clearly
victimization (24.9%; e.g., “He looked at me wrong”; Cohen’s ␬ ⬎
.85). Participants were also asked how long ago the incident
occurred (open-ended, coded in days since the incident happened).
After answering these relatively negative questions, participants
were given an extensive set of positively worded filler questions
about laughing with friends, eating ice cream, and having goals in
life.
We conducted numerous pilot studies with high school students
in Finland and in the United States to test the reliability and
validity of our measure of the desire for vengeance. In one study
conducted with students in Grades 9 and 10, the desire for vengeance after a recalled incident was significantly correlated with
the same desire for vengeance after a hypothetical bullying scenario, r ⫽ .57, N ⫽ 283, p ⬍ .05 (this scenario is described in
Study 2). Next, in two different diverse urban samples of U.S.
students in Grades 9 and 10, the desire for vengeance after the
recalled incident was significantly correlated with a measure of
anger rumination (Peled & Moretti, 2007), r ⫽ .33, N ⫽ 127, and
r ⫽ .56, N ⫽ 57.
We next examined what types of aggressive behavior were
associated with the desire for vengeance. Because we conceptualized the desire for vengeance as including both an immediate
response of angry retaliation and a more delayed, planned, and

deliberate processes of rehearsing or enacting vengeful fantasies to
recover one’s status or restore justice, we predicted that this desire
would be associated with both reactive and proactive aggression.
Therefore, it is not surprising that in an additional U.S. pilot
sample, the desire for vengeance was equally correlated with both
self-reported reactive aggression (e.g., “gotten angry when others
threaten you”) and proactive aggression (“threaten or bully others”; Raine et al., 2006), rs ⫽ .50, .51, N ⫽ 33, ps ⬍ .05,
respectively.3 Thus, our measure of the desire for vengeance seems
to capture both the desire to retaliate reactively following a provocation and a willingness to proactively plan and calculate an
aggressive act.
Bad-person attributions. To test whether the effect of an
entity theory on the desire for vengeance toward an acquaintance
was mediated, at least in part, by its effect on bad-person attributions (a global negative belief about the moral character of the
acquaintance; Weiner, 1986, 1995), we asked participants to answer “What do you think about this acquaintance?” on a fully
labeled 7-point scale (1 ⫽ an extremely good person, 4 ⫽ really
can’t say if they are good or bad, 7 ⫽ an extremely bad person).
Bad feelings about the self. To test whether the effect of an
entity theory on the desire for vengeance was also mediated by its
effect on bad feelings about the self, we asked participants, “How
badly did you feel about yourself after this incident?” (1 ⫽ not at
all bad, 5 ⫽ extremely bad). In a pilot study, we found that this
item was significantly correlated with shame following a recalled
conflict with an acquaintance, r ⫽ .56, N ⫽ 164, p ⬍ .05.
Descriptive statistics, correlations, and reliabilities for these survey
measures are reported in Table 1.
Participant characteristics. As noted, participants were asked
to indicate the highest level of education their mothers had received (1 ⫽ less than high school, 2 ⫽ high school degree, 3 ⫽
some college, 4 ⫽ college degree, 5 ⫽ graduate degree [master’s,
doctor, lawyer, or PhD]) and what grades they usually made in
school (0 ⫽ D average or below, .3366 ⫽ C average, .6633 ⫽ B
average, 1 ⫽ A average).
We explored the possibility that more frequently victimized
adolescents would be more likely to believe that people cannot
change and would also be more likely to recall conflicts about
which they harbored vengeful thoughts. To control for the potential influence of victimization on both an entity theory and the
desire for vengeance, participants were also asked to indicate how
often they were victims of 12 forms of peer aggression, such as
“called mean or hurtful names,” “the subject of false rumors or
lies,” “had mean things sent by e-mail from lots of people,” and
2
Note that in some previous research (Dweck, Chiu, & Hong, 1995)
implicit theories were analyzed dichotomously. However, some more
recent guidelines (MacCallum, Zhang, Preacher, & Rucker, 2002) suggest
that such measured variables are best analyzed continuously. Therefore, we
analyzed implicit theories continuously whenever they were measured.
3
As in some previous investigations (Raine et al., 2006), we also
examined whether desire for vengeance was more strongly related to one
or the other type of aggression, controlling for the alternative type in a
regression. In these regressions, we found that the coefficient predicting the
effect of desire for vengeance on proactive aggression was not significantly
different from the coefficient predicting reactive aggression, F(1, 29) ⫽
0.09, ns, suggesting that desire for vengeance was equally predictive of
both forms of aggression.

IMPLICIT THEORIES AND ADOLESCENT VENGEANCE

“were hit, slapped, or pushed.” The 12 kinds of victimization were
adapted from an existing measure of bullying (Olweus, 1993), and
the word bullying was not used. Participants rated how often they
experienced each category (1 ⫽ never, 5 ⫽ all the time), and these
ratings were combined into a single scale (␣ ⫽ .91) by taking their
unweighted average, with higher values corresponding to more
victimization.

Results and Discussion
Analysis plan.
To test our primary hypothesis about the
effects of the implicit theories on the desire for vengeance, we built
a latent variable structural model, using Amos 17 (Arbuckle,
2006).4 We next expanded this model to test for the effects of our
potential mediators. We then used multigroup analyses to test
whether the mediation model was the same across different groups
of participants (i.e., subsample, sex, and victimization). We did
this by constraining the paths of interest to be equal across groups
and then tested whether these constraints significantly reduced
model fit by examining the changes in the chi-square fit statistic.
To assess the impact of each individual mediator, we used the
multiple mediation macro from Preacher and Hayes (2008). Note
that a cutoff of p ⬍ .05 was used to determine the significance for
all statistics throughout the studies.
Does an entity theory predict a greater desire for vengeance? In a latent variable model combining both subsamples,
Finnish and American adolescents holding more of an entity
theory desired more vengeance after their recalled peer conflicts,
as predicted, ␤ ⫽ .43, (unstandardized B ⫽ .51; 95% CI [.36, .66],
p ⬍ .05; also see Table 1 for a comparable zero-order correlation).
This model provided adequate fit to the data, ␹2(60) ⫽ 129.208,
p ⬍ .05, ␹2/df ⫽ 2.153, comparative fit index [CFI] ⫽ .968,
root-mean-square error of approximation [RMSEA] ⫽ .057. Controlling for time since the incident (both linear and logtransformed), levels of victimization, or the type of conflict did not
influence the relationship between implicit theories and the desire
for vengeance. Thus, we found support for our primary hypothesis
that holding more of an entity theory would be related to a greater
desire for vengeance after a variety of interpersonal conflicts.
Why do adolescents with more of an entity theory have a
desire for vengeance? As predicted, in the combined sample of
Finnish and American youths, an entity theory was significantly
related to bad-person attributions and bad feelings about the self
after the recalled peer conflict, ␤ ⫽ .17 and ␤ ⫽ .20, respectively
Table 1
Descriptive Statistics and Correlations for Study 1 Measures
Measure

M

SD

1. Entity theory (bullies and
victims)
2. Desire for vengeance
3. Bad-person attributions
4. Bad feelings about the self

3.21
2.87
3.92
2.60

1.06
0.94
1.83
1.36

␣ Range
.82
.92
—
—

1–6
1–7
1–7
1–5

1

2

3

4

—
.38ⴱ —
.19ⴱ .49ⴱ —
.18ⴱ .34ⴱ .26ⴱ —

Note. ␣ ⫽ internal consistency reliability. Rating scale for Measure 1:
1 ⫽ strongly disagree, 6 ⫽ strongly agree; Measure 2: 1 ⫽ not at all, 7 ⫽
an extreme amount; Measure 3: 1 ⫽ an extremely good person, 7 ⫽ an
extremely bad person; Measure 4: 1 ⫽ not at all bad, 5 ⫽ extremely bad.
ⴱ
p ⬍ .05.

1095

(see also column 1 of Table 1), and these variables were significantly related to the desire for vengeance, ␤ ⫽ .40 and ␤ ⫽ .17,
respectively, (see also column 2 of Table 1). To formally test for
mediation by these variables, we built the multiple-group (Finland
vs. United States) latent variable structural model presented in
Figure 1, ␹2(170) ⫽ 233.146, p ⬍ .05, ␹2/df ⫽ 1.37, CFI ⫽ .973,
RMSEA ⫽ .032.
Tests of generalizability of effects of implicit theories. First,
we tested the generalizability of the effects of implicit theories
across subsamples. To do so, we compared our final model, which
constrained each of the paths between focal variables in Figure 1
to be equal across subsamples, to a model in which none of these
five paths were constrained across subsamples, ␹2(165) ⫽
231.369, p ⬍ .05, ␹2/df ⫽ 1.40, CFI ⫽ .973, RMSEA ⫽ .034. Our
final model did not have a significantly lower model fit than the
unconstrained model, ⌬␹2(5) ⫽ 1.78, ns, suggesting that the
strength of associations between implicit theories, bad person
attributions, bad feelings about the self, and the desire for vengeance were not different in Finnish versus U.S. adolescents. The
same null findings emerged from tests for moderation by sex in a
multigroup analysis, ⌬␹2(5) ⫽ 1.90, ns, and by victimization status
(dichotomized at the median, 1.5), ⌬␹2(5) ⫽ 4.2, ns5
Tests of mediation. In our final model, the association of an
entity theory with the desire for vengeance was reduced from ␤ ⫽
.43 (in a model with no mediators) to ␤ ⫽ .32 (B ⫽ .21; 95% CI
[.13, .29], p ⬍ .05) when these two mediators were entered into the
model (Figure 1). This was a significant reduction in effect size
(indirect effect B ⫽ .08; 95% CI [.03, .15], p ⬍ .05, ␤ ⫽ .11). Of
interest, the main effect of an entity theory on the desire for
vengeance was still significant when controlling for these mediators, suggesting that there was additional variance in this relationship that was not yet accounted for.
We next tested whether the significant reduction in effect size
was due to one or both of the possible mediators, using Preacher
and Hayes’s (2008) macro. We found that both were significant
mediators. The reduction in the effect of an entity theory on the
desire for vengeance due to bad-person attributions was significant
(B ⫽ .05; 95% CI [.01, .11], p ⬍ .05, ␤ ⫽ .07). The reduction in
effect size due to bad feelings about the self was also significant
(B ⫽ .03; 95% CI [.01, .07], p ⬍ .05, ␤ ⫽ .04). Thus, an entity
theory exerted indirect effects on the desire for vengeance partially
through both bad-person attributions and bad feelings about the
self.
We also explored the alternative hypothesis that these findings
were obtained because those with an entity theory had less of the
cognitive ability required to make the perhaps more complex
situational attributions about transgressors, as opposed to trait or
4
All of the findings reported with latent variable structural models were
replicated with least squares regressions, and these results are available on
request from the first author.
5
In this study and in Study 2, the null findings regarding moderation by
participant characteristics were replicated when conducting regressions
that tested the significance of Participant Characteristic ⫻ Implicit Theories interaction effects on the dependent measures or mediators, controlling
for main effects of these variables. In additional regression analyses, we
also found similar null findings regarding moderation by victimization
when victimization was treated as a continuous variable as opposed to a
dichotomous variable.

1096

YEAGER, TRZESNIEWSKI, TIRRI, NOKELAINEN, AND DWECK

Figure 1. Multiple partial mediation model in Study 1: Entity theory exerts indirect effects on the desire for
vengeance through bad-person attributions and bad feelings about the self. Numbers are standardized coefficients. Circles represent latent variables, and squares represent manifest variables. For indirect effect of entity
theory on vengeance, ␤ ⫽ .11, p ⬍ .05. All coefficients shown were significant, p ⬍ .05. For this multigroup
model (United States vs. Finland), parameters for the paths depicted were constrained across groups.

bad-person attributions. We did this by controlling for two different proxies for cognitive ability: grade point average and mother’s
education level. In past research, these proxies have consistently
predicted IQ (e.g., Bee et al., 1982; Sirin, 2005; Walker, Greenwood, Hart, & Carta, 1994). Neither of these controls reduced the
effect of the entity theory on the desire for vengeance or either of
the mediators, consistent with the idea that implicit theories of
personality are not a by-product of cognitive ability or exposure to
more sophisticated thinking.
Summary. Overall, Study 1 found support for our hypothesis
that an entity theory would significantly predict the desire for
vengeance after a recalled incident of peer conflict. Adolescents
who endorsed the idea that people cannot change held more
festering resentment, in that they wished that extreme harm and
punishment would befall the peers who had transgressed against
them. Study 1 also began to build a theoretical account that is
consistent with previous work that has focused on the role of
attributions and negative feelings in response to social challenges
(Chiu, Hong, & Dweck, 1997; Erdley & Dweck, 1993; Graham &
Juvonen, 1998; Thomaes et al., 2008). This study extended previous work by showing that an entity theory was associated with
both self-relevant feelings and other-relevant social cognitions.
Previous research on attributions has posited that people tend to
make either internal or external attributions after an event (Weiner,
1995). Yet, our research suggests that both internal and external
trait attributions may result from the same overall entity theory
(see also Erdley & Dweck, 1993; Erdley et al., 1997).
Study 1 also showed that the processes relating an entity
theory to the desire for vengeance were replicated when the
participants were a sample of students in Finland and when they
were a diverse group of students attending an urban public high
school in the United States. An explicit test of the differences in
effect sizes between the two samples did not support a cultural

difference hypothesis. Thus, the present study not only demonstrated that the same social– cognitive process occurred in two
highly different samples— one in Finland and one in the United
States— but also showed that the magnitudes of these associations were not different.

Study 2
Although Study 1 provided convergent results across subsamples, these results were limited by the lack of control over the
incidents that participants reacted to, because each adolescent
wrote about a different personal incident. For this reason, we could
not rule out the possibility that Study 1’s results were obtained
because those with more of an entity theory actually experienced
or recalled more serious events— even though our coding of these
events did not detect such differences. Therefore, in Study 2 we
tested whether an entity theory predicted the desire for vengeance
after an experimenter-controlled hypothetical incident of direct
victimization. In addition, because this study’s sample was racially
and ethnically diverse, we were able to test whether the relationship between an entity theory and the desire for vengeance varied
across racial/ethnic groups.

Methods
Participants. Participants were a diverse group of students in
Grades 9 and 10 (N ⫽ 314) attending a public high school in San
Jose, California. Of the participants, 57% were Hispanic/Latino,
10% were Asian/Asian American, 9% were Black/African American, 17% were White, non-Hispanic, and 7% indicated another
race/ethnicity; 55% were boys and 45% were girls. Nearly all
participants received free or reduced-price lunch. Among parents,
4% had a graduate degree, 18% had a college degree, 26% had

IMPLICIT THEORIES AND ADOLESCENT VENGEANCE

some college education (but no degree), and the rest had a high
school degree or less. Some students (n ⫽ 17) did not complete at
least one of the measures on the survey; therefore, their responses
were multiply-imputed as described earlier.
Procedure. All of the students in Grades 9 and 10 in six
classes were invited to participate in this study, and 75% provided
parental consent and assented. Participants completed the survey
during school hours. After completing the study, students were
thanked for their time and debriefed.
Measures. Implicit theories measures identical to those used
in Study 1 were administered (M ⫽ 2.76, SD ⫽ 1.06, ␣ ⫽ .83).
The survey also included a measure of current victimization (␣ ⫽
.89) and of the desire for vengeance after a hypothetical bullying
scenario.
Participants read a hypothetical incident of bullying. Then, to
elicit a more authentic emotional response to the scenario, they
wrote an essay describing how they would feel and what they
would feel like doing if they experienced this incident. The stimulus scenario was as follows:
One day you found out that two acquaintances from your grade saw
you make a fool out of yourself at school. At first you tried to ignore
them, but over the next few weeks they called you a “loser” every time
they saw you. Now they make fun of what you’re wearing and they
spread rumors about you to your friends. It keeps happening every
single day. EVERY day. Finally, now they’re threatening to make fun
of you on MySpace and Facebook.

After reading the scenario and writing a brief essay in response
to the prompt “If the story had actually happened to you, how
would you feel?” participants were asked “How much would you
feel like doing each of these things to the people who did those
things to you?” Participants then responded to the same seven
items measuring the desire for vengeance used in Study 1 (M ⫽
2.93, SD ⫽ 1.91, range: 1–7; ␣ ⫽ .94). Last, they answered some
positively worded filler items and were asked to write a short essay
describing “what makes you really happy in life.”

Results and Discussion
An entity theory was significantly related to a greater desire for
vengeance after the hypothetical bullying scenario in a latent
variable structural model, ␤ ⫽ .33 (B ⫽ .53; 95% CI [.31, .75], p ⬍
.05), and the model provided adequate fit to the data, ␹2(44) ⫽
98.425, p ⬍ .05, ␹2/df ⫽ 2.237, CFI ⫽ .977, RMSEA ⫽ .062.
Next, in separate multigroup analyses, this association was not
significantly moderated by victimization status (dichotomized at
the median, 1.67), ⌬␹2(1) ⫽ 0.01, ns, or by participant sex,
⌬␹2(1) ⫽ 0.90, ns. To test for differences in this relationship
across racial/ethnic groups, we built a structural model with five
groups (Black, Latino, Asian, White/non-Hispanic, and other race/
ethnicity). We then constrained the path from an entity theory to
the desire for vengeance to be equal across all five groups, and this
did not reduce model fit, ⌬␹2(4) ⫽ 2.7, ns, suggesting no moderation by race/ethnicity. We also tested whether each group individually differed from the White/non-Hispanic group, and none of
these constraints significantly reduced model fit, all ⌬␹2s(1) ⬍ 2,
ns. Thus, an entity theory was related to more vengeful desires
even when participants responded to an identical scenario of direct

1097

victimization, and this was not moderated by sex, previous victimization, or race/ethnicity.

Study 3
Studies 1 and 2 documented that implicit theories have meaningful associations with a desire for vengeance after both peer
conflicts in general and victimization in particular, and they began
to map out the mediational pathways explaining this relationship.
However, those studies were limited in several ways.
First, they did not test whether changing implicit theories would
have the effect of reducing the desire for vengeance. Indeed, no
previous study has done so. Such an experiment is especially
important for translating the present research into an intervention
in the future. Therefore, in the present study, we tested whether
experimentally manipulating implicit theories would reduce the
desire for vengeance.
In Study 1, the particular negative emotions felt after victimization were not specified; thus, it is unclear exactly which emotions
led to the effects we observed. Therefore, in the present study, we
sought to better specify the emotional mediators. To do so, we
measured hatred for the perpetrator and feelings of shame and
sadness about the self. Because leading accounts of shame suggest
that it arises from threats to one’s core self, whereas sadness is not
considered a self-conscious emotion (Tangney et al., 2007), we
expected that shame, and not sadness, would mediate the link
between implicit theories and vengeance.
In Study 1 we found that bad-person attributions and bad feelings about the self only partially mediated the effect of an implicit
theory. Thus, we sought to extend our theoretical explanation of
why negative emotions might lead to vengeance by exploring a
new potential mediator. Some have suggested that people aggress
in part because they are motivated to regulate the negative emotions that they have (Baumeister, Smart, & Boden, 1996; Bushman, Baumeister, & Phillips, 2001; Thomaes et al., 2008).
Baumeister et al. (1996) argued that “aggression can be regarded
as a crude technique of affect regulation . . . to avoid certain
negative emotional states such as shame, dejection, sadness and
disappointment with oneself (pp. 10 –11),” and numerous investigations have pointed to the importance of anticipated positive
emotional states in motivating aggression (for a review, see
Baumeister, Vohs, DeWall, & Zhang, 2007). In this view, the
belief that one will feel better is a motivational antecedent to
the desire to aggress and is a distinct construct. We therefore
conducted a preliminary investigation of this issue. We assessed
adolescents’ beliefs about whether imagining vengeance is a good
way to regulate negative emotions, and we determined whether
this would help further explain the relation between an entity
theory and the desire for vengeance.
Finally, we included more positive and prosocial reactions to the
conflicts and added more positive attributions to the attributional
measures. This allowed us to investigate whether learning an
incremental theory would lead participants to seek to educate
transgressors, as proposed by previous research with college students (Chiu, Dweck, Tong, & Fu, 1997; Rattan & Dweck, 2010).
We also examined whether an incremental theory might reduce
trait attributions and increase alternative attributions, such as the
importance of the situation or a transgressor’s immaturity as
causes of bullying (cf. Chiu, Hong, & Dweck, 1997).

1098

YEAGER, TRZESNIEWSKI, TIRRI, NOKELAINEN, AND DWECK

Methods
Participants. Participants were a subset of the Finnish students in Grades 9 and 10 from Study 1. Two hundred and two
students took the online experiment in their school’s computer lab.
Nearly all of the participants were White, and they ranged in age
from 14 to 16. There were nearly equal numbers of boys (52%) and
girls (48%). Some participants (n ⫽ 15) did not complete the
dependent measure of desire for vengeance. Therefore, they were
excluded from the study. For those who completed the vengeance
measure but did not provide responses to other questions, missing
values were multiply imputed, yielding a final sample of N ⫽ 187
for all analyses.
Procedure. The six schools from various regions in Finland
that provided the participants for the Study 1 sample were invited
to administer this experiment to the Study 1 participants through
the Internet. This allowed us to test whether the results of the
experiment were moderated by Study 1’s baseline measures.
All of the schools and 92% of the students agreed to participate.
Consent was obtained during Study 1, and assent was again obtained for Study 3. On average, 20.3 days elapsed between participation in Studies 1 and 3 (range ⫽ 7 to 37). Participants were not
told that the Study 1 and Study 3 surveys would be related, nor
were they given information that would reveal any experimental
hypotheses after Study 1.
The survey administration software randomly assigned participants to either a control article group or to an incremental article
group. As a part of an online “reading comprehension task,”
participants in the incremental group read an article, purportedly
from Psychology Today, concluding that people can change who
they are. The style of the article was modeled after teen self-help
articles that are popular in magazines aimed at adolescents. In the
incremental article, a protagonist (whose sex was matched to the
participant’s sex) was bullied in school in a manner similar to
the scenario used in Study 2: The protagonist did something
embarrassing, and then some peers created a mean nickname that
they circulated to many people and threatened to post on the
Internet. Next, the protagonist received advice from a peer, a
soccer coach, and a school counselor. Each provided the protagonist with the message that people (both the protagonist and the
bullies) could change the kind of person they were, for example,
“People’s characteristics are changeable and can be influenced
over time.” Only beliefs about change were discussed in the
article. The incremental article did not endorse one course of
action or another (i.e., vengeance vs. forgiveness), and participants
were never told what specific attribution to make to explain their
victimization or what emotion they should or should not feel.
Participants in the control group were given an article with an
identical story about the protagonist being victimized but without
any mention of whether people can change. We did not assign
control participants to read an entity article because of ethical
considerations. To equate the experience as much as possible
across the groups and to support the cover story of a reading
comprehension task, all participants wrote detailed essays summarizing their respective articles (“Please summarize the article in
your own words in 3–5 sentences. What happened? What was the
main idea?”) and communicating the thoughts and feelings they
had about the peer victimization scenario (“Imagine that all the
events in the article actually happened to you. How would you

feel?”) before completing any of the dependent measures. Finally,
participants completed the dependent measures and manipulation
checks. At the end of the study, participants answered another
series of positively valenced filler items to counteract the relatively
negative nature of the dependent measures. They were debriefed
and thanked for their participation, and then they returned to class.
Dependent measures. Means, standard deviations, and correlations for the measures used in the present study are presented
in Table 2.
Manipulation checks. To test whether the article had the
intended effect on implicit theories, two kinds of manipulation
check items were included at the very end of the survey. The first
set of items asked participants to rate three statements about
whether people could change: “How much do you think other
people’s personalities can change?” “How much do you think
other people can change the kind of person they are?” “How much
do you think bullies can change the way they are?” Ratings were
made on a 5-point scale (1 ⫽ not at all, 5 ⫽ a great deal). These
three items were collapsed into a single scale (␣ ⫽ .77) with higher
scores corresponding to a more incremental theory.
Next, on the basis of findings from previous research (Erdley &
Dweck, 1993), another manipulation check asked participants to
make predictions about the consistency of traits for a new person.
We reasoned that if participants’ implicit theories had become
more incremental, they would make fewer dispositional attributions about targets and, therefore, would expect them to behave
less consistently. We measured trait consistency predictions by
administering an item similar to those used in previous research
(Chiu, Hong, & Dweck, 1997; Kunda & Nisbett, 1986) to measure
individual differences in the tendency to expect that people always
act in the same way. This item first asked participants to “Imagine
that one day you observed two students at your school, Mary and
Alicia, and on that day you noticed that Mary was MEANER than
Alicia in school.” Next, participants answered the following question: “How likely is it that Mary would also be MEANER than
Alicia in a very different situation OUTSIDE of school?” on a
fully labeled 5-point scale (1 ⫽ not at all likely, 5 ⫽ extremely
likely).
Desire for vengeance. We measured participants’ desire for
vengeance with the same rating-scale items as we used in Study 1
for the recalled conflict and in Study 2 for the hypothetical conflict. We administered these items after participants had read the
bullying article, imagined that the events in the article had happened to them, and described their feelings in an essay format. The
seven items measuring the desire for vengeance were again reliable in this sample (␣ ⫽ .90). In support of the validity of this
measure, we found that the desire for vengeance after a recalled
conflict at baseline (i.e., from Study 1) was strongly correlated
with the desire for vengeance following the bullying scenario, r ⫽
.68, p ⬍ .05. In addition to these relatively negative items, participants also rated neutral or prosocial items, such as “just ignoring
the person,” “forgetting about it and getting over it,” “forgiving
them eventually,” “helping them see that what they did was
wrong,” and “helping them act better in the future.” Neither set of
items formed a common factor; therefore, each item was analyzed
individually.
As a forced-choice measure of vengeful intentions, participants
were asked to indicate which one of the 12 options listed (i.e., the
seven vengeful items and the five prosocial or neutral items) they

IMPLICIT THEORIES AND ADOLESCENT VENGEANCE

1099

Table 2
Descriptive Statistics and Correlations for Study 3 Measures
Measure
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Incremental theory article
Desire for vengeance
Bad-person attributions
Hatred
Shame
Sadness
Vengeance as an emotion-regulation strategy

M

SD

␣

Range

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

0.46
2.90
0.29
4.49
3.89
4.10
2.85

0.50
1.28
0.46
1.90
1.95
1.85
1.62

—
.89
—
—
—
—
.83

0–1
1–7
0–1
1–7
1–7
1–7
1–7

—
⫺.23ⴱ
⫺.19ⴱ
⫺.17ⴱ
⫺.15ⴱ
⫺.03
⫺.14ⴱ

—
.12
.54ⴱ
.24ⴱ
.18ⴱ
.62ⴱ

—
.08
⫺.09
⫺.15ⴱ
.23ⴱ

—
.35ⴱ
.45ⴱ
.47ⴱ

—
.64ⴱ
.06

—
.02

—

Note. Rating scale for Measures 1 and 2: 1 ⫽ not at all, 7 ⫽ an extreme amount; Measure 3: 1 ⫽ bad-person attributions, 2 ⫽ other attributions; Measures
4, 5, and 6: 1 ⫽ not at all, 7 ⫽ an extreme amount; Measure 7: 1 ⫽ not at all better, maybe worse, 7 ⫽ extremely better.
ⴱ
p ⬍ .05.

would “be most likely to ACTUALLY do.” Responses to this
question were converted to a dichotomous item of vengeful versus
prosocial or neutral responses to conflict (1 ⫽ vengeful, 0 ⫽
prosocial or neutral; M ⫽ .39, SD ⫽ .49).
Bad-person attributions. We expanded the Study 1 measure
by allowing participants to choose one attribution from among
several, using a forced-choice question, as opposed to rating only
the belief that the acquaintance was a bad person. The new
question first asked, “What do you think is probably the biggest
reason why the two people treated the main character that way?”
Respondents then chose among several attributions, some of which
were characterological, including “They’re just bad people” and
“They’re bullies and they were doing what bullies do.” Others
were situational, environmental, or developmental attributions,
including “They’re trying to feel better about themselves,” “They
have problems at home,” or “They’re going through an ‘immature’
phase in life.” Participants could also provide “some other reason”
and then write their own attributions in an open-ended question;
fewer than 7% did so. The forced-choice and open-ended responses were subsequently recoded for analyses (1 ⫽ characterological bad-person attributions, 0 ⫽ other attributions; ␬ ⬎ .85
for open-ended attributions).
Emotions. To examine specific emotions, participants indicated to what extent they would feel sadness and to what extent
they would feel shame. In addition, in the present study, we
separated the attribution that the bullies were bad people from the
emotion of hatred for the bullies. Thus, participants were first
asked, “How much would you feel each of the following ways?”
and then were asked to rate these three emotions— hatred for the
transgressor, shame, and sadness— on a fully labeled 7-point scale
(1 ⫽ not at all, 7 ⫽ an extreme amount).
Vengeance as an emotion-regulation strategy. To begin to
explore whether imagining vengeance might function as an
emotion-regulation strategy, we asked participants to rate how
much better they would feel if they did each of the following:
“Imagining them getting punished or hurt” or “Planning out some
revenge against them.” Responses were given on a fully labeled
7-point scale (1 ⫽ not at all better, maybe worse, 7 ⫽ extremely
better). These two items were averaged, with higher values corresponding to a greater belief that vengeance would make one feel
better.
Baseline entity theory and other moderators. Participants’
scores on the entity theory scale reported in Study 1 were linked to

their Study 3 data. Other Study 1 measures were also linked to
participants’ Study 3 data, including ratings of the frequency of
various bullying actions toward them, desire for vengeance toward
an acquaintance after a conflict (measured about 3 weeks earlier in
Study 1), and sociodemographic variables such as sex, mother’s
education, grade level and age.

Results and Discussion
Preliminary analyses.
Effectiveness of randomization. Randomization was effective. Assignment to the incremental or control group was independent of baseline entity theory in Study 1, t(185) ⫽ ⫺0.72, ns,
desire for vengeance in Study 1, t(185) ⫽ 0.70, ns, frequency of
being bullied in school (treated continuously), t(185) ⫽ 0.58, ns,
sex, ␹2(1, N ⫽ 187) ⫽ 0.84, ns, mother’s education, ␹2(5, N ⫽
187) ⫽ 0.52, ns, grade level, ␹2(1, N ⫽ 187) ⫽ 0.82, ns, and
school attended, ␹2(6, N ⫽ 187) ⫽ 1.88, ns.
Manipulation checks. We found that the incremental article
led participants to believe that people could change, relative to
those who read the control article: for the incremental article, M ⫽
3.19, SD ⫽ 0.92; for the control article, M ⫽ 2.80, SD ⫽ 0.88;
t(185) ⫽ 2.89, p ⬍ .05, d ⫽ .43.6 The incremental theory also
reduced participants’ predictions of people’s behavioral consistency in a scenario that was unrelated to the stimulus scenario,
relative to the control group: for the incremental theory, M ⫽ 2.79,
SD ⫽ 0.93; for the control theory, M ⫽ 3.09, SD ⫽ 0.94; t(185) ⫽
2.83, p ⬍ .05, d ⫽ .42.7 This result is consistent with the conclusion that participants’ beliefs that people are fixed were reduced by
the incremental article, because it reduced participants’ predictions
7
Throughout our discussion of Study 3’s results, we use the term
reduced to refer to the difference between the incremental group and the
control group, or the potential outcome for the incremental participants had
they not received the treatment.
6
Although the difference between the means for this manipulation check
may appear modest, the standardized effect size was in fact moderate. It is
also important to note that the manipulation check showed a substantive
difference between conditions. The control group had an average score
below the midpoint, whereas the incremental paragraph group had an
average above the midpoint, suggesting they held more of an incremental
theory. In any case, a modest change in implicit theories would work
against finding the hypothesized effect on vengeance.

1100

YEAGER, TRZESNIEWSKI, TIRRI, NOKELAINEN, AND DWECK

that behaviors such as meanness would be manifested consistently
across very different situations.
Did an incremental theory reduce the desire for vengeance?
Recall that the primary objective of the present research was to test
whether learning an incremental theory about oneself and about
bullies would reduce the desire to take revenge on perpetrators. We
found that this change in mind-set did, in fact, reduce vengeance. The
incremental article significantly reduced ratings of the desire for
vengeance: for the incremental article, M ⫽ 2.56, SD ⫽ 1.19; for the
control article, M ⫽ 3.16, SD ⫽ 1.25; t(185) ⫽ 3.23, p ⬍ .05, d ⫽ .48.
The incremental article did not affect the ratings of neutral or prosocial strategies. This may be because our article did not explain that
they personally could play a role in setting the process of personality
change in motion, which has been found to be a key component in
boosting the motivation to confront or educate a transgressor (e.g.,
Rattan & Dweck, 2010). However, for the vengeful intentions measure, the incremental article substantially cut the proportion of participants saying that they would be most likely to use vengeance as
opposed to neutral or prosocial strategies: for the incremental article,
M ⫽ 32%;for the control article, M ⫽ 53%; logistic B ⫽ ⫺.81, Z ⫽
⫺2.63, p ⬍ .05, odds ratio ⫽ .44.8
None of these effects were moderated by sex, age, frequency of
being bullied (dichotomized at the median or treated continuously), or
desire for vengeance toward an acquaintance reported 3 weeks earlier.
That is, in separate regressions predicting desire for vengeance with a
variable indicating condition, the moderator, and the Condition ⫻
Moderator interaction, all interactions were nonsignificant. In addition, controlling for these variables did not change the size or significance of the effect of the incremental theory. Thus, the incremental
article, with its endorsement of change and growth, reduced students’
ratings of their desire for vengeance and increased their choice of
neutral/prosocial versus vengeful responses. Moreover, it did so similarly across groups of participants.
Why did learning an incremental theory reduce vengeance?
The second objective of the present research was to continue to
build a theory of why an incremental theory might affect responses
to conflict. We predicted that a shift in mind-set toward a more
malleable view of personality would reduce bad-person attributions, shame, hatred, and vengeful emotion regulation and that
these, in turn, would reduce the actual desire to use strategies such
as imagining or planning revenge. Next, we present results demonstrating the direct effect of the incremental theory article on each
of the hypothesized mediators and then the tests of mediation.
Bad-person attributions. Participants learning an incremental
theory were half as likely to make bad-person attributions: for the
incremental theory, M ⫽ 19%; for the control theory, M ⫽ 38%;
logistic B ⫽ ⫺.87, Z ⫽ ⫺2.38, p ⬍ .05, odds ratio ⫽ .42. Instead,
those who learned an incremental theory explained the bullies’
actions with other, more malleable factors—such as the bullies’
wanting to feel better, having a bad home life, or going through an
immature phase in life. Thus, the incremental theory made the
participants see the bullies as people with their own motivations—
however flawed those motivations may be—as opposed to simply
placing a pejorative label on them.
Emotions. The incremental article, as hypothesized, significantly reduced feelings of hatred for the perpetrators: for the
incremental article, M ⫽ 4.11, SD ⫽ 1.85; for the control article,
M ⫽ 4.76, SD ⫽ 1.89; t(185) ⫽ 2.38, p ⬍ .05, d ⫽ .35. The
incremental article also significantly reduced feelings of shame

toward the self: for the incremental article, M ⫽ 3.51, SD ⫽ 1.78;
for the control article, M ⫽ 4.14, SD ⫽ 2.04; t(185) ⫽ 2.25, p ⬍
.05, d ⫽ .31. It did not, however, reduce feelings of sadness after
the bullying scenario: for the incremental article, M ⫽ 4.04, SD ⫽
1.70; for the control article, M ⫽ 4.14, SD ⫽ 2.00; t(185) ⫽ 0.37,
ns, This latter result was also predicted, because sadness can result
from many sources (e.g., sympathy) and is not an emotion that is
expected to stem primarily from an entity theory, as hatred and
shame are (Tangney et al., 2007). Hence, sadness was not included
in the mediational model discussed later.
Vengeance as an emotion-regulation strategy. The incremental article, in addition, significantly reduced how much better
participants thought they would feel after imagining revenge: for
the incremental article, M ⫽ 2.58, SD ⫽ 1.42; for the control
article, M ⫽ 3.05, SD ⫽ 1.74; t(185) ⫽ 2.02, p ⬍ .05, d ⫽ .29.
Mediational model. To formally test for mediation by these
variables, we first used Preacher and Hayes’s (2008) macro to test
the model presented in Figure 2, which included all four mediators.
We found that the effect of the incremental theory on vengeance
was reduced from ␤ ⫽ ⫺.23, p ⬍ .05, in a model with no
mediators to ␤ ⫽ ⫺.10 (B ⫽ ⫺.17, 95% CI [⫺.46, .12], ns) in the
model presented in Figure 2, suggesting full mediation by these
variables (indirect B ⫽ ⫺.42, 95% CI [⫺.72, ⫺.15], p ⬍ .05, ␤ ⫽
⫺.13). Of interest, when this same analysis was conducted without
including emotion regulation as a mediator, only partial mediation
was found. Thus, by expanding our set of mediators to include
emotion regulation, and by specifying the negative emotions felt
after victimization (shame and hatred), we were able to fully
account for the effects of implicit theories on the desire for
vengeance.
However, when we built the latent variable structural model
presented in Figure 2, we found that it was a very poor fit to the
data, ␹2(49) ⫽ 143.75, ␹2/df ⫽ 3.04, p ⬍ .05, CFI ⫽ .884,
RMSEA ⫽ .108, suggesting that there is a more complicated chain
of mediation involving these variables. Yet, the present study’s
design, with its concurrent self-report measures, does not allow for
firm conclusions regarding the temporal ordering of the mediators.
Therefore, we briefly describe an exploratory analysis that is
suggestive of one possible order, and we propose it as a guide for
future investigations.
Specifically, we propose that emotion regulation is a later step
in the path from an incremental theory to vengeance, with attributions and emotions as antecedents. That is, judgments and
emotions may need to be generated before they are regulated.
On the basis of this theory, we tested the model presented in
Figure 3. We found that it provided adequate fit to the data,
␹2(48) ⫽ 81.821, p ⬍ .05, ␹2/df ⫽ 1.705, CFI ⫽ .961, RMSEA ⫽
.064, and yielded a significant indirect effect of the incremental
theory on vengeance (B ⫽ ⫺.32, 95% CI [⫺.55, ⫺.15], p ⬍ .05,
␤ ⫽ ⫺.13). In addition, the direct effect of the incremental theory
8
To test the robustness of this result, we also recoded prosocial and
neutral responses into separate categories (0 ⫽ vengeful, 1 ⫽ neutral, 2 ⫽
prosocial) and analyzed the data with a multinomial logistic regression in
which neutral and prosocial responses were each separately compared with
vengeful responses. We found a similar pattern of results: An incremental
theory significantly predicted the desire to use prosocial or neutral responses relative to vengeful responses.

IMPLICIT THEORIES AND ADOLESCENT VENGEANCE

on vengeance was reduced to being no longer significant (B ⫽
⫺.27, 95% CI [⫺.56, .01], p ⫽ .056, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.11). In this model, an
incremental theory reduced participants’ feelings of shame after
victimization, which in turn reduced their hatred for the bullies
(indirect effect of incremental theory on hatred, B ⫽ ⫺.19, 95% CI
[⫺.45, ⫺.01], p ⬍ .05, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.05).9 In addition, the incremental
theory reduced bad-person attributions, which in turn reduced their
vengeful emotion-regulation strategies (total indirect effect of incremental theory on emotion regulation, B ⫽ ⫺.39, 95% CI [⫺.69,
⫺.14], p ⬍ .05, ␤ ⫽ ⫺.12). Finally, vengeful emotion-regulation
strategies significantly mediated the effect of both hatred and
bad-person attributions on the desire for vengeance (indirect effect
of bad-person attributions on vengeance, B ⫽ .25, 95% CI [.06,
.52], p ⬍ .05, ␤ ⫽ .09; indirect effect of hatred on vengeance, B ⫽
.15, 95% CI [.09, .23], p ⬍ .05, ␤ ⫽ .22; see Figure 3).10
It is interesting to note that the effect of the incremental
theory on hatred was mediated by feelings of shame. This
account is consistent with established sociological theories on
shame, which suggests that shame arises from a worry about
one’s permanent status in the community. In this view, shamed
victims are motivated to derogate and hate those who threaten
that status (Scheff, 1994; Scheff & Retzinger, 1991; see also
Gilbert & Andrews, 1998). This finding also resonates with
psychological research on hatred. For example, Fitness and
Fletcher (1993) found that hatred, relative to anger, more frequently followed from incidents of humiliation. In addition,
experimental investigations have shown that leading adolescents to feel ashamed can increase their motivation to behave
aggressively (Reijntjes et al., in press; Thomaes et al., 2008).
The present study’s findings contribute to this research by
showing that an incremental theory can reduce shame and
subsequently hatred by changing the meaning of peer victimization, so that the conflict is perceived as a less permanent (and
hence less humiliating) threat to a victim’s status.
Internal replication of the causal effect. Last, we attempted
to internally replicate our experiment’s primary findings within
our control group by examining whether changes over time in
implicit theories from Study 1’s survey to the present study’s
survey significantly predicted changes in the desire for vengeance.
To do so, we first created a change in implicit theories measure by
subtracting the z score for the implicit theories at baseline from the
z score for the implicit theories manipulation check in the present
study, and we coded it so that higher values corresponded to more
of an incremental theory. We then used this change score to predict
changes in desire for vengeance, as indexed by the z score for
baseline vengeance subtracted from the z score for the desire for
vengeance in the present study, so that higher values corresponded
to more vengeance. In this regression analysis, changes toward
holding more of an incremental theory significantly predicted
decreases in desire for vengeance, B ⫽ ⫺.34, SE ⫽ .14, p ⬍ .05,
␤ ⫽ ⫺.24, replicating our experiment’s main finding with a
different methodology.
Summary. Overall, these results suggest that when adolescents are taught that people can change, they are not as likely to
think that bullies are simply bad people, they do not feel as
ashamed after victimization, they do not hate the bullies as
much, and they are less motivated to imagine vengeance to
regulate their negative emotions. In turn, they are less likely to

1101

say they would like to respond to the conflict in an aggressive,
vengeful way.
Our overall hypothesis that implicit theories led to the differences we observed in this study was supported by an internal
replication with short-term longitudinal associations and by the
finding that the article changed implicit theories, predictions of
trait consistency, and the key mediators that we found in our
previous studies.

General Discussion
Adolescents frequently experience peer conflicts, ranging from
minor slights to outright victimization, and they respond to those
conflicts in various ways. Sometimes adolescents seek prosocial
ways to handle the conflict and move on. Other times, adolescents
hold enduring grudges toward their transgressors and wish them
harm. What predicts which type of response adolescents prefer? In
the present research, we propose that the meaning adolescents
make of their social conflicts, arising from their implicit theories of
personality, can shed light on how they cope with social setbacks.
Three studies found that implicit theories can predict how adolescents in high school respond to conflicts with their peers. In
Study 1, we found that an entity theory, or a belief in fixed traits,
was related to a greater desire for vengeance when adolescents
recalled recent conflicts in their lives. In Study 2, we replicated the
results, using a vivid hypothetical incident of victimization. In an
experiment, Study 3 showed that learning an incremental theory,
or a belief in the potential for change, could reduce the desire for
revenge after hypothetical peer victimization.
The relation between implicit theories and the desire for vengeance was consistent and robust. This association was clear
across very different samples: a socioeconomically diverse, mostly
9
The total indirect effect of shame on desire for vengeance was B ⫽ .11,
95% CI [.06, .17], p ⬍ .05, ␤ ⫽ .18, and the indirect effect of shame on
vengeful emotion regulation was B ⫽ .13, 95% CI [.07, .21], p ⬍ .05,
␤ ⫽ .15.
10
Because this mediational analysis was exploratory, we built alternative models in which we changed the order of the mediators or added/
removed paths. We tested whether the fit of these models was lower or
higher by comparing the ␹2/df, CFI, RMSEA, Akaike information criterion, and Bayesian information criterion fit statistics relative to the theoretical model in Figure 3. Our final model had better fit with regard to each
of these five statistics relative to any alternative model we tested, although
the magnitude of these differences was often quite small. For example,
model fit was lower when the desire for vengeance was not the final
variable in the model, when bad-person attributions were placed after
emotion regulation, and when shame was placed after either hatred or
emotion regulation. Because the model in Figure 3 provided better fit to the
data than all other models tested, and because theory led us to predict that
emotion regulation would come after the emotions were generated, we
have presented the model shown in Figure 3. It should be noted that the
final model in Figure 3, which includes ordering of the mediators, fit the
data similarly to a model with covariances between the mediators and no
ordering, ␹2(46) ⫽ 79.330, p ⬍ .05, ␹2/df ⫽ 1.725, CFI ⫽ .961, RMSEA ⫽
.065. We chose a final model that ordered the mediators because, as noted
earlier, we thought of attributions and emotions as prior processes to the
evaluation of strategies for regulating those emotions, and the ordering of
the mediators provides more direction for future empirical and theoretical
studies.

1102

YEAGER, TRZESNIEWSKI, TIRRI, NOKELAINEN, AND DWECK

Figure 2.

Preliminary multiple mediation model in Study 3.

White sample from Finland and two racially and ethnically diverse
low-income samples from urban schools in the United States Of
interest, when we explicitly tested the difference in effect size
between the homogeneous Finnish subsample and the diverse U.S.

subsample in Study 1, we found no evidence that the effect of
implicit theories on adolescents’ desire for vengeance (or on the
mediators of that relationship) was stronger or weaker in either
subsample. Because few studies have directly tested the general-

Figure 3. Path model leading from an incremental theory to a reduced desire for vengeance in Study 3.
Numbers are standardized coefficients. Circles represent latent variables, and squares represent manifest
variables. Bad-person attributions and the incremental manipulation were categorical variables; all others were
continuous. Nonsignificant paths and indicators of latent variables were removed from the figure for ease of
presentation. ⴱ p ⬍ .05.

IMPLICIT THEORIES AND ADOLESCENT VENGEANCE

izability of the social– cognitive processes documented among
Finnish youths, this study yielded reassuring findings about the
generality of these processes.
Implicit theories were associated with adolescents’ desire for
vengeance above and beyond the effects of many other factors
(such as sex, levels of peer victimization, or race/ethnicity). Implicit theories were related to vengeance after a broad array of
social conflicts (Study 1) and, more specifically, after hypothetical
peer victimization and aggression (Studies 2 and 3). Changes in
implicit theories over a few weeks toward more of an incremental
theory were associated with a reduction in the desire for vengeance
over the same period (Study 3). Moreover, when implicit theories
were experimentally changed, an incremental theory played a
causal role in reducing the vengeance a victim desired (Study 3).
No previous experiment with children or adults has shown that
vengeful responses to peer victimization could be reduced by
learning an incremental theory.
Our demonstration of the causal role of implicit theories of
personality can have implications for intervention. Recent incidents of planned school violence in America, Finland, and other
countries have been found to be related to experiences of peer
victimization in school and fantasies of revenge afterward (Leary
et al., 2003; Punamäki, Nokelainen, Marttunen, & Tirri, in press;
Vossekuil et al., 2002; for a review, see Borum et al., 2010).
Notably, peer victimization does not appear to have a direct effect
on adolescents’ adjustment problems but rather an indirect one that
works through their social cognitions. In past research, when a
maladaptive pattern of social cognitions did not result from peer
rejection, later violence was less likely to ensue (see Dodge,
Greenberg, Malone, & the Conduct Problems Prevention Research
Group, 2008; Pettit, Lansford, Malone, Dodge, & Bates, 2010).
Thus, the present research suggests that interventions targeting one
particular psychological factor— beliefs about whether people can
change—may perhaps buffer peer-victimized adolescents from the
desire to use vengeance as a solution.

Relation of Implicit Theories to Attributions and
Emotions
This research also illuminates why and how implicit theories
affect the desire for vengeance after a conflict by exploring several
mediators. Study 1 showed that, when considering a past conflict,
adolescents who held an entity theory were more likely to judge
the perpetrator to be a bad person and to harbor negative feelings
about themselves. These then predicted the desire to use vengeance
as a solution. This study was unique in examining both selfrelevant and other-relevant processes as mediators in the path
leading from an entity theory to a desire for revenge. Study 3,
which changed implicit theories, found support for similar mediators and showed that the negative emotions of hatred and shame
played a key role in promoting vengeance. Study 3 also extended
the theoretical model by adding a measure that tapped a belief in
vengeful thoughts as a good way to regulate emotions. This, too,
was found to partially explain the impact of implicit theories on
vengeful responses, consistent with theories of the role of anticipated emotional states in motivating aggression (Baumeister et al.,
2007). Taken together, our mediators fully accounted for the effect
of learning an incremental theory on reduced endorsement of
vengeful responses. Although future research is still needed to

1103

understand the order and manner in which these mediators operate,
our studies suggest that adolescents’ implicit theories of personality predict their responses to social conflicts with acquaintances
because they predict their attributions, emotions, and emotionregulation strategies.
Depicting the transgressor. Our findings in Studies 1 and 3
regarding bad-person attributions suggest that believing people can
be permanently labeled with descriptors like bully may make it
more likely that one will summarily dismiss transgressors as bad
people. Because “bad” people may be seen as deserving more
punishment, those with more of an entity theory may feel more
justified in their endorsement of revenge toward the transgressors.
An interesting future direction is to investigate the role of dehumanization and moral disengagement (Bandura, 1999) in the process just described. For example, adolescent victims of bullying
who also hold an entity theory may find it easier to think of
transgressors in terms of fixed labels, instead of in terms of a
bundle of complex human motivations. Once the victim has dehumanized the transgressor with a pejorative label, it may be easier
for the victim to disengage from the guilt that may be normally
associated with desiring that someone suffer.
Next, previous research on attribution theory (Weiner, 1986,
1995) has focused on the role of stable characterological attributions in leading to more punitive evaluations of transgressors. The
results of Study 3, which showed that characterological attributions could be reduced by an incremental theory, added to this
perspective by showing that implicit theories may be an antecedent
step in this social– cognitive process (see also Blackwell et al.,
2007, Study 1, for related results in the academic domain).
Attributions of intent. Previous groundbreaking and highly
important research has shown the role of biased attributions of
hostile intent in predicting aggression (Hudley & Graham, 1993;
for reviews, see Crick & Dodge, 1994; Dodge et al., 2006). This
research has shown that adolescents who chronically perceive
hostile intent when a perpetrator’s motivation is ambiguous are
more likely to respond aggressively. However, the focus on perceptions of a perpetrator’s intent might not explain how adolescents respond when it is clear that a transgressor has victimized
them on purpose. That is, given clear hostile intent, why do some
adolescents seek more revenge after conflicts?
The present research has suggested that implicit theories play an
important role in responses to unambiguously intentional conflicts.
To address this question directly, we asked participants to rate how
much they thought the acquaintance in the recalled conflict had
acted negatively toward them on purpose (1 ⫽ completely by
accident, 7 ⫽ completely on purpose) as part of Study 1. We found
that this did not matter. In other words, when we controlled for the
degree to which adolescents believed that the transgression had
been committed on purpose, the effect of an entity theory on the
desire for vengeance was not changed in either of the samples.
Therefore, it seems that implicit theories predict responses to
conflict regardless of perceived intent.
However, an entity theory may well be related to attributions of
hostile intent when intent is ambiguous. An adolescent with more
of an entity theory may see ambiguous actions as driven by the
traits of transgressors and, therefore, as arising from relatively
clear intent. Yet, an adolescent with an incremental theory, with an
appreciation of situational or developmental influences on behav-

1104

YEAGER, TRZESNIEWSKI, TIRRI, NOKELAINEN, AND DWECK

ior, might not reach such a conclusion. We are currently examining
these possibilities.

Limitations
The present research is not without its limitations. The most
important caveat is that Study 3 was a demonstration, not an
intervention. It is important to determine in future research
whether an incremental theory of personality can be taught to
adolescents in a lasting way and how to teach it appropriately.
Adolescents who learn an incremental theory might incorrectly
believe they are supposed to change a bully by themselves, potentially leading to guilt or danger if their efforts are not effective. An
intervention should make it clear that adolescents ought not always
believe that it is their responsibility or within their power to change
a transgressor. It should also teach that change is neither easy nor
certain and may only happen over time— but it is usually possible.
Additionally, an incremental intervention, while teaching victims
that bullies are not inherently bad, also needs to teach the victims
that they themselves are not to blame. A task for future research,
then, is to determine how best to teach adolescents to flexibly
apply malleable theories about transgressors and about themselves,
an issue that must be addressed in the design and implementation
of real-world interventions.
A potential limitation in our research is that the measurement
and manipulation of implicit theories combined both implicit theories about the self and theories about others. This was done
intentionally to maximize ecological validity. In pilot investigations and focus group interviews with adolescents, many adolescents had global mind-sets that viewed people’s traits as generally
either fixed or malleable. We also believed it was more ethical in
Study 3 to manipulate both implicit theories for the reasons mentioned earlier. However, it is possible for these implicit theories to
be separated and to have separate effects. That is, some adolescents may have an entity theory of others but not of the self or vice
versa. In the former case, they would be predicted to make dispositional (bad person) attributions about others but not to make
negative, dispositional attributions about themselves. As such,
some victims of bullying might think that they can improve over
time, even though the bullies will continue to be bad people. Thus,
future research might assess the potentially separate effects of
implicit theories about the self and about others.
Next, the present research focused on the desire for vengeance
(Studies 1–3) and on vengeful intentions (Study 3) and not on
actual vengeful behavior. We think it is likely that implicit theories
would relate to behavioral responses to peer conflict, because
previous studies have found a relation between an entity theory
and increased aggressive behavior (measured by self-reports and
parent reports; Rudolph, 2010) and between an incremental theory
and increased prosocial confronting behavior (Rattan & Dweck,
2010). Nevertheless, an important next step is to investigate
whether teaching an incremental theory reduces actual vengeful
behavior following peer conflicts.
It is also important to note that, as in much of the literature,
many of our measures, such as the measures of attributions and
emotions, consisted of single items. Single-item measures typically have lower reliability, and measurement error in mediators
often leads to overestimation of the direct effects of independent
variables (Bullock, Green, & Ha, 2010). This bias, however, would

work against the significance of the indirect effects, a fact that
highlights the potential importance of the mediators we identified
in our studies. Nevertheless, future studies should use more extensive and more fully validated measures (e.g., Tangney et al.’s,
1996, measure of shame). Along similar lines, future research
might investigate additional emotions that could arise from implicit theories. For example, in line with Tangney et al.’s (1996)
formulation, incremental theorists might feel more guilt rather than
shame for their part in a conflict, which could lead to constructive
actions rather than aggressive ones.
Our investigation focused primarily on why some adolescents
who experience social setbacks turn to vengeful fantasies as a
coping strategy. Yet, implicit theories may also play a role in the
actions of those who initiate bullying or aggression toward others.
For instance, aggressors may justify their actions with fixed beliefs
that their victims are inherently losers or otherwise personally
flawed. However, if they humanized the potential victims and saw
them as people with thoughts and feelings—and not as people who
are permanently stuck in low-status social categories—then their
motivation to bully might be reduced. Thus, it may be interesting
in future investigations to attempt to reduce bullying by teaching
aggressors an incremental theory about their potential victims.
Finally, in Study 1, we found that adolescents’ implicit theories
predicted their desire for vengeance after a broad range of recalled
conflicts with acquaintances, who are more likely than close
friends to perpetrate intense victimization (Olweus, 1993). However, research on the domain specificity of aggression suggests that
responses to conflicts with close friends or romantic partners may
have a different relation to social– cognitive variables than do
responses to conflicts with acquaintances or enemies (e.g., Peets et
al., 2007, 2008; Pettit et al., 2010). Thus, it is important to conduct
future studies extending our research to other groups of peers.

Conclusion
It has become increasingly important to understand the psychological dynamics of peer conflict as adolescents have gained
unprecedented access to weapons and as society has increasingly
grappled with violence and suicide in schools. The present research attempts to contribute to the knowledge of the motivation
behind violent retaliation after peer conflicts in general or victimization in particular. Our findings are consistent in suggesting that
adolescents who construe their social world in terms of good
people and bad people can, after conflict or victimization, enter a
cycle of hatred and shame that leads to a desire for vengeance,
particularly when they believe that thoughts of revenge will make
them feel better about themselves. However, our findings also
suggest that a more positive cycle of thoughts, feelings, and desires
can be fostered by teaching adolescents to view themselves and
their peers as works in progress rather than as finished products.

References
Arbuckle, J. L. (2006). Amos 7.0 programming reference guide. Spring
House, PA: Amos Development Corporation.
Bandura, A. (1999). Moral disengagement in the perpetration of inhumanities. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 3, 193–209. doi:
10.1207/s15327957pspr0303_3
Baumeister, R. F., Smart, L., & Boden, J. (1996). Relation of threatened

IMPLICIT THEORIES AND ADOLESCENT VENGEANCE
egotism to violence and aggression: The dark side of high self-esteem.
Psychological Review, 103, 5–33. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.103.1.5
Baumeister, R. F., Vohs, K. D., DeWall, C. N., & Zhang, L. (2007). How
emotion shapes behavior: Feedback, anticipation, and reflection, rather
than direct causation. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 11,
167–203. doi:10.1177/1088868307301033
Bee, H. L., Barnard, K. E., Eyres, S. J., Gray, C. A., Hammond, M. A.,
Spietz, A. L., . . . Clark, B. (1982). Prediction of IQ and language skill
from perinatal status, child performance, family characteristics, and
mother–infant interaction. Child Development, 53, 1134 –1156. doi:
10.2307/1129003
Beer, J. S. (2002). Implicit self-theories of shyness. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 83, 1009 –1024. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.83
.4.1009
Berger, K. S. (2007). Update on bullying at school: Science forgotten?
Developmental Review, 27, 90 –126. doi:10.1016/j.dr.2006.08.002
Blackwell, L. S., Trzesniewski, K., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Implicit
theories of intelligence predict achievement across an adolescent transition: A longitudinal study and an intervention. Child Development, 78,
246 –263. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2007.00995.x
Borum, R., Cornell, D. G., Modzeleski, W., & Jimerson, S. R. (2010).
What can be done about school shootings? A review of the evidence.
Educational Researcher, 39, 27–37. doi:10.3102/0013189X09357620
Brent, D. A., Baugher, M., Bridge, J., Chen, T., & Chiappetta, L. (1999).
Age- and sex-related risk factors for adolescent suicide. Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 38, 1497–1505.
doi:10.1097/00004583-199912000-00010
Bullock, J. G., Green, D. P., & Ha, S. E. (2010). Yes, but what’s the
mechanism? (Don’t expect an easy answer). Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 98, 550 –558. doi:10.1037/a0018933
Bushman, B. J., Baumeister, R. F., & Phillips, C. M. (2001). Do people
aggress to improve their mood? Catharsis beliefs, affect regulation
opportunity, and aggressive responding. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 81, 17–32. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.81.1.17
Chiu, C., Dweck, C. S., Tong, J. Y., & Fu, J. H. (1997). Implicit theories
and conceptions of morality. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 923–940. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.73.5.923
Chiu, C. Y., Hong, Y., & Dweck, C. S. (1997). Lay dispositionism and
implicit theories of personality. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 19 –30. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.73.1.19
Crick, N. R., & Dodge, K. A. (1994). A review and reformulation of social
information-processing mechanisms in children’s social adjustment.
Psychological Bulletin, 115, 74 –101. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.115.1.74
Dodge, K. A. (2008). Framing public policy and prevention of chronic
violence in American youths. American Psychologist, 63, 573–590.
doi:10.1037/0003-066X.63.7.573
Dodge, K. A., Coie, J. D., & Lynam, D. (2006). Aggression and antisocial
behavior in youth. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.),
Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and personality development (6th ed.). New York, NY: Wiley.
Dodge, K. A., Greenberg, M. T., Malone, P. S., & the Conduct Problems
Prevention Research Group. (2008). Testing an idealized dynamic cascade model of the development of serious violence in adolescence. Child
Development, 79, 1907–1927. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2008.01233.x
Dweck, C. S., Chiu, C., & Hong, Y. (1995). Implicit theories and their role
in judgments and reactions: A world from two perspectives. Psychological Inquiry, 6, 267–285. doi:10.1207/s15327965pli0604_1
Erdley, C., Cain, K., Loomis, C., Dumas-Hines, F., & Dweck, C. S. (1997).
The relations among children’s social goals, implicit personality theories
and response to social failure. Developmental Psychology, 33, 263–272.
doi:10.1037/0012-1649.33.2.263
Erdley, C., & Dweck, C. S. (1993). Children’s implicit theories as predictors of their social judgments. Child Development, 64, 863– 878. doi:
10.2307/1131223

1105

Fitness, J., & Fletcher, G. (1993). Love, hate, anger, and jealousy in close
relationships: A prototype and cognitive appraisal analysis. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 942–958. doi:10.1037/00223514.65.5.942
Gervey, B., Chiu, C., Hong, Y., & Dweck, C. S. (1999). Differential use of
person information in decision-making about guilt vs. innocence: The
role of implicit theories. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25,
17–27. doi:10.1177/0146167299025001002
Gilbert, P., & Andrews, B. (1998). Shame: Interpersonal behavior, psychopathology, and culture. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Giles, J. W. (2003). Children’s essentialist beliefs about aggression. Developmental Review, 23, 413– 443. doi:10.1016/S0273-2297(03)
00039-X
Graham, S., Bellmore, A. D., & Mize, J. (2006). Aggression, victimization,
and their co-occurrence in middle school. Journal of Abnormal Child
Psychology, 34, 363–378. doi:10.1007/s10802-006-9030-2
Graham, S., & Juvonen, J. (1998). Self-blame and peer victimization in
middle school: An attributional analysis. Developmental Psychology, 34,
587–599. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.34.3.587
Haselhuhn, M. P., Schweitzer, M. E., & Wood, A. M. (2010). How implicit
beliefs influence trust recovery. Psychological Science, 21, 645– 648.
doi:10.1177/0956797610367752
Hong, Y., Chiu, C., Dweck, C. S., Lin, D., & Wan, W. (1999). Implicit
theories, attributions, and coping: A meaning system approach. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 588 –599. doi:10.1037/00223514.77.3.588
Hudley, C., & Graham, S. (1993). An attributional intervention to reduce
peer-directed aggression among African-American boys. Child Development, 64, 124 –138. doi:10.2307/1131441
Janoff-Bulman, R. (1979). Characterological versus behavioral self-blame:
Inquiries into depression and rape. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 37, 1798 –1809. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.37.10.1798
Juvonen, J., Graham, S., & Schuster, M. (2003). Bullying among young
adolescents: The strong, the weak, and the troubled. Pediatrics, 112,
1231–1237. doi:10.1542/peds.112.6.1231
Kaltiala-Heino, R., Rimpelä, M., Marttunen, M., Rimpelä, A., & Rantanen,
P. (1999). Bullying, depression, and suicidal ideation in Finnish adolescents: School survey. British Medical Journal, 319, 348 –351.
Kammrath, L. K., & Dweck, C. S. (2006). Voicing conflict: Preferred
conflict strategies among incremental and entity theorists. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 32, 1497–1508. doi:10.1177/
0146167206291476
Kaufman, P., Chen, X., Choy, S. P., Ruddy, S. A., Miller, A. K., Chandler,
K. A., . . . Klaus, P. (1999). Indicators of school crime and safety (NCES
1999 – 057/NCJ-178906). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education and U.S. Department of Justice.
Killen, M., Crystal, D. S., & Watanabe, H. (2002). Japanese and American
children’s evaluations of peer exclusion, tolerance of differences, and
prescriptions for conformity. Child Development, 73, 1788 –1802. doi:
10.1111/1467-8624.t01–1-00506
Killen, M., Kelly, M. C., Richardson, C., & Jampol, N. S. (2010). Attributions of intentions and fairness judgments regarding interracial peer
encounters. Developmental Psychology, 46, 1206 –1213. doi:10.1037/
a0019660
Kray, L. J., & Haselhuhn, M. (2007). Implicit negotiation beliefs and
performance: Longitudinal and experimental evidence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 93, 49 – 64. doi:10.1037/00223514.93.1.49
Kunda, Z., & Nisbett, R. E. (1986). The psychometrics of everyday life.
Cognitive Psychology, 18, 195–224. doi:10.1016/0010-0285(86)
90012-5
Lahti, A., Räsänen, P., Karvonen, K., Särkioja, T., Meyer-Rochow, V. B.,
& Hakko, H. (2006). Autumn peak in shooting suicides of children and

1106

YEAGER, TRZESNIEWSKI, TIRRI, NOKELAINEN, AND DWECK

adolescents from northern Finland. Neuropsychobiology, 54, 140 –146.
doi:10.1159/000098265
Leary, M., Kowalski, R., Smith, L., & Phillips, S. (2003). Teasing, rejection, and violence: Case studies of the school shootings. Aggressive
Behavior, 29, 202–214. doi:10.1002/ab.10061
Levy, S., & Dweck, C. S. (1999). Children’s static vs. dynamic person
conceptions as predictors of their stereotype formation. Child Development, 70, 1163–1180. doi:10.1111/1467-8624.00085
Levy, S., Stroessner, S., & Dweck, C. S. (1998). Stereotype formation and
endorsement: The role of implicit theories. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 74, 1421–1436. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.74.6.1421
Loeb, I., & Dweck, C. S. (1994, July). Beliefs about human nature as
predictors of reactions to victimization. Paper presented at the Sixth
Annual Convention of the American Psychological Society, Washington, DC.
MacCallum, R. C., Zhang, S., Preacher, K. J., & Rucker, D. D. (2002). On
the practice of dichotomization of quantitative variables. Psychological
Methods, 7, 19 – 40. doi:10.1037/1082-989X.7.1.19
McGlothlin, H., & Killen, M. (2006). Intergroup attitudes of European
American children attending ethnically homogeneous schools. Child
Development, 77, 1375–1386. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2006.00941.x
McGlothlin, H., & Killen, M. (2010). How social experience is related to
children’s intergroup attitudes. European Journal of Social Psychology,
40, 625– 634. doi:10.1002/ejsp.733
Miller, C. H., Burgoon, J. K., & Hall, J. R. (2007). The effects of implicit
theories of moral character on affective reactions to moral transgressions. Social Cognition, 25, 819 – 832. doi:10.1521/soco.2007.25.6.819
Nishina, A., & Juvonen, J. (2005). Daily reports of witnessing and experiencing peer harassment in middle school. Child Development, 76,
435– 450. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2005.00855.x
Ojanen, T., Grönroos, M., & Salmivalli, C. (2005). An interpersonal
circumplex model of children’s social goals: Links with peer-reported
behavior and sociometric status. Developmental Psychology, 41, 699 –
710. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.41.5.699
Olweus, D. (1993). Bullying at school: What we know and what we can do.
Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Peets, K., Hodges, R., Kikas, E., & Salmivalli, C. (2007). Hostile attributions and behavioral strategies in children: Does relationship type matter? Developmental Psychology, 43, 889 –900. doi:10.1037/00121649.43.4.889
Peets, K., Hodges, R., & Salmivalli, C. (2008). Affect-congruent social–
cognitive evaluations and behavior. Child Development, 79, 170 –185.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2007.01118.x
Peled, M., & Moretti, M. M. (2007). Rumination on anger and sadness in
adolescence: Fueling of fury and deepening of despair. Journal of
Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 36, 66 –75. doi:10.1207/
s15374424jccp3601_7
Pettit, G. S., Lansford, J. E., Malone, P. S., Dodge, K. A., & Bates, J. E.
(2010). Domain specificity in relationship history, social-information
processing, and violent behavior in early adulthood. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 98, 190 –200. doi:10.1037/a0017991
Plaks, J. E., Stroessner, S., Dweck, C. S., & Sherman, J. (2001). Person
theories and attention allocation: Preference for stereotypic vs. counterstereotypic information. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
80, 876 – 893. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.80.6.876
Preacher, K. J., & Hayes, A. F. (2008). Asymptotic and resampling
strategies for assessing and comparing indirect effects in multiple mediator models. Behavior Research Methods, 40, 879 – 891. doi:10.3758/
BRM.40.3.879
Punamäki, R., Nokelainen, P., Marttunen, M., & Tirri, K. (in press).
Violent behavior and school killings: Societal, developmental and social
factors. Finnish Academy of Science and Letters.
Raine, A., Dodge, K. A., Loeber, R., Gatzke-Kopp, L., Lynam, D., Reynolds, C., . . . Liu, J. (2006). The Reactive–Proactive Aggression Ques-

tionnaire: Differential correlates of reactive and proactive aggression in
adolescent boys. Aggressive Behavior, 32, 159 –171. doi:10.1002/
ab.20115
Rattan, A., & Dweck, C. S. (2010). Who confronts prejudice? The role of
implicit theories in the motivation to confront prejudice. Psychological
Science, 21, 952–959. doi:10.1177/0956797610374740
Reijntjes, A., Thomaes, S., Bushman, B. J., Boelen, P. A., Orobio de
Castro, B., & Telch, M. J. (in press). The outcast lash-out effect in youth:
Alienation increases aggression following peer rejection. Psychological
Science.
Robins, R. W., & Pals, J. L. (2002). Implicit self-theories in the academic
domain: Implications for goal orientation, attributions, affect, and selfesteem change. Self and Identity, 1, 313–336. doi:10.1080/
15298860290106805
Rudolph, K. D. (2010). Implicit theories of peer relationships. Social
Development, 19, 113–129. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9507.2008.00534.x
Salmivalli, C., Ojanen, T., Haanpää, J., & Peets, K. (2005). “I’m OK but
you’re not” and other peer-relational schemas: Explaining individual
differences in children’s social goals. Developmental Psychology, 41,
363–375. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.41.2.363
Scheff, T. J. (1994). Bloody revenge: Emotion, nationalism and war.
Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Scheff, T. J., & Retzinger, S. (1991). Violence and emotions. Lexington,
MA: Lexington Books.
Sirin, S. R. (2005). Socioeconomic status and academic achievement: A
meta-analytic review of research. Review of Educational Research, 75,
417– 453. doi:10.3102/00346543075003417
Sourander, A., Jensen, P., Rönning, J. A., Niemelä, S., Helenius, H.,
Sillanmäki, L., . . . Almqvist, F. (2007). What is the early adulthood
outcome of boys who bully or are bullied in childhood? The Finnish
“From a Boy to a Man” study. Pediatrics, 120, 397– 404. doi:10.1542/
peds.2006-2704
Statistics Finland. (2009). Statistical yearbook of Finland 2009. Helsinki,
Finland: Author.
Swearer, S. M., Espelage, D. L., Vaillancourt, T., & Hymel, S. (2010).
What can be done about school bullying? Linking research to educational practice. Educational Researcher, 39, 38 – 47. doi:10.3102/
0013189X09357622
Swearer, S. M., Song, S. Y., Cary, P. T., Eagle, J. W., & Mickelson, W. T.
(2001). Psychosocial correlates in bullying and victimization: The relationship between depression, anxiety, and bullying. Journal of Emotional Abuse, 2, 95–121. doi:10.1300/J135v02n02_07
Tangney, J. P., Miller, R. S., Flicker, L., & Barlow, D. H. (1996). Are
shame, guilt and embarrassment distinct emotions? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70, 1256 –1269. doi:10.1037/00223514.70.6.1256
Tangney, J. P., Stuewig, J., & Mashek, D. J. (2007). Moral emotions and
moral behavior. Annual Review of Psychology, 58, 345–372. doi:
10.1146/annurev.psych.56.091103.070145
Thomaes, S., Bushman, B. J., Stegge, H., & Olthof, T. (2008). Trumping
shame by blasts of noise: Narcissism, self-esteem, shame, and aggression in young adolescents. Child Development, 79, 1792–1801. doi:
10.1111/j.1467-8624.2008.01226.x
Trach, J., Hymel, S., Waterhouse, T., & Neale, K. (2010). Bystander
responses to school bullying: A cross-sectional investigation of grade
and sex differences. Canadian Journal of School Psychology, 25, 114 –
130. doi:10.1177/0829573509357553
Twenge, J. M., Baumeister, R. F., Tice, D. M., & Stucke, T. S. (2001). If
you can’t join them, beat them: Effects of social exclusion on aggressive
behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 1058 –1069.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.81.6.1058
Vossekuil, B., Fein, R. A., Reddy, M., Borum, R., & Modzeleski, W.
(2002). The final report and findings of the Safe School Initiative:
Implications for the prevention of school attacks in the United States.

IMPLICIT THEORIES AND ADOLESCENT VENGEANCE
Washington, DC: U.S. Secret Service and U.S. Department of Education.
Walker, D., Greenwood, C., Hart, B., & Carta, J. (1994). Prediction of
school outcomes based on early language production and socioeconomic
factors. Child Development, 65, 606 – 621. doi:10.2307/1131404
Weiner, B. (1986). An attributional theory of motivation and emotion. New
York, NY: Springer-Verlag.
Weiner, B. (1995). Judgments of responsibility: A foundation for a theory
of social conduct. New York, NY: Guilford Press.

1107

Williams, K. D. (2009). Ostracism: A temporal need–threat model. In M.
Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 41, pp.
275–314). New York, NY: Academic Press. doi:10.1016/S00652601(08)00406-1

Received June 6, 2010
Revision received January 5, 2011
Accepted January 19, 2011 䡲

Online First Publication
APA-published journal articles are now available Online First in the PsycARTICLES database.
Electronic versions of journal articles will be accessible prior to the print publication, expediting
access to the latest peer-reviewed research.
All PsycARTICLES institutional customers, individual APA PsycNET威 database package subscribers, and individual journal subscribers may now search these records as an added benefit.
Online First Publication (OFP) records can be released within as little as 30 days of acceptance and
transfer into production, and are marked to indicate the posting status, allowing researchers to
quickly and easily discover the latest literature. OFP articles will be the version of record; the
articles have gone through the full production cycle except for assignment to an issue and
pagination. After a journal issue’s print publication, OFP records will be replaced with the final
published article to reflect the final status and bibliographic information.

Child Development, xxxx 2017, Volume 00, Number 0, Pages 1–19

Loss of Institutional Trust Among Racial and Ethnic Minority Adolescents: A
Consequence of Procedural Injustice and a Cause of Life-Span Outcomes
David S. Yeager

Valerie Purdie-Vaughns

University of Texas at Austin

Columbia University

Sophia Yang Hooper

Geoffrey L. Cohen

University of Texas at Austin

Stanford University

This research tested a social-developmental process model of trust discernment. From sixth to eighth grade,
White and African American students were surveyed twice yearly (ages 11–14; Study 1, N = 277). African
American students were more aware of racial bias in school disciplinary decisions, and as this awareness
grew it predicted a loss of trust in school, leading to a large trust gap in seventh grade. Loss of trust by
spring of seventh grade predicted African Americans’ subsequent discipline infractions and 4-year college
enrollment. Causality was conﬁrmed with a trust-restoring “wise feedback” treatment delivered in spring of
seventh grade that improved African Americans’ eighth-grade discipline and college outcomes. Correlational
ﬁndings were replicated with Latino and White students (ages 11–14; Study 2, N = 206).

I am marked by old codes, which shielded me in
one world and then chained me in the next.—TaNehisi Coates (2015), an African American father, in
a letter to his adolescent son.
A key developmental challenge in contemporary
society is to learn how to monitor, assess, and reassess the trustworthiness of institutions and ultimately make judgments about whether compliance
with institutional policies is warranted (PurdieVaughns, Steele, Davies, Ditlmann, & Crosby, 2008;
Spencer, 2006; Tyler & Blader, 2003). Adolescents
face this challenge with respect to many institutions, such as police, government, healthcare, or
businesses. Here, we focus on one setting where
Support for this research was provided by grants from the
National Science Foundation/REESE Division (Award 0723909),
the Spencer Foundation (Award 200800068), the W. T. Grant
Foundation, the Nellie Mae Education Foundation, and National
Science Foundation Grant DRL-1109548 to the last author. Writing of the manuscript was supported by a fellowship from the
Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences (CASBS)
and a William T. Grant Scholars award to the David S. Yeager.
The authors are grateful to Eric Bettinger for his assistance
obtaining National Student Clearinghouse data and to Hae Yeon
Lee for her analyses of the School and Stafﬁng Survey. Data, syntax, and results of alternative model speciﬁcations are available
online at osf.io/3hpu8.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to
Geoffrey L. Cohen or David S. Yeager. 108 E. Dean Keeton Stop
A8000, Austin, TX, 78712-1043. Electronic mail may be sent to
glc@stanford.edu or dyeager@utexas.edu.

trust discernment comes to the fore and may have
long-term consequences: racial and ethnic minority
adolescents transitioning through middle school.
On the one hand, it can be costly for an adolescent to trust an institution when it systematically
takes advantage of one’s group (Cohen & Steele,
2002; Gambetta, 1988). Indeed, in the U.S. schools,
African American and Latino youth are disproportionately subjected to mistreatment by authorities,
in the form of low expectations from teachers (see
Harber, 1998), extreme disparities in disciplinary
referrals and suspensions for minor misbehavior
(Okonofua & Eberhardt, 2015; Skiba, Michael,
Nardo, & Peterson, 2002), and even unwarranted
stops and arrests by police (see Tyler, Fagan, & Geller, 2014). Because trust of authorities is negotiated
in the context of social interactions (Lewin, Lippitt,
& White, 1939), a natural adaptation to such interactions is to withhold trust.
As illustrated by the quotation above, from TaNehisi Coates (2015) to his 14-year-old son, experiences of injustice can affect one in ways that can
make it more difﬁcult to thrive in an institution.
That is, racial and ethnic minority youth, experiencing and perceiving bias, may generalize from
© 2017 The Authors
Child Development © 2017 Society for Research in Child Development, Inc.
All rights reserved. 0009-3920/2017/xxxx-xxxx
DOI: 10.1111/cdev.12697

2

Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns, Hooper, and Cohen

speciﬁc interactions to a mental representation of
the institution as an abstract entity. Youth may then
demonstrate lower compliance with institutional
policies, accelerating a self-reinforcing cycle of punishment and loss of trust (Crocker & Major, 1989
Fagan & Tyler, 2005; Gregory & Weinstein, 2008;
Levi, Sacks, & Tyler, 2009; Tyler, Goff, & MacCoun,
2015). Exacerbating the potential for mistrust is the
racial divide that characterizes most interactions
between teachers and their students in the U.S.
According to our re-analyses of the School and
Stafﬁng Survey (Coopersmith, 2009), 70% of teachers in minority-serving schools (i.e. those with
50% or more non-white students); the ﬁgure is 96%
in predominately white-student-serving institutions). The tendency to attribute bias is greater
across racial divides than within them (Crocker &
Major, 1989); thus the demographics of most American schools may act as an affordance of mistrust.
Yet a loss of trust can become a liability if some
authority ﬁgures wish to enact fair policies, treat
racial or ethnic minority students with respect, and
help them to thrive (Gregory & Weinstein, 2008;
Okonofua, Walton, & Eberhardt, in press). When
students have lost trust, they may be deprived of
the beneﬁts of engaging with an institution, such as
positive relationships, access to resources and
opportunities for advancement, and avoidance of
punishment. Thus, racial and ethnic minority youth
may be twice harmed by institutional injustices:
They both receive the lion’s share of the initial punishment, and then may be required to psychologically adapt, through a loss of trust, in a way that
prevents them from proﬁting from instruction and
relationships.
This research seeks to understand this predicament by applying a developmental and social-psychological lens (also see Okonofua, Paunesku, &
Walton, in press; Okonofua, Walton, et al., in
press). We use data from an 8-year longitudinal
study that tracked White and African American students from sixth grade until entry into college
across two cohorts (Study 1). In addition, because
our theory is that trust is an issue for any group
that faces negative stereotypes and institutional
mistreatment, we also examine data from a 1-year,
cohort-sequential study of White and Latino middle
school students (Study 2).
Our approach integrates insights from developmental (Killen, Mulvey, & Hitti, 2013; McKown,
2013; Olson & Dweck, 2008) and social-psychological
recursive process models (Okonofua, Walton, et al.,
in press), resulting in the model shown in Figure 1.
We document the mental representations (i.e.,

institutional trust) that sit in the middle between
objective realities (i.e., racial and ethnic minority
group differences in the perceived justice of school
procedures) and developmental outcomes (i.e.,
group differences in rates of noncompliance with
school rules, or in long-term educational outcomes
such as college enrollment). We highlight how these
mental representations are shaped and then create
social reality, propelling effects forward in time.
Finally, we use a small sample, double-blind randomized experiment to test causality. We illustrate
how a timely and credible show of respect from
authorities to racial and ethnic minority youth can,
during a key developmental window, set in motion
an alternative process. This more beneﬁcial process
can culminate in improved educational behaviors
years later.
Institutional Trust Among Adults
Among adults, what causes institutional trust?
Research in social psychology (Tyler, 2006; Tyler &
Blader, 2003; Tyler et al., 2015), political science
(Levi, 1997; Levi et al., 2009), and sociology (Bryk
& Schneider, 2002; Goffman, 1963) has converged
on the conclusion that people trust an institution
more when they perceive that it is procedurally just
—that is, that it uses fair processes to make consequential decisions—and when they believe that
authorities have personal regard for individuals
served by the institution—that is, when authorities
are respectful and have one’s best interest at heart.
Notably, people do not have to have been the personal recipient of procedural justice or personal
regard to gain or lose trust (Tyler et al., 2014). It is
enough to experience it vicariously by means of
observation.
What has been missing from much previous
research, however, has been a developmental perspective. Indeed, an adolescent developmental lens
was a notable absence from recent inﬂuential
reviews of group disparities in crime and policing
(President’s Task Force on 21st Century Policing,
2015; Tyler et al., 2015). Our primary theoretical
contribution is to offer such a lens.
A Developmental Process Model of the Emergence and
Consequences of Institutional Trust
Adolescence has been described as a period of
socialization into a belief about the fairness and
legitimacy of institutions (Baumrind, 1997; Fagan &
Tyler, 2005). Positive and negative encounters with
authorities—such as discipline incidents or moments

Middle School Trust Gap
Developmental Processes

Social-Psychological Processes
Social Reality

Trust
"Adults at
This School
Are Not Fair"

Social-Cognitive Ability for
Abstraction

Pubertal Hormone-Sensitized
Vigilance to Fairness and Respect

Teacher
Criticizes
Student's
Work

Example 2

Low Trust

Social
Reality
Social
Reality
Institutional Trust

Developmental Antecdents
Racial
Awareness

Social
Reality

Mental Representation

Group
Example 1
Disparities in
School
Discipline
and Grades

3

Mental
Representation
of Institution

Social
Reality
Mental
Representation
of Institution

Student Does Not
Revise, Gets Low
Grade

Social
Reality
Mental
Representation
of Institution

Outcomes
Behavioral
Noncompliance
Disidentification
With School

Mental
Representation
of Institution

Poorer
Performance
Mental
Representation
of Institution

"Wise
Feedback"

Lower Human
Capital

Time
(During Adolescence)

Figure 1. A social-developmental recursive process model of trust discernment during adolescence.

of criticism—are “teachable moments,” for good or
ill (Baumrind, 1997; Fagan & Tyler, 2005; Tyler
et al., 2014). Of course, even young children are able
to discern whether to trust another person (Vanderbilt, Liu, & Heyman, 2011) and are aware of racial
and ethnic group membership (see Brown & Bigler,
2005). Why then might adolescence be a special period for institutional trust discernment?
To trust—or distrust—an institution, one must
notice and assign generalized meaning to authorities’ negative treatment of members of one’s group
and attribute it to a bias in the institution as an
abstract actor (the school, or school in general) not
just to an individual actor (a speciﬁc teacher). Several developmental antecedents make adolescents
prepared to do this (see the top left panel in Figure 1).
Changes During Adolescence
Adolescents are increasingly capable of mentally
representing unseen, abstract policies in an institution as the cause of unfair treatment, whereas children may be more attuned to the negative attitudes
of speciﬁc authority ﬁgures acting as individuals
(see Brown & Bigler, 2005; Spencer, 2006). Next,
adolescence is a period marked by questioning
whether to obey adults’ commands (Laupa, Turiel,
& Cowan, 1995) or ignoring them altogether (for an
eample from neurosicence, see Lee, Siegle, Dahl,
Hooley, & Silk, 2014). Third, adolescents may
undergo pubertal changes that can heighten a

sensitivity to the possibility of being disrespected
by adult authorities. The pubertal surge in testosterone and other hormones among boys and girls
(see Peper & Dahl, 2013) is thought to increase
attention to, reactivity to, and memory for experiences of being disrespected or made to feel low status (see Terburg & van Honk, 2013).
Developments Speciﬁc to Minority Youth
As they mature, adolescents undergo these
changes regardless of ethnic group membership.
However, by the start of middle school, negatively
stereotyped ethnic minority adolescents are also
more likely than White peers to be racially and ethnically aware—that is, to have conscious appraisals
about how different racial and ethnic groups are
evaluated and treated by the larger society (Ruble
et al., 2004; Sellers, Copeland-Linder, Martin, &
Lewis, 2006; Spencer, 2006; Swanson, Cunningham,
Youngblood, & Spencer, 2009). Long before they
get to sixth grade, children and teachers stereotype
African American children as aggressive (Sagar &
Schoﬁeld, 1980), and children take note. By early
adolescence, African American students report
occurrences of others perceiving them as a threat
(Sellers et al., 2006), and the overwhelming majority
are aware of negative stereotypes about their
group’s intelligence or behavior by the beginning of
middle school, even as their White peers are unaware (Bigler, Averhart, & Liben, 2003; McKown &
Weinstein, 2003).

4

Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns, Hooper, and Cohen

Negatively stereotyped racial and ethnic
minority adolescents may therefore enter middle
school prepared to attribute unfair treatment to
group membership rather than group-irrelevant
factors and do so more readily than White peers
(Crocker & Major, 1989, McKown & Weinstein,
2003; also see Cohen & Garcia, 2005). This preparedness then meets social reality in the form
of disparate punishment and remediation in
school (Okonofua & Eberhardt, 2015; see Skiba
et al., 2002). Even when students themselves are
not subjected to disparate treatment, vicarious
experiences of group members offer a window
into the potential unfairness endemic to the institution (see Bigler & Liben, 2006).
Recursive Process
Like a stone rolling down a hill that triggers an
avalanche, the loss of trust—especially among
members of negatively stereotyped minority groups
—could accumulate behavioral consequences over
time (see Roberts & Caspi, 2003; Spencer, 2006), as
illustrated in the right panel of Figure 1. For members of stereotyped groups, disparities in treatment
in a given institution can amplify signals of unfairness and disrespect (Crocker & Major, 1989, PurdieVaughns et al., 2008), while obscuring signals of
fair treatment (Harber, 1998), accelerating loss of
trust, and its potential negative consequences
(Okonofua, Walton, et al., in press).
Social-psychological process models emphasize
the importance of attributions in this feedback loop
(Cohen & Steele, 2002; Okonofua, Walton, et al., in
press; see the left panels in Figure 1). If adolescents experience procedural injustice or disrespect,
they may come to expect it. If they expect it, they
will tend to see it. If they see it, they will tend to
expect more (cf. Lord, Ross, & Lepper, 1979). Seeing and expecting injustice and disrespect, negatively stereotyped ethnic minority adolescents may
disengage, defy authorities, underperform, and act
out. This process may culminate in greater disciplinary incidents and lower academic attainment,
even among ethnic minority adolescents who
began middle school motivated and capable of
succeeding (Gregory & Weinstein, 2008; Okonofua,
Walton, et al., in press; Spencer, 2006).
Our process model offers an alternative to deﬁcit
models of adolescent behavior problems. It does
not posit deﬁciencies in executive function, cultural
mismatches between school contexts and ethnic
minority families. Nor does it posit a developmentally deterministic path in which adolescents

inevitably rebel against adult authority. These may
play a role but the causal action in our model is in
the interaction between social reality and psychology. A loss of trust and its behavioral consequences
are often reasonable adaptations to an environment
of disrespect and procedural injustice (Spencer,
2006; Swanson et al., 2009). This adaptation can
have long-term consequences when left unaddressed. However, as a mental representation, trust
can be improved through timely intervention (see
Olson & Dweck, 2008).
Slowing a Loss of Trust Through “Wise” Strategies
That Respect Youth
What might prevent a loss of trust in adolescence? “Wise” strategies can accomplish this. They
convey to students that they will be neither treated
nor judged in light of a negative stereotype but will
instead be respected and treated as a valuable individual (Cohen & Steele, 2002; Goffman, 1963). If
such a signal was offered during sensitive periods
for trust formation, it might create accumulating
positive consequences, by means of a virtuous
recursive cycle rather than a vicious one (Yeager &
Walton, 2011).
The term “wise” was originally formulated by
Goffman (1963) in his analysis of social stigma. To
be “wise” is the act of seeing stigmatized individuals in their full humanity, which enables an openness and honesty when one interacts with them.
Ethnographic accounts of exceptional teachers
show how wise practitioners build trust with and
motivate members of stigmatized groups (e.g., Lepper & Woolverton, 2002; Treisman, 1992; see Gregory & Weinstein, 2008). Such teachers have been
described as “warm demanders” (Vasquez, 1988)
and “compassionate disciplinarians” (Irvine, 2003),
meaning that they are distinguished by their ability
to combine high performance standards with high
personal regard for students’ well-being. One student described a “wise” teacher this way: “When
she talk to you with seriousness, she mean [sic] it,
but then she also have a smile like ‘I’m on your
side” (Gregory & Weinstein, 2008).
In large-scale survey studies, this combination of
high standards and personal care predicted higher
achievement for negatively stereotyped and socioeconomically disadvantaged youth (Gregory &
Weinstein, 2004; Shouse, 1996). Furthermore, in a
daily diary study, African American students who
reported experiencing both high expectations and
feelings of personal care were the most likely to
report that they trusted their teacher (Gregory &

Middle School Trust Gap

Weinstein, 2008, Study 2)—regardless of the teacher’s racial and ethnic group.
Research has distilled the practices of wise mentors to investigate them experimentally. Cohen,
Steele, and Ross (1999) showed that when African
American students were required to endure tough
criticism on an essay, they beneﬁtted from learning
that the teacher was critical not because of bias but
because of his stated desire to hold them to a
higher standard (procedural justice) and his belief
that they were capable of meeting that higher standard (personal regard). This message—called “wise
feedback”—increased African American college students’ motivation and reduced their attributions of
bias (Cohen et al., 1999). In these experiments, wise
feedback clariﬁed that the critical feedback originated in the critic’s positive motivations rather than
bias. In these experiments, wise feedback clariﬁed
that the critical feedback originated in the critic’s
belief in the student’s potential rather than bias. By
changing attributions in this manner, the intervention turned what might have otherwise been seen
as negative feedback into positive feedback. This
wise feedback method was later tested in a behavioral ﬁeld study that affected African American seventh-grade students’ institutional trust and
motivation (Yeager et al., 2014). Yeager et al. (2014)
showed that a single hand-written note from students’ social studies teacher, appended to an essay
they had written, and pithily but credibly conveying the teacher’s high standards and belief in students’ capacity to reach them, increased from 17%
to 72% the proportion of African American adolescents who revised their critiqued essays a week
later (covariate-adjusted values). Furthermore,
2.5 months later, the note halted the semester-oversemester decline in trust for African American
seventh graders who, at baseline, had begun to
mistrust school.
In this research (Study 1), we analyze additional
longitudinal data from the same data set originally
reported by Yeager et al. (2014; Studies 1 and 2).
We look at the implications of an experience of
wise feedback on African American adolescents’
subsequent disciplinary infractions and eventual 4year college enrollment.
This Research
We test whether disciplinary outcomes in school,
and the sense of procedural injustice they give rise
to, predict a loss of institutional trust for negatively
stereotyped racial and ethnic minority adolescents
(Figure 1, top left panel), and whether this loss in

5

turn predicts greater awareness of procedural justice, starting a feedback loop (Figure 1, right panel).
We assume but do not measure developmental
antecedents that can facilitate this process, such as
racial and ethnic awareness, social-cognitive ability,
and the start of puberty (Figure 1, top left panel).
We then test whether middle school adolescents’
trust predicts their later behavioral outcomes—their
discipline incidents in eighth grade and their eventual enrollment at a 4-year college (bottom right of
Figure 1).
Finally, as noted, we take advantage of a randomized experimental intervention embedded in
this correlational study, to test causality. Can wise
critical feedback from a teacher, which has already
been shown to sever the effect of academic mistrust
on subsequent willingness to revise an essay and
later mistrust (Yeager et al., 2014, Studies 1 and 2),
set in motion a virtuous recursive cycle? We
explored whether a wise hand-written note from a
teacher, known to convey respect and build trust
(cf. Gregory & Weinstein, 2008), might set in
motion a process that leads to greater behavioral
compliance the subsequent year as well as greater
eventual enrollment at a 4-year college (also see
Okonofua, Paunesku, et al., in press).

Study 1
Method
Participants
Survey sample. A total of N = 277 students in
two consecutive cohorts (Fall of 2004 and 2005)
were recruited from a middle-class to lower-middle-class public middle school in the northeast
region of the United States and surveyed twice
yearly from sixth to eighth grade. The overall
school population was split evenly between African
American and White students. Twenty-two percent
were eligible for free or reduced-price lunch, an
indicator of socioeconomic status. Fifty-two percent
of the students were female; 48% were African
Americans, and 52% were White. Not all students
completed all measures, so degrees of freedom varied across analyses.
Experimental subsample. In the spring of seventh
grade in each cohort, a subsample of 44 students
(88 total) with “B” or “C” grades participated in a
randomized experimental intervention in their
social studies classrooms. The focus on “B” and
“C” students was motivated by the fact that the
intervention conveyed to students that they were

6

Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns, Hooper, and Cohen

able to reach a higher standard. This message, it
was expected, would lack credibility in the eyes of
very low-performing students and seem redundant
in the eyes of very high-performing students, who
were already, by and large, reaching a higher standard (Yeager et al., 2014).
All social studies teachers were white. This
matches the modal experience for students in the
U.S., as noted previously.
In each cohort, n = 11 students from each racial
group (White and African American) were assigned
either to a treatment condition or placebo control
condition, yielding 22 total per racial group per
condition. These constituted the “experimental subsample” (for extensive detail on this subsample, see
Yeager et al., 2014, Studies 1–2).
Procedure
Survey sample. Students were surveyed in the
spring and fall of sixth, seventh, and eighth grades
(six total surveys). At the end of the middle school
years, data on discipline incidents and school
grades were collected from the school registrar. College enrollment data (whether students enrolled in
the year after high school and whether it was a 4year college or not) were obtained 6 years after
middle school through the National Student Clearinghouse (NSC).
Experimental subsample. The “wise feedback”
intervention was designed to be an antidote to mistrust of teachers. No intervention could fully dispel
concerns about racial bias. Instead, this treatment
was aimed to interrupt the reciprocally reinforcing
relationship between perceived bias and mistrust
(Figure 1). Because the process depends on a continual feedback loop, even a minor interruption
could have beneﬁts that persist and compound with
time. The intervention altered students’ construals
of an acute experience with the potential to increase
mistrust: the receipt of teachers’ critical feedback on
an essay they had written. Such feedback could
plausibly be attributed to either negative or positive
factors, such as bias or a belief in one’s ability to
reach a higher standard (Cohen & Steele, 2002). The
treatment sought to promote the latter judgment.
In spring of seventh grade, in the context of their
social studies class, students wrote an essay about a
personal hero. Their initial draft received thorough
critical feedback from their teachers, accompanied
by whatever encouragement the teacher felt
inclined to give. Before students received their edited essay, the research team appended one of two
notes to the essays of the participating students.

Both notes had been hand written by the teacher in
advance. In a placebo control condition, the note stated, “I’m giving you these comments so that you’ll
have feedback on your paper,” which fulﬁlls the
grammatical expectation to provide an explanation
but conveys no information relevant to the trustworthiness of the criticism. In the wise feedback condition, the note stated, “I’m giving you these
comments because I have very high expectations
and I know that you can reach them.” A blank
piece of paper covered the notes and edited essays
to keep peers and teachers blind to condition.
Over the next week, students had the opportunity to revise their essays, which most did. Yeager
et al. (2014) previously reported that the randomly
assigned “wise feedback” note increased African
American students’ likelihood of revising their
essays and improved the quality of their revisions.
For instance, it doubled the number of teacher-suggested edits that students implemented. Furthermore, 3 months posttreatment, African American
students with low levels of baseline trust showed a
less steep decline in trust in the treatment condition
than in the control condition.
Survey Measures
School trust. Trust was assessed with six questions (e.g., “I am treated fairly by teachers and
other adults at my school,” “Students in my racial
group are treated fairly by teachers and other
adults at [school name] middle school;” 1 = very
much disagree, 6 = very much agree). Items were averaged at each wave (all as > .70), with higher values
indicating greater trust.
Awareness of bias in enforcement of school policies. Students reported their belief that racial bias
intruded in school disciplinary decisions—and thus
providing a measure of procedural injustice—using
two items written speciﬁcally for this study (“If a
Black or a White [school name] student is alone in
the hallway during class time, which one would a
teacher ask for a hall pass?” and “If a Black and a
White [school name] student do something wrong,
who is more likely to get in trouble for it?” Rated
on a 5-point scale; 1 = almost always the black student
instead of the white student; 3 = both of them about the
same; 5 = almost always the white student instead of the
black student). Only 2% of all participants ever gave
a response > 3, which would have indicated proAfrican American bias. Therefore, the measure is
best interpreted as perceptions of anti-African
American bias. The two items were averaged, with
higher values corresponding to a greater

Middle School Trust Gap

expectation of unjust treatment (a > .70). We then
reverse coded the composite score, with higher values corresponding to a greater expectation of procedural injustice. The modal response was “about the
same,” with over 55% of students at each wave
providing a rating of 3. Data could thus be analyzed either in their original continuous form or
dichotomized. Although we used the former
method, substantive results were unchanged with
the latter.
School records. From school records we obtained
the following data for each student: their gender, the
number of disciplinary incidents in each of the three
middle school years (range: 0–34), and grade point
averages (GPAs) in core classes (math, science,
social studies, and English or reading; range: 0 [F]
to 4.33 [A+]) for each academic quarter of each of
the three school years. As is common in this kind
of administrative data, disciplinary incidents were
nonnormal due to large numbers of students with 0
incidents and few with very many (> 20). To better
normalize the distribution, high outliers were
recoded to the 98th percentile and then the overall
metric was square root transformed. However, substantive results were unchanged when this was not
done (i.e., signiﬁcant results in the article were signiﬁcant in the raw data as well). In addition, for the
ﬁrst cohort only, the school provided data on the
reason for each disciplinary action.
College enrollment. College enrollment data were
obtained from the NSC. NSC is a nonproﬁt database that reports on students receiving ﬁnancial aid
to both private and federal loan providers, and as a
result it tracks college enrollment and degree attainment for the vast majority of college students in
America. Researchers conducting program evaluation in partnership with schools, as in this case, can
obtain participating students’ college enrollment
data. In the Northeast region of the United States,
where nearly all participating students attended college, the coverage rate for African American students attending public 4-year institutions was
99.6%, at public 2-year institutions it was 99.2%,
and at private nonproﬁt institutions it was 97%
(Dynarski, Hemelt, & Hyman, 2013).
The primary outcome of interest was on time
enrollment at a 4-year college (1 = enrolled at a 4-year
college the year after high school; 0 = did not),
which was the appropriate measure for the middleachieving (B and C average) students who participated in the experiment. Exploratory analyses also
focused on whether students enrolled in college at
all; roughly 70% of students in this middle-class
school had records the year after high school,

7

indicating college enrollment. Just over two thirds
of these students enrolled in a 4-year college.
Covariates. Covariates used in all structural
equation models were as follows: students’ gender,
cohort, and prior achievement. The latter was an average of students’ state test scores in the ﬁrst month of
sixth grade and their prior grades. To ensure that
this achievement measures represented baseline values, the correlational analyses, which began with
data from the fall of sixth grade, used ﬁfth-grade
GPA, whereas analyses of the experimental treatment, implemented in the spring of seventh grade,
used GPA from the fall of seventh grade. College
enrollment models, which as described below used
seventh- and eighth-grade measures, also controlled
for prior (sixth grade) trust.
Results
The software Mplus was used for all structural
models. Full information maximum likelihood was
used to estimate parameters without discarding or
imputing missing data. For models predicting
school discipline (a count variable), Poisson regression was used. Additional detail on all statistical
models can be found in the Supporting Information, and syntax is posted online (osf.io/3hpu8).
The Emergence of the Middle School Racial Trust Gap
In a growth curve model, including all students
from both racial groups, trust decreased from
Grades 6 to 8, slope: unstandardized b = 0.13,
p < .001, 95% CI [ 0.17, 0.09]. The model ﬁt the
data acceptably: v2(29) = 83.45, p < .001; root mean
square error of approximation (RMSEA) = .08, 90%
CI [0.06, 0.10]; and comparative ﬁt index (CFI) = .93.
However, trust declined faster for African American students, producing a racial trust gap. Figure 2
shows that there was no signiﬁcant trust gap
between African American and White students in
sixth grade, but the gap emerged by fall of seventh
grade. Student race signiﬁcantly predicted the slope
from sixth to eighth grades in a latent growth curve
model, unstandardized b = 0.06, p = .028, 95% CI
[ 0.11, 0.01]. This steeper loss of trust for African
American students led to signiﬁcant race-based differences in trust by seventh and eighth grade.
Predictors of the Trust Gap
Does age alone account for the trust gap?. If age
alone—and not school experiences—accounted for
the emergence of the trust gap across the middle

8

Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns, Hooper, and Cohen

Figure 2. The racial and ethnic trust gap emerges in seventh grade and is largest in spring of seventh grade in Studies 1 and 2.
Note. Values are covariate adjusted, controlling for premiddle school achievement, gender, and cohort. p-values are from t-tests;
d = Cohen’s d. Results are from independent regression models.

school years, then one might expect the decline in
trust over middle school to be a monotonically
decreasing linear function. However, when inspecting Figure 2, the change in trust in the summer is
mostly ﬂat or positive, whereas the change in trust
during the school year mostly slopes downward.
This is consistent with the explanation that loss of
trust emerges from experiences in school not processes tied to chronological age or pubertal maturation alone.

To test this formally, in another growth model
conducted with all students, we estimated a “school
year” slope and a “summer” slope by ﬁxing weights
on two latent slope variables (“School year:” fall
sixth grade = 0, spring sixth grade and fall seventh
grade = 1, spring seventh grade and fall eighth
grade = 2, spring eighth grade = 3, “Summer:” fall
sixth grade and spring sixth grade = 0, fall seventh
grade and spring seventh grade = 1, and fall eighth
grade and spring eighth grade = 2). The model ﬁt

Middle School Trust Gap

the data acceptably: v2(22) = 48.95, p < .001;
RMSEA = .07, 90% CI [0.04, 0.09]; and CFI = .97.
For all students, “school year” trust declined signiﬁcantly over time, unstandardized b = 0.32,
p < .001, 95% CI [ 0.42, 0.22], and “summer”
trust did not, unstandardized b = 0.10, p = .092,
95% CI [ 0.02, 0.21]. A Wald test of parameter constraints showed that the “school year” decline was
steeper than the “summer” decline, W = 17.01,
df = 1, p < .001.
Moreover, student race signiﬁcantly predicted
the latent “school year” slope, unstandardized
b = 0.10, p = .036, 95% CI [ 0.18, 0.01]; model
ﬁt: v2(26) = 54.39, p < .001; RMSEA = .06, 90% CI
[0.04, 0.09]; CFI = .96, and not predict the summer
slope (p = .088). In sum, African American students
lost more trust during the school year than their
White peers. They did not lose more trust over the
summer.
Which school experiences might account for the
growth of the trust gap?
Procedural injustice in school discipline. Students
may discern whether to trust the school based on
the social reality of whether suspicion and punishments primarily target members of their racial and
ethnic minority groups. Students’ private grades
may matter as well (which is why we control for
them), but discipline-related events, such as a teacher sending a student to the principal, are more
readily observable to all children.
Ofﬁcial records revealed that African American
students received signiﬁcantly more discipline
throughout middle school. This was true at every
grade level in the continuous data and when
inspecting a dichotomous measure of whether a
student had any incident at all (sixth grade:
White = 24%, African American = 55%; seventh
grade: White = 40%, African American = 67%;
eighth grade: White = 41%; African American = 69%). Although disciplinary events rose with
time for both racial groups, the largest race gap
was apparent in sixth grade.
This racial group difference does not appear to
be driven by differences in social class or in academic achievement. In a Poisson regression predicting number of discipline incidents in sixth to eighth
grades with student race and relevant covariates
(see above) a substantial student race gap in discipline remained, unstandardized b = 0.90 events, t
(269) = 13.78, p < .001, 95% CI [0.77, 1.03], and this
was relatively undiminished compared with the
race gap with no covariates (raw gap: 5.8 incidents,
covariate-adjusted gap: 4.16 incidents). Thus, on the
basis of the allocation of punishment in this school,

9

African American students may have wondered
whether the rules of the institution were being
applied fairly to their group.
This is especially apparent when limiting analyses to what we call “judgment call” incidents—operationally, “deﬁance” and “disobedience,” as
coded by the school. In much prior research, there
has been no group disparity in discipline for more
objectively apparent infractions—such as bringing a
weapon to school—but African American students
were far more likely to be disciplined for subjective
infractions such as disrespect, disobedience, loitering, or excessive noise (Gregory & Weinstein, 2008;
Skiba et al., 2002). Students’ levels of trust may be
more affected by subjective than objective incidents.
To be disciplined for an objectively apparent matter, like ﬁghting, is difﬁcult to quarrel with. But to
be disciplined for talking out of turn, and to see fellow African Americans more frequently sentenced
to such disciplinary measures, is perhaps more
likely to raise questions about teachers’ trustworthiness.
In the ﬁrst cohort, the only cohort with school
codes for incident type, African American students
outnumbered their White peers roughly three to
one for deﬁance or disobedience (25% vs. 8%,
respectively), a signiﬁcant difference v2(1) = 6.52,
p = .012, and one that corresponds to the group difference in an analyses of all 17 middle schools in a
large district (Skiba et al., 2002). For objective incidents such as cheating, ﬁghting, or obscene gestures, the race gap was not signiﬁcant, (7% vs. 4%),
v2(1) = 0.56, p = .453.
Awareness of bias in enforcement of school policies. In addition to receiving more discipline, African American students also perceived bias in
disciplinary sentencing (see Figure 2). Analyses of
the awareness of bias survey items showed that
African American students were more likely to
expect that they, and not their White peers, would
be disciplined for the same events (e.g., being in the
hallway without a hall pass), at every measurement
occasion, ps < .05. White students, by contrast, saw
no bias in discipline. At every measurement occasion except the last one, 80% of White students
expected equal treatment for White and African
American students (Figure 2). Only at the end of
eighth grade did White students show a signiﬁcant
tendency to see bias against African Americans, but
they still saw less bias than African American students did at the beginning of sixth grade, as shown
in Figure 2. By contrast, for African American students, fewer than 55% expected equal treatment at
every wave except the ﬁrst month of sixth grade.

10

Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns, Hooper, and Cohen

Figure 3. Recursive processes in awareness of bias and school trust among African American middle school students: a parallel growth
curve analysis in Study 1.
Note. Unstandardized coefﬁcients. Covariates were gender, prior achievement (ﬁfth-grade grade point average and fall sixth-grade test
scores), and cohort. “Awareness of bias” is coded so that higher values correspond to greater expectations of equal treatment (i.e., lower
awareness of bias), matching Figure 2, so that all correlations with trust were expected to be positive. ***p < .001.

Recursive process. A parallel growth curve model
explored the relationship between African American students’ awareness of bias in disciplinary decisions and their level of trust. The model estimated
a latent intercept at fall of sixth grade as well as a
latent slope from that point until spring of eighth
grade, separately for both awareness of bias and
trust (Figure 3).
We found evidence consistent with the recursive
process displayed in Figure 1. African American
students who reported greater awareness of disciplinary bias (reverse-coded) in the fall of sixth
grade also reported lower trust at the same time
point (i.e., the intercepts were correlated), unstandardized b = 0.68, t(132) = 3.97, p < .001, 95% CI
[0.28, 1.054]. Next, a change in awareness of bias
(reverse-coded) predicted a concurrent change in
trust (i.e., the slopes were correlated), b = 1.79,
t(132) = 7.58, p < .001, 95% CI [0.96, 2.61] (these
results were no different when estimating the
“school year” slopes only). These correlational data
do not isolate which of the two constructs, mistrust
or awareness of disciplinary bias, have temporal
causal precedence, but rather demonstrate their
pattern of reciprocal reinforcement through time.
Furthermore, if perceived bias and mistrust reinforced each other, then perceived bias should
increase with time. Indeed, the growth curve model

found a signiﬁcant slope for awareness of bias (not
reverse-coded), unstandardized b = 0.06, p = .002,
showing that African American adolescents
perceived increasingly high levels of bias through
middle school. This was in spite of the fact, noted
previously, that the objective size of the gap in
disciplinary sentencing, if anything, decreased with
time (although disciplinary events rose for all
students, regardless of race, over time). In sum,
students who were more aware of bias reported
lower trust, and students who became more aware
of bias lost more trust—and vice versa.
This process did not appear to be driven by students who were the most likely to be disciplined.
Controlling for students’ ﬁfth-grade discipline incidents did not change the signiﬁcance levels of
either of these results. Moreover, there was no
interaction involving ﬁfth-grade discipline (in a
multiple-group analysis), suggesting that the patterns held for students with a history of disciplinary
problems and those without one. Furthermore, African American students showed a signiﬁcant decline
in trust (i.e., a signiﬁcant slope) even when conﬁned to those who never received a disciplinary
infraction during middle school. These supplemental analyses dovetail with past research suggesting
that vicarious awareness of procedural injustice can
affect institutional trust, even when one has not

Middle School Trust Gap

been the direct recipient of unfair treatment (Fagan
& Tyler, 2005).
Does a Loss of Trust Predict Future Discipline
Incidents?
What implications might the loss of school trust
have for future behavior? A series of regression
analyses found that lower trust each spring was
associated with disciplinary behavior the following
year. Poisson regressions predicting discipline incidents showed that lower trust in the spring of sixth
and seventh grades predicted African American
students’ discipline incidents in the subsequent
year: spring sixth-grade trust predicting seventhgrade discipline, b = 0.26, t(109) = 5.53, p < .001,
95% CI [ 0.35, 0.17]; spring seventh-grade trust
predicting eighth grade discipline, b = 0.22, t
(102) = 4.172, p < .001, 95% CI [ 0.32,
0.12].
Hence, one year’s level of institutional trust predicted the next year’s level of behavioral deﬁance
of institutional policies.
Long-Term Consequences of Loss of Trust
Did a loss in trust predict long-term developmental outcomes? We estimated residual scores
from regressions of spring trust on fall trust, for
each of the three school years: sixth, seventh, and
eighth. Lower values correspond to a greater loss of
trust. The advantage of the residual score is that it
is independent of either of the two scores used to
compute it (supplementary analyses using raw
change scores yielded the same substantive results).
Seventh-grade residual trust scores predicted on
time enrollment at a 4-year college for African
American students, standardized b = .19, Z = 2.26,
p = .024, 95% CI [0.025, 0.36], meaning that students who lost more trust than would be expected
in seventh grade were less likely to end up at a 4year college. (Similar results emerged in a supplemental ordinal regression analysis that examined
college enrollment at three levels, 0 = no college,
1 = 2-year college, 2 = 4-year college, Z = 2.38,
p = .018.) Fall eighth-grade absolute levels of trust
predicted college enrollment as well (p < .01), and
no other absolute or residual measure of trust did
(see Supporting Information).
Thus, it appears that the damage to African
American students’ trust by the end of seventh
grade or the beginning of eighth grade signiﬁcantly
predicted whether they made it to a 4-year college
the year after high school. Crucially, this was true
even after controlling for relevant predictors of

11

college enrollment such as premiddle school academic performance. In contrast, trust spring residual scores or within-year change scores in any year
were not associated with college enrollment for
White students (see Figure S5).
Effect of the “Wise Feedback” Intervention
One limitation with the analyses reported so far
is endogeneity. Students’ social realities in their
institutions, their mental representations of them,
and their behaviors over time occur in a mutually
causal system, creating a confound for causal inference. We are fortunate, however, that it was possible to supplement a portion of the correlational
analysis with an experimental one. As noted, students were randomly assigned at the individual
level to receive trust-sustaining “wise feedback”
from their seventh-grade teacher in the context of a
potentially unfair interpersonal event: being criticized on a writing assignment (recall that, in a previous article reporting on these data, the note
sustained African American students’ trust at
the end of seventh grade; Yeager et al., 2014,
Studies 1–2).
Eighth-grade discipline. Receiving a trust-sustaining “wise feedback” intervention in the spring of
seventh grade signiﬁcantly reduced African American students’ eighth-grade discipline incidents, t
(43) = 2.96, p = .005, d = .67. There was no effect
for White students (p = .75), and the Race 9 Condition interaction was signiﬁcant, t(81) = 2.04,
p = .045. Figure 4 reports raw and covariateadjusted means. In the control condition, African
American students received four times more disciplinary citations as compared to White students. In
the treatment group that gap was halved. These
results represent a conceptual replication of
research that has changed teachers’ chronic behaviors, improving students’ feelings that teachers
respected them, thus reducing race-related discipline disparities (Gregory et al., in press; Okonofua,
Paunesku, et al., in press).
These results support the theory presented in
Figure 1, which contends that adolescents engage
in inductive reasoning on the basis of interpersonal interactions but, after forming a mental
model, are also partly top–down in their assessments of future attributionally ambiguous interactions. Here, a trust-restoring experience with a
single teacher in seventh grade affected discipline
in eighth grade, even as students entered into new
interactions with different teachers and authority
ﬁgures in the school (for analogous year-over-year

12

Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns, Hooper, and Cohen

Figure 4. Longitudinal effects of trust-restoring “wise feedback” intervention (administered spring of seventh grade) on eighth-grade
discipline incidents and on time enrollment in a 4-year college 5½ years postintervention, in Study 1.
Note. Covariates include prior achievement (grade point average and test scores), preintervention trust, gender, and cohort. Covariateadjusted values for each racial group estimated at the mean for each racial group.

effects, see Gregory et al., in press). This suggests
that it is possible to interrupt or at least slow the
top-down appraisals that contribute to worsening
mistrust.
College enrollment. Next, the wise feedback intervention in spring of seventh grade—the period
when we found that changes in trust were most
predictive of college outcomes—signiﬁcantly
increased African American students’ likelihood of
attending a 4-year college the year immediately following high school, 5.5 years posttreatment,
Z = 2.58, p = .010 (Covariate-adjusted values: Control = 40%, Wise feedback = 70%, see Figure 4 for
raw values). Gender, prior achievement, and prior
trust all signiﬁcantly predicted college enrollment,
but cohort did not; removing the latter did not

change the signiﬁcance of the treatment effect
(p = .01). Treatment effects for White students were
nonsigniﬁcant (p < .5).
There were no treatment effects on whether adolescents enrolled at any college at all (2 or 4 years),
Z = 0.16, p = .880, only on 4-year college enrollment. In a supplemental ordinal regression analysis
when 0 = no college enrollment, 1 = 2-year college,
and 2 = 4-year college, the treatment effect was
marginally signiﬁcant, Z = 1.69, p = .092.
Recall, however, that this experiment was conducted among the subset of “B” and “C” average
students who were already more likely to attend
college than students with lower grades, and so
there was range restriction. Within the subset of
those who attended any college at all (N = 37 of

Middle School Trust Gap

44), we analyzed treatment effects on 4-year college
enrollment (1 = 4-year college, 0 = 2-year college,
NA = not enrolled in college). In that analysis,
effects of the wise feedback treatment were stronger, Z = 2.95, p = .003, with covariates. Thus, at
least in our small sample of middle-class “B” and
“C” African American students who eventually
attended college, the trust-sustaining “wise-feedback” intervention resulted in greater likelihood of
attending 4-year college instead of a 2-year college.

Study 2
Method
Participants and Procedures
Study 2 was a 1-year cohort sequential study
that followed the entire middle school (sixth, seventh, and eighth grade) at a rural school in Colorado for 1 year (N = 206). Students were either
Hispanic or Latino (44%) or White (56%). Unlike
Study 1, the negatively-stereotyped ethnic minority
students were largely working class. These differences between the studies permitted us to assess
the generality of our ﬁndings to a new negatively
stereotyped group (Latino Americans) that was
relatively economically disadvantaged and living in
an altogether different geographic location from the
students in Study 1.
Survey procedures were analog to Study 1. Adolescents completed fall and spring survey measures
assessing school trust and awareness of procedural
injustice, identical to Study 1, except the procedural
injustice in school policies survey measures (after
piloting) referred to “Hispanic” students, not “African American” students. Students were surveyed
only for 1 year of middle school, and because this
study was conducted years after Study 1, students
have not yet been tracked through college. Furthermore, discipline incidents in the year after the study
were not available.

13

year, was strongest for minority rather than majority students, with the largest gap in trust between
the two ethnic groups occurring in the spring of 7th
grade. Thus, analyses of school trust in a cohortsequential design with Latinos replicated Study 1’s
results with African Americans.
What Caused the Trust Gap?
Unlike Study 1, in the fall of sixth grade there
was no initial signiﬁcant Latino–white difference in
expectations of bias in application of school policies
(Figure 2). However, by the spring of sixth grade a
signiﬁcant difference emerged, and from then on
the results of Study 2 paralleled Study 1.
Next, we examined the relationship between
awareness of bias and changes in trust. Because
Study 2 is a cohort sequential design, not a true
longitudinal design like Study 1, the latent change
score model is not identiﬁed, as it requires at least
three observations. Therefore, we estimated crosslagged autoregressive models with Latino participants from all three grades (sixth, seventh, and
eighth) and tested the effects of fall awareness of
bias on spring trust.
The cross-lagged model showed that the extent
to which Latino students believed there was injustice in school discipline in the fall was a signiﬁcant
predictor of their subsequent trust of school in the
spring, in cross-lagged models (b = 0.53, p < .001;
see Figure 5). The reverse was not true, suggesting
a path from awareness of bias to trust, and not vice
versa. This path was not signiﬁcantly different for
any of the three grade levels, when constraining
paths across grade levels in a multigroup analysis
(see Supporting Information). (We have also reconducted Study 1’s analyses using cross-lagged models, and they are reported in the online supplement,
Figure S6. These yield the same conclusions, with
the exception that both paths, from trust to bias
and bias to trust, are signiﬁcant at different waves.)

Results
Emergence of the Latino–White Trust Gap in Middle
School
As in Study 1, a signiﬁcant (p < .05) ethnic group
gap in school trust emerged during fall of 7th grade
and was sustained through the end of middle
school (see Figure 2); once again, the trust gap was
not signiﬁcant in 6th grade. As in Study 1, the largest loss in trust appeared in the 7th grade school

Figure 5. Cross-lagged models show that awareness of bias in
discipline predicts subsequent lower levels of trust among Latinos
in Study 2. Unstandardized regression coefﬁcients. ***p < .001.

14

Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns, Hooper, and Cohen

These ﬁndings extend the parallel growth curve
analysis in Study 1 by showing that awareness of
bias in the fall predicts lower trust of school in the
spring.

Discussion
In a Pew Center survey of adults in the United
States, 61% of African Americans and 53% of Latinos reported low levels of trust in the fairness of
American society, as compared to only 32% of
White Americans (Taylor, Funk, & Clark, 2007).
Analog gaps exist with regard to speciﬁc U.S. institutions. For instance, 70% of African Americans
recently reported low levels of trust in the police
compared to 43% of White Americans (Gallup,
2015). Such racial and ethnic gaps in adults’ levels
of trust are large. They may appear unavoidable,
normative, and unsurprising. A key contribution of
this article is to offer a testable social and developmental psychological process model for how racial
and ethnic gaps in institutional trust emerge during
adolescence and affect long-term developmental
outcomes (Figure 1). A second contribution is to
show that such gaps and their consequences need
not be inevitable.
Speciﬁcally, this research used a theory-informed
developmental frame to understand the formation
of institutional trust among racial and ethnic minority adolescents and to explore its behavioral implications over an 8-year period. Trust declined every
semester of middle school, and this decline happened more quickly and strongly for African Americans (Study 1) and Latino (Study 2) students.
Racial and ethnic minority students’ decline in trust
was predicted by their awareness of bias—that is,
their awareness of the possibility of procedural
injustice at their school. This ﬁnding was conﬁrmed
using a parallel growth curve model (Study 1) and
a cross-lagged model (Study 2). These results are
consistent with much prior research showing that
trust is tied to perceptions of procedural justice and
predicts institutional compliance (Levi, 1997; Tyler
& Blader, 2003).
One intriguing aspect of the process shown in
Figure 1 is its recursive nature. Once students’
sense of trust or distrust was formed, it seemed to
feed off its consequences, producing perceptions of
procedural injustice that caused trust to decline further (also see Fagan & Tyler, 2005; Gregory &
Weinstein, 2008). Moreover, that decline in trust
seemed to increase the likelihood of discipline
infractions, creating the very social reality that

precipitated it. These feedback loops proceed often
hidden from the view of teachers and administrators because they unfold slowly and are partly psychological in nature. But their cumulative effect is a
large trust gap by seventh grade that disfavored
racial and ethnic minority students. Years later, the
drop in trust in the transition to seventh grade and
then eighth grade seemed to have lingering consequences, in the form of lower 4-year college enrollment for African Americans.
Trust, it seems, sat “in the middle” between
social reality and later behavioral outcomes such as
disciplinary infractions and college enrollment (cf.
Olson & Dweck, 2008). We know this from an intervention in Study 1 that experimentally bolstered
African Americans’ sense of trust in the face of
sharp criticism of their work in the seventh grade
(previously shown in Yeager et al., 2014, Study 2).
Because the link between trust and later outcomes
depends on a continual feedback loop, an early
experience that refuted the plausibility of procedural injustice had long-term effects, presumably
through a kind of developmental cascade from trust
to engagement and into educational pathways (cf.
Masten et al., 2005).
African American seventh graders who received
wise feedback on an essay—conveying that the teacher believed in their potential to reach a higher
standard, thus reassuring students that they would
be seen based on their merits rather than through
the lens of a negative stereotype about the intellectual ability of their racial group—beneﬁted. Our
intervention was based on a body of previous theoretical and empirical research (Cohen et al., 1999;
Gregory & Weinstein, 2008; Shouse, 1996) and was
timed to the emergence of the trust gap (see Cohen,
Garcia, Purdie-Vaughns, Apfel, & Brzustoski, 2009).
Although the objective experience of receiving
“wise feedback” was short, the psychological and
developmental consequences seemed long-lasting.
Adolescents receiving the note were assigned fewer
disciplinary infractions later according to ofﬁcial
records and, nearly 6 years later, were more likely
to attend a 4-year college according to the NSC.
Trust, and the trust-restoring wise feedback
intervention, did not predict subsequent college
persistence for White students (Figure S5). Why
not? For students with group-based advantages,
such as majority-group students, there may simply
be greater redundancy in the system. When one’s
group is positively stereotyped and overrepresented
in a domain, a loss of trust or a poor relationship
with a teacher might be a temporary setback but
not fatal. For a stigmatized student, however,

Middle School Trust Gap

outcomes might depend more on the accident of
having a teacher who believes in them (for an anlog
example from low-income children in early childhood, see Tucker-Drob, 2012). Thus, although the
present results offer an exciting possibility for what
might be done to prevent race-based achievement
gaps, they simultaneously act as an indictment of
the educational system, by demonstrating that
minority students’ outcomes are more contingent
on everyday experiences of respect—experiences
that may occur too rarely and by happenstance.
Limitations and Future Directions
The wise feedback experiment has limitations.
First, the evidence is based on only one school. Second, the sample size was small, and small sample
sizes can lead to false-positive ﬁndings or to overstated effect sizes when researchers have ﬂexibility
in data analysis. Here, sample size was constrained
by the number of B and C students in the two
cohorts, and analysis was constrained to be parallel
across types of analysis—correlational and experimental—which yielded similar results. In addition,
the results are robust across many (but not all) alternative model speciﬁcations (see both signiﬁcant and
nonsigniﬁcant model speciﬁcations at osf.io/3hpu8).
At the same time, the overall sample size was
approximately 70% of the longitudinal sample for
the Perry Preschool project, which has had a
tremendous inﬂuence on early childhood policy
(e.g., Heckman, 2006). Furthermore, unlike the
Perry Preschool project, in this study there were no
problems with randomization or missing data (because random assignment was effective, Yeager
et al., 2014; and outcome data were collected from
the NSC). We also note that prior psychological
interventions that initially involved a few dozen
treated students (e.g., Aronson, Fried, & Good,
2002) later showed reproducible ﬁndings when conducted with many thousands of students (Paunesku
et al., 2015) and when analyses were preregistered
and data were collected by third-party research
ﬁrms (Yeager, Romero, et al., 2016).
Nevertheless, it will be important for future
experiments to reproduce our method with a larger
sample and in more heterogeneous contexts. Doing
this will not be without challenges. The present
experiments require working closely with schools
over several years to guide teachers in designing
assignments and hand-writing personal notes to
students, and tracking these students over the ensuing 6 years. Moreover, we know very little about
what contextual conditions might moderate the

15

effects of wise feedback, but we imagine they are
plentiful.
Although we have focused on the middle school
transition, the processes documented here did not
begin in sixth grade and do not stop in eighth
grade. It will be critical in future research to understand how to prevent experiences of racial and ethnic discrimination that begin early in childhood and
also to develop methods to regain racial and ethnic
minority students’ trust after they transition to high
school. For instance, one possibility is that students
reengage their potential to trust when they transition to a novel institution—asking themselves
whether the “old codes” apply or not (cf. Coates,
2015). Perhaps timely intervention at later life transitions might approximate the effects of the wise
feedback intervention documented here (for an
example among college students, e.g., Yeager, Walton, et al., 2016).
We emphasize that our theoretical model does
not “psychologize” the social problem of racial disparities in discipline and college enrollment. Nor
does it “sociologize” it and ascribe outcomes solely
to unalterable structural causes. It is, as we show in
Figure 1, the interaction of structure with psyche
that drives outcomes over time (Cohen, Garcia, &
Goyer, 2017). School presents a social reality to
which all students, especially negatively stereotyped minority groups, must psychologically adapt.
That psychological adaptation, in turn, can reinforce
the social reality, as when African American middle
school students act out against a system they perceive as unjust. It is neither the attributes of the
child, such as a troublesome nature or a behavioral
disorder, nor the social environment alone that is
the driver of inequality. Rather it is the unfolding
transaction between the child and the environment
(Cohen et al., 2017; Gregory & Weinstein, 2008;
Okonofua, Walton, et al., in press).
Our approach echoes Bronfenbrenner’s (1977)
early formulation of ecological systems theory and
aligns with contemporary social-cognitive theories
of development (Olson & Dweck, 2008). Mental
representations, the product of observing and interacting with a social context, continue to exert an
inﬂuence on development for years to come. Yet by
the logic of causal mediation, intervening in a
timely way slowed the psychological accretions of
injustice and lessened its lasting harm.
Our theoretical perspective is consistent with
phenomenological variants on ecological systems
theories, which address the social, structural, cultural, and historical contexts in which youth
develop (Spencer, 2006). A mental model of trust

16

Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns, Hooper, and Cohen

can act as a protective factor or a risk factor. Trust
allows a person to reap the rewards of engagement
with the system, but it also puts them at risk of
being taken advantage of. Trust, absent justice,
might be misplaced, but well-placed trust can help
people thrive. Hence, institutions would do well to
simultaneously improve fairness and reduce bias
while also addressing the psychological legacy of
previous injustices. Said differently, wise feedback
is not, on its own, the solution to race gaps in discipline. Schools and teachers need to be trustworthy.
When they are, then wise feedback can help clear
the attributional air and redirect students’ working
mental models of the institution, so that students
can proﬁt from the relationships and instruction in
their schools.
These data inform education policy and practice.
By experimentally testing the wise feedback intervention, it demonstrates a method for helping
teachers create a classroom climate that is more
likely to maintain the trust of students who may
contend with discrimination (also see Gregory
et al., in press; Okonofua, Paunesku, et al., in
press). Based on prior correlational (Gregory &
Weinstein, 2008; Shouse, 1996) and experimental
research (Cohen & Steele, 2002; Cohen et al., 2009;
Yeager et al., 2014), the intervention was not only
precisely targeted to address the key psychological
process but was timed to intervene on that process
at a crucial stage: when mistrust was likely to
emerge and to exert a growing impact. This is
because a process can be easier to affect at its
beginning. Once it has accumulated consequences—
the child is labeled as a “troublemaker,” sees his
permanent record tainted by a suspension—the process will have a momentum that is much harder to
halt (Okonofua, Paunesku, et al., in press; Okonofua, Walton, et al., in press).
Of course, truly “wise” educators do not simply
append notes to essays and end their interventions
there. Instead, they send the continually send the
message that their students are capable, valued,
and respected, weaving it into the culture of the
classroom. Our studies demonstrate the way that
larger cultural forces infuse the interactions
between teachers and students. How to break free
of their inﬂuence is a craft that requires both wisdom and tact.

References
Aronson, J. M., Fried, C. B., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing
the effects of stereotype threat on African American

college students by shaping theories of intelligence.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 113–125.
doi:10.1006/jesp.2001.1491
Baumrind, D. (1997). The discipline encounter: Contemporary issues. Aggression and Violent Behavior, 2, 321–
335. doi:10.1016/S1359-1789(97)00018-9
Bigler, R. S., Averhart, C. J., & Liben, L. S. (2003). Race
and the workforce: Occupational status, aspirations, and
stereotyping among African American children. Developmental Psychology, 39, 572–580. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.39.3.
572
Bigler, R. S., & Liben, L. S. (2006). A developmental intergroup theory of social stereotypes and prejudice.
Advances in Child Development and Behavior, 34, 39–89.
doi:10.1016/S0065-2407(06)80004-2
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1977). Toward an experimental ecology of human development. American Psychologist, 32,
513–531. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.32.7.513
Brown, C. S., & Bigler, R. S. (2005). Children’s perceptions
of discrimination: A developmental model. Child Development, 76, 533–553. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2005.00862.x
Bryk, A. S., & Schneider, B. (2002). Trust in schools: A core
resource for improvement. New York, NY: Russell Sage
Foundation.
Coates, T.-N. (2015). Between the world and me. New York,
NY: Random House Publishing Group.
Cohen, G. L., & Garcia, J. (2005). “I am us”: Negative
stereotypes as collective threats. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 89, 566–582. doi:10.1037/00223514.89.4.566
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., & Goyer, J. P. (in press). Turning
point: Targeted, tailored, and timely psychological
intervention. In A. Elliot, C. S. Dweck & D. S. Yeager
(Eds.) Handbook of competence and motivation (2nd ed.):
Theory and application. New York, NY: Guilford.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Apfel, N., &
Brzustoski, P. (2009). Recursive processes in self-afﬁrmation: Intervening to close the minority achievement
gap. Science, 324, 400–403. doi:10.1126/science.1170769
Cohen, G. L., & Steele, C. M. (2002). A barrier of mistrust:
How negative stereotypes affect cross-race mentoring.
In J. M. Aronson (Ed.), Improving academic achievement:
Impact of psychological factors on education (pp. 303–327).
Bingley, UK: Emerald Group.
Cohen, G. L., Steele, C. M., & Ross, L. D. (1999). The
mentor’s dilemma: Providing critical feedback across
the racial divide. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 1302–1318. doi:10.1177/0146167299258011
Coopersmith, J. (2009). Characteristics of public, private, and
bureau of indian education elementary and secondary school
teachers in the United States: Results from the 2007–08 schools
and stafﬁng survey. First Look. NCES 2009-324. Washington D.C.: National Center for Education Statistics.
Dynarski, S. M., Hemelt, S. W., & Hyman, J. M. (2015).
The missing manual using national student clearinghouse data to track postsecondary outcomes. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 37(1), 53s–79s.
doi:10.3102/0162373715576078

Middle School Trust Gap
Fagan, J., & Tyler, T. R. (2005). Legal socialization of children and adolescents. Social Justice Research, 18, 217–
241. doi:10.1007/s11211-005-6823-3
Gallup. (2015). In U.S., conﬁdence in police lowest in
22 years. Retrieved from http://www.gallup.com/poll/
183704/confidence-police-lowest-years.aspx
Gambetta, D. (1988). Can we trust trust? In D. Gambetta
(Ed.), Trust: Making and breaking cooperative relations (pp.
213–235). New York, NY: Basil Blackwell.
Goffman, E. (1963). Stigma: Notes on the management of
spoiled identity. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster.
Gregory, A., Hafen, C. A., Ruzek, E., Mikami, A. Y.,
Allen, J. P., & Pianta, R. C. (in press). Closing the racial
discipline gap in classrooms by changing teacher practice.
School Psychology Review. Advance online publication.
Gregory, A., & Weinstein, R. S. (2004). Connection and
regulation at home and in school predicting growth in
achievement for adolescents. Journal of Adolescent
Research, 19, 405–427. doi:10.1177/0743558403258859
Gregory, A., & Weinstein, R. S. (2008). The discipline gap
and African Americans: Deﬁance or cooperation in the
high school classroom. Journal of School Psychology, 46,
455–475. doi:10.1016/j.jsp.2007.09.001
Harber, K. D. (1998). Feedback to minorities: Evidence of
a positive bias. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 622–628. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.74.3.622
Heckman, J. J. (2006). Skill formation and the economics
of investing in disadvantaged children. Science, 312,
1900–1902. doi:10.1126/science.1128898
Irvine, J. J. (2003). Educating teachers for diversity: Seeing
with a cultural eye. New York, NY: Teachers College
Press.
Killen, M., Mulvey, K. L., & Hitti, A. (2013). Social exclusion in childhood: A developmental intergroup perspective. Child Development, 84, 772–790. doi:10.1111/
cdev.12012
Laupa, M., Turiel, E., & Cowan, P. A. (1995). Obedience
to authority in children and adults. In M. Killen & D.
Hart (Eds.), Morality in everyday life: Developmental perspectives (pp. 131–165). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Lee, K. H., Siegle, G. J., Dahl, R. E., Hooley, J. M., & Silk,
J. S. (2014). Neural responses to maternal criticism in
healthy youth. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience,
10, 902–912. doi:10.1093/scan/nsu133
Lepper, M. R., & Woolverton, M. (2002). The wisdom of
practice: Lessons learned from the study of highly
effective tutors. In J. M. Aronson (Ed.), Improving academic achievement: Impact of psychological factors on education (pp. 135–158). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Levi, M. (1997). Consent, dissent, and patriotism. New York,
NY: Cambridge University Press.
Levi, M., Sacks, A., & Tyler, T. (2009). Conceptualizing
legitimacy, measuring legitimating beliefs. American
Behavioral
Scientist,
53,
354–375.
doi:10.1177/
0002764209338797
Lewin, K., Lippitt, R., & White, R. K. (1939). Patterns of
aggressive behavior in experimentally created social

17

climates. The Journal of Social Psychology, 10, 269–299.
doi:10.1080/00224545.1939.9713366
Lord, C. G., Ross, L., & Lepper, M. R. (1979). Biased
assimilation and attitude polarization: The effects of
prior theories on subsequently considered evidence.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37, 2098–
2109. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.37.11.2098
Masten, A. S., Roisman, G. I., Long, J. D., Burt, K. B.,
Obradovic, J., Riley, J. R., . . . Tellegen, A. (2005).
Developmental cascades: Linking academic achievement and externalizing and internalizing symptoms
over 20 years. Developmental Psychology, 41, 733–746.
doi:10.1037/0012-1649.41.5.733
McKown, C. (2013). Social equity theory and racial-ethnic
achievement gaps. Child Development, 84, 1120–1136.
doi:10.1111/cdev.12033
McKown, C., & Weinstein, R. S. (2003). The development
and consequences of stereotype consciousness in middle childhood. Child Development, 74, 498–515.
Muthen, L. K., & Muthen, B. O. (1998-2011). Mplus user’s
guide. Sixth Edition. Los Angeles, CA: Author.
Okonofua, J. A., & Eberhardt, J. L. (2015). Two strikes:
Race and the disciplining of young students. Psychological Science, 26, 617–624. doi:10.1177/0956797615570365
Okonofua, J. A., Paunesku, D., & Walton, G. M. (in
press). A brief intervention to encourage empathic discipline cuts suspension rates in half among adolescents.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. Advance online publication.
Okonofua, J. A., Walton, G. M., & Eberhardt, J. L. (in
press). A vicious cycle: A social-psychological account
of extreme racial disparities in school discipline. Perspectives on Psychological Science. Advance online publication.
Olson, K. R., & Dweck, C. S. (2008). A blueprint for social
cognitive development. Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 3, 193–202. doi:10.1111/j.1745-6916.2006.00007.x
Paunesku, D., Walton, G. M., Romero, C., Smith, E. N.,
Yeager, D. S., & Dweck, C. S. (2015). Mindset interventions are a scalable treatment for academic underachievement. Psychological Science, 26, 284–293. doi:10.
1177/0956797615571017
Peper, J. S., & Dahl, R. E. (2013). The teenage brain: Surging hormones—brain-behavior interactions during
puberty. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 22,
134–139.
President’s Task Force on 21st Century Policing. (2015).
Final report of The President’s Task Force on 21st Century
Policing. Washington, DC: Ofﬁce of Community Oriented Policing Services.
Purdie-Vaughns, V., Steele, C. M., Davies, P. G., Ditlmann, R., & Crosby, J. R. (2008). Social identity contingencies: How diversity cues signal threat or safety for
African Americans in mainstream institutions. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 94, 615–630. doi:10.
1037/0022-3514.94.4.615
Roberts, B. W., & Caspi, A. (2003). The cumulative continuity model of personality development: Striking a

18

Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns, Hooper, and Cohen

balance between continuity and change in personality
traits across the life course. In U. M. Staudinger & U.
E. R. Lindenberger (Eds.), Understanding human
development: Lifespan psychology in exchange with other
disciplines (pp. 183–214). Dordrecht, NL: Kluwer
Academic.
Ruble, D. N., Alvarez, J., Bachman, M., Cameron, J.,
Fuligni, A., Garcia Coll, C., & Rhee, E. (2004). The
development of a sense of “we”: The emergence and
implications of children’s collective identity. In M. Bennett & F. Sani (Eds.), The development of the social self
(pp. 29–76). New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Sagar, H. A., & Schoﬁeld, J. W. (1980). Racial and behavioral cues in black and white children’s perceptions of
ambiguously aggressive acts. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 39, 590–598.
Sellers, R. M., Copeland-Linder, N., Martin, P. P., &
Lewis, R. L. (2006). Racial identity matters: The relationship between racial discrimination and psychological functioning in African American adolescents. Journal
of Research on Adolescence, 16, 187–216.
Shouse, R. C. (1996). Academic press and sense of community: Conﬂict, congruence, and implications for student achievement. Social Psychology of Education, 1(1),
47–68.
Skiba, R. J., Michael, R. S., Nardo, A. C., & Peterson, R.
L. (2002). The color of discipline: Sources of racial and
gender disproportionality in school punishment. The
Urban
Review,
34,
317–342.
doi:10.1023/A:
1021320817372
Spencer, M. B. (2006). Phenomenology and ecological systems theory: Development of diverse groups. In W.
Damon & R. M. Lerner (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology, Vol. 1: Theoretical models of human development (6th
ed., pp. 829–893). New York, NY: Wiley.
Swanson, D. P., Cunningham, M., Youngblood, J., &
Spencer, M. B. (2009). Racial identity development during childhood. In H. A. Neville, B. M. Tynes, & S. O.
Utsey (Eds.), Handbook of African American psychology
(pp. 269–281). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Taylor, P., Funk, C., & Clark, A. (2007). Americans and
social trust: Who, where and why. Washington, DC: Pew
Research Center.
Terburg, D., & van Honk, J. (2013). Approach–avoidance
versus dominance–submissiveness: A multilevel neural
framework on how testosterone promotes social status.
Emotion Review, 5, 296–302.
Treisman, U. (1992). Studying students studying calculus:
A look at the lives of minority mathematics students in
college. The College Mathematics Journal, 23, 362–372.
doi:10.2307/2686410
Tucker-Drob, E. M. (2012). Preschools reduce early academic-achievement gaps a longitudinal twin approach.
Psychological Science, 23, 310–319. doi:10.1177/
0956797611426728
Tyler, T. R. (2006). Restorative justice and procedural justice: Dealing with rule breaking. Journal of Social Issues,
62, 307–326. doi:10.1111/j.1540-4560.2006.00452.x

Tyler, T. R., & Blader, S. L. (2003). The group engagement
model: Procedural justice, social identity, and cooperative behavior. Personality and Social Psychology Review,
7, 349–361. doi:10.1207/S15327957PSPR0704_07
Tyler, T. R., Fagan, J., & Geller, A. (2014). Street stops
and police legitimacy: Teachable moments in young
urban men’s legal socialization. Journal of Empirical
Legal Studies, 11, 751–785. doi:10.1111/jels.12055
Tyler, T. R., Goff, P. A., & MacCoun, R. J. (2015). The
impact of psychological science on policing in the united states procedural justice, legitimacy, and effective
law enforcement. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 16, 75–109. doi:10.1177/1529100615617791
Vanderbilt, K. E., Liu, D., & Heyman, G. D. (2011). The
development of distrust. Child Development, 82, 1372–
1380. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2011.01629.x
Vasquez, J. A. (1988). Contexts of learning for minority
students. The Educational Forum, 52, 243–253. doi:10.
1080/00131728809335490
Yeager, D. S., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., Apfel, N.,
Brzustoski, P., Master, A., . . . Cohen, G. L. (2014).
Breaking the cycle of mistrust: Wise interventions to
provide critical feedback across the racial divide. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 143, 804–824.
doi:10.1037/a0033906
Yeager, D. S., Romero, C., Paunesku, D., Hulleman, C. S.,
Schneider, B., Hinojosa, C., . . . Dweck, C. S. (2016).
Using design thinking to improve psychological interventions: The case of the growth mindset during the
transition to high school. Journal of Educational Psychology, 108, 374–391. doi:10.1037/edu0000098
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological interventions in education: They’re not magic.
Review of Educational Research, 81, 267–301. doi:10.3102/
0034654311405999
Yeager, D. S., Walton, G. M., Brady, S. T., Akcinar, E. N.,
Paunesku, D., Keane, L., . . . Dweck, C. S. (2016).
Teaching a lay theory before college narrows achievement gaps at scale. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America, 113, E3341–
E3348. doi:10.1073/pnas.1524360113

Supporting Information
Additional supporting information may be found in
the online version of this article at the publisher’s
website:
Figure S1. Exploratory Mediation Analysis of
Effects of Seventh-Grade Trust (Measured, Top
Panel; or Manipulated, Bottom Panel) on on time 4Year College Enrollment, Via Eighth-Grade Behaviors, for African American Participants Only
Figure S2. Cross-Lagged Models Show That
Awareness of Bias Predicts Subsequent Trust for
Seventh- and Eighth-Grade Hispanic/Latino Students, Controlling for Gender

Middle School Trust Gap

Figure S3. Individual Differences in Awareness
of Anti-African American Procedural Injustice in
School Policies Do Not Predict the Onset of Overall
Mental Models of Trust of School Among White
Middle School Students in Study 1
Figure S4. The “Trust Residual Predicts College
Enrollment” Model, Excluding Treated Students
Figure S5. The “Trust Residual Predicts College
Enrollment” Model, White Students Only
Figure S6. Cross-Lagged Analyses Among African American Participants in Study 1, Showing the

19

Reciprocal Relations Between Perceived Bias and
Loss of Trust Across the Middle School Years
Table S1. Study 1 Racial Group Differences in
School Trust
Table S2. Study 2 Ethnic Group Differences in
School Trust
Table S3. Descriptive Statistics for Study Variables (Study 1)
Table S4. Descriptive Statistics for Study Variables (Study 2)

Review of Educational
Research
http://rer.aera.net

Social-Psychological Interventions in Education : They're Not Magic
David S. Yeager and Gregory M. Walton
REVIEW OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH 2011 81: 267 originally published online 19
April 2011
DOI: 10.3102/0034654311405999
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://rer.sagepub.com/content/81/2/267

Published on behalf of

American Educational Research Association

and
http://www.sagepublications.com

Additional services and information for Review of Educational Research can be found at:
Email Alerts: http://rer.aera.net/alerts
Subscriptions: http://rer.aera.net/subscriptions
Reprints: http://www.aera.net/reprints
Permissions: http://www.aera.net/permissions

Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

RER405999RER10.3102/0034654311405999Yeager

& WaltonSocial-Psychological Inter-

ventions in Education
Review of Educational Research
June 2011, Vol. 81, No. 2, pp. 267–301
DOI: 10.3102/0034654311405999
© 2011 AERA. http://rer.aera.net

Social-Psychological Interventions in Education:
They’re Not Magic
David S. Yeager and Gregory M. Walton
Stanford University

Recent randomized experiments have found that seemingly “small” socialpsychological interventions in education—that is, brief exercises that target
students’ thoughts, feelings, and beliefs in and about school—can lead to
large gains in student achievement and sharply reduce achievement gaps
even months and years later. These interventions do not teach students academic content but instead target students’ psychology, such as their beliefs
that they have the potential to improve their intelligence or that they belong
and are valued in school. When social-psychological interventions have lasting effects, it can seem surprising and even “magical,” leading people either
to think of them as quick fixes to complicated problems or to consider them
unworthy of serious consideration. The present article discourages both
responses. It reviews the theoretical basis of several prominent social-psychological interventions and emphasizes that they have lasting effects
because they target students’ subjective experiences in school, because they
use persuasive yet stealthy methods for conveying psychological ideas, and
because they tap into recursive processes present in educational environments. By understanding psychological interventions as powerful but context-dependent tools, educational researchers will be better equipped to take
them to scale. This review concludes by discussing challenges to scaling psychological interventions and how these challenges may be overcome.

Keywords: social psychology, education policy, implicit theories, stereotype
threat, affirmation, belonging, achievement gaps.
Several years ago a brief intervention was introduced in eight hospitals around
the world in an effort to reduce medical errors. The intervention required surgeons
and nurses to complete a one-page checklist of tasks before beginning a surgery,
such as introducing themselves to one another and correctly timing the application
of antiseptics. An evaluation of this simple intervention found that it reduced surgical complications by 36% and deaths by 47% (Haynes et al., 2009). Observers and
medical professionals have wondered how this small intervention could have a
large effect, especially when it did not address such clearly important factors as
surgeons’ skills and training. Some have hailed the checklist intervention as “a
classic magic bullet” (Aaronovitch, 2010); others have dismissed it as “[not] Harry
267
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

Yeager & Walton

Potter’s magic wand” (Szalavitz, 2009). Atul Gawande (2009), creator of the
checklist, argues that this sense of mystery arises because many people assumed
that surgeons were already doing the set of practices included in the checklist.
Hence, the checklist’s effects were not easily understood (Gawande, 2009, p. 159).
With a deeper understanding of why the intervention improved outcomes, he
argues, the medical community would be better able to institutionalize the innovation in standard practice.
Interestingly, something similar is happening in education. In recent years,
several rigorous, randomized field experiments have shown that seemingly
“small” social-psychological interventions—typically brief exercises that do not
teach academic content but instead target students’ thoughts, feelings, and beliefs
in and about school—have had striking effects on educational achievement even
over months and years (see Table 1; for reviews see Garcia & Cohen, in press;
Gehlbach, 2010; Walton & Dweck, 2009; Walton & Spencer, 2009; Wilson,
2006). For example, Blackwell, Trzesniewski, and Dweck (2007) found that
middle school students who attended an eight-session workshop teaching them
that the brain is like a muscle and grows with effort displayed a sharp increase
in math achievement for the rest of the school year, an effect not shown by
students who attended a control workshop that taught them study skills. Walton
and Cohen (2007, 2011) found that a 1-hour session designed to buttress African
American college students’ sense of social belonging in school increased the
GPA of these students over the next 3 years, halving the Black–White achievement gap over this period. And Cohen, Garcia, Apfel, and Master (2006), found
that a 15- to 20-minute writing exercise in which students reflected on their core
personal values reduced the gap in grades between African American and
European American students by nearly 40% at the end of the semester, an effect
that persisted, with a few additional writing exercises, for 2 years (Cohen,
Garcia, Purdie-Vaugns, Apfel, & Brzustoski, 2009).
Like people who hear about Gawande’s checklist, people who learn about
social-psychological interventions may wonder, how could these effects be real?
How could such interventions work? And how could brief experiences change
students’ outcomes months and years later? These questions are especially pressing in a context in which far more expensive and comprehensive interventions in
education often yield disappointing results. For example, of the dozens of randomized controlled trials published by the Institute for Education Sciences in recent
years, most have found no effects on student outcomes beyond the initial treatment
period, including a 1-year new-teacher support program (Glazerman et al., 2010),
a yearlong middle school mathematics professional development program (Garet
et al., 2010), and a 2-year supplemental reading courses (James-Burdumy et al.,
2010; Somers et al., 2010), among many other reforms.
In this context, social-psychological interventions can appear magical. As a
consequence, it is tempting either to deliver these interventions as quickly and as
widely as possible or to dismiss them as snake oil—as entertaining sideshows, but
not worthy of serious consideration in education reform.
We argue that neither response is appropriate. Social-psychological interventions hold significant promise for promoting broad and lasting change in education, but they are not silver bullets. They are powerful tools rooted in theory, but
they are context dependent and reliant on the nature of the educational environment.
(Text continues on p. 274)
268
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

269

Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

Student sample

Summary of randomized
treatment and control
group(s)
Summary of results

Effect on
achievement

(continued)

First-year
Leading students to
In one laboratory session, osOne week later, students in the .27 grade points
college
attribute academic
tensibly as a part of a survey,
treatment condition performed
one year later
students
setbacks to unstable
students watched videos of
better on a GRE exam. A year
struggling
factors rather than
upper-year students describlater, these students had earned
academically
stable factors can
ing how their grades in college
higher college GPAs and were
motivate students to
were low at first but improved
80% less likely to have dropped
work harder and not
over time. In a control group,
out of college. The treatment
give up after setbacks students saw videos of the same effect on GPA appeared to gain
in school.
upper-year students talking
strength over time.
about their social and academic
interests.
Blackwell, Trzes­
Low-income, Teaching students that In 8 sessions over 8 weeks,
At the end of the academic year, .30 grade points
niewski, and Dweck
Black and
people’s core intelstudents took part in workshops the normative decline in math
at the end of
(2007)
Hispanic or
ligence is malleable
on study skills and the function
grades exhibited by students in the school
Latino 7thand grows with effort of the brain and how the brain
the control group was reversed year
grade students and challenge can
can get stronger when a person
such that students in the treatat an urban
motivate students to
works on challenging tasks. Stu- ment condition had earned sigschool
work hard and not
dents in a control group learned nificantly higher math grades.
give up after setbacks only study skills.
in school.

Attributions and
implicit theories of
intelligence
Wilson and
Linville (1982,
1985)

Study

Theoretical
approach

Table 1 
Summary of Selected Social-Psychological Interventions to Improve Student Achievement

270

Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

Student sample

Theoretical
approach

Summary of randomized
treatment and control
group(s)
Summary of results

Effect on
achievement

(continued)

Black and
Teaching students that In a laboratory session, ostensibly At the end of the academic year, .23 grade points
White college people’s core intelas a part of a “pen pal” program both Black and White students’ at the end of
students
ligence is malleable
to support younger students,
GPAs rose significantly in the
the next term
will buffer students
students wrote letters to middle
treatment condition as comfrom the threat of
school students endorsing
pared to both control groups.
being targeted by
the belief that intelligence is
Black students (but not White
negative stereotypes
malleable. In a control group,
students) reported increased
in school.
students wrote “pen pal” letters
engagement and identification
advocating a theory of multiple
with school.
intelligences. A second control
group did not write letters.
Good, Aronson,
Low- and
One treatment group
Students met with college student At the end of the academic year, See notea
and Inzlicht (2003)
middlereceived an attrimentors twice and exchanged
in all three treatment groups
income Black butional retraining
occasional emails throughout
girls’ math scores on a stateand Hispanic
intervention similar to the school year. Mentors were
wide standardized test rose
or Latino 7th- Wilson and Linville
taught to endorse the relevant
relative to the control group,
grade students (1982). A second treat- treatment message. A control
eliminating the gender differat a rural
ment group received
group received an antidrug mes- ence in math performance presschool
an implicit theories of sage from mentors.
ent in the control condition. In
intelligence intervenaddition, both boys’ and girls’
tion. A third treatment
reading scores increased in all
group received both
three treatment groups relative
interventions.
to the control group.

J. Aronson, Fried,
and Good (2002)

Implicit theories of
intelligence and
stereotype threat

Study

Table 1  (continued)

271

Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

Student sample

Theoretical
approach

Summary of randomized
treatment and control
group(s)
Summary of results

Effect on
achievement

(continued)

Cohen, Garcia,
Low- and
Affirming important
In one or several 15- to 20At the end of the first semester, .30 grade points
Apfel, and Master
middlevalues can buffer
minute classroom sessions
the value-affirmation interven- among Black
(2006); Cohen, Gar- income Black people from the
beginning at the beginning of
tion increased Black students’
students at
cia, Purdie-Vaughns, and White
effects of stereotype
the school year, students wrote
class grades, reducing the gap
the end of
Apfel, and Brzus7th-grade
threat.
about values that were personbetween Black and White
the first term;
toski (2009)
students at
ally important to them as an
students by 40%. Further,
.46 grade
a suburban
in-class writing exercise. In a
among initially low-performing points among
school
control group, students wrote
Black students, the treatment
low-performabout values that were not imraised GPA in all core academic ing Black
portant to them but might matter classes two years posttreatment. students after
to someone else.
two years.
Miyake et al.
Men and
Same as above.
Same as above.
At the end of the 15-week course, .33 grade
(2010)
women in a
the value-affirmation intervenpoints among
college
tion eliminated a substantial
women at the
physics class
gender gap in physics grades
end of the
and on scores on a nationally
termb
normed physics test that was
present in the control condition.
The effect was strongest for
women who endorsed gender
stereotypes.

Stereotype threat

Study

Table 1  (continued)

272

Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

Oyserman, Bybee,
and Terry (2006)

Possible selves

Walton and Cohen
(2007, 2011)

Study

Table 1  (continued)
Summary of randomized
treatment and control
group(s)
Summary of results

Effect on
achievement

Low-income
Black and
Hispanic or
Latino 8thgrade
students

Leading ethnic minority In 10 workshop sessions, students Two years later, students in the
students to see that
wrote about how their future
treatment group had higher
their academic future
selves might be academically
GPAs, fewer absences, fewer
selves are close (and
successful, and completed exer- nominations for disruptive
not far), consistent (not cises to make those future selves behavior, and fewer depressive
inconsistent) with their seem more attainable, to make
symptoms and were 60% less
racial identity, and
challenges seem normal and
likely to repeat 8th grade.
attainable even when
expected, and to make academic
facing challenges will success not seem like “acting
increase students’
White.” A control group took
motivation.
standard elective classes.

(continued)

.28 grade points
two years
later

First-year
Leading students to
In a 1-hour laboratory session, stu- Relative to students in
.24 grade points
Black and
attribute worries about dents read the results of a survey
multiple control groups, Black
among Black
White college belonging to the difindicating that many students feel students in the social-belonging students from
students
ficulty of the transition they do not belong in college at
treatment condition earned
sophomore
to college rather than
first but that such worries dishigher GPAs from sophomore
through
to students’ personal
sipate with time. Students then
through senior year, reducing
senior year of
or racial identity can
wrote an essay and gave a speech the racial achievement gap by
college
buttress ethnic minor- ostensibly for the next year’s
52%, were more likely to be
ity students’ sense of
freshmen about how their worries in the top 25% of their college
social belonging in
about belonging had changed
class, and 3 years posttreatment
school and increase
over time in college. In control
reported being happier and
motivation and perfor- groups, students were exposed to healthier.
mance.
information irrelevant to issues of
belonging.

Student sample

Theoretical
approach

273

Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

Student sample

Theoretical
approach

Summary of randomized
treatment and control
group(s)
Summary of results

Effect on
achievement

a. Good et al.’s (2003) attributional retraining, implicit theories, and combined interventions produced effects on girls’ math test scores of the following magnitudes: Cohen’s
d = 1.13, 1.30, and 1.50, respectively.
b. Miyake et al. (2010) reported grades on a 100-point scale, so these numbers were converted to grade points for inclusion in this table.

Hulleman and Har- MiddleMaking science classes Every 3 or 4 weeks starting at
At the end of the semester treated .80 grade
ackiewicz (2009)
income, ethni- personally relevant
the beginning of the semester
students who expected to
points among
cally diverse
will increase interest students wrote a brief essay
perform poorly in science had
students
9th-grade
in science, engagedescribing how the material
earned higher science grades;
with low
students
ment with the learnstudied in their high school sci- no effects were found among
expectations
ing process, and imence class that week could be
students with high expectations for success
proved performance
applied in their lives. Control
for success in science.
in science at
especially among
students summarized the week’s
the end of the
students who do not
science class topic.
semester
expect to succeed in
science.

Expectancy-value
theory

Study

Table 1  (continued)

Yeager & Walton

Although we believe that social-psychological interventions can be scaled effectively
to reach larger numbers of students, how to do so is not simply a matter of handing
out a worksheet. Rather, scaling social-psychological interventions raises important theoretical, practical, and ethical questions that as yet have not been adequately explored.
To illustrate the effects of social-psychological interventions, take a second
analogy.1 Consider a passenger jet that speeds down a runway and lifts into the air.
It can seem surprising even to an experienced flier how an object that weighs many
tons could fly. This is because the miracle of flight relies on numerous interrelated
forces, some more obvious than others. It is not hard to see that a plane needs an
engine, wings, and a pilot to fly. Similarly, a student needs content to learn, a
teacher to teach, and a place or community to support that learning. These factors
shape the objective school environment and create essential capacities for success.
But less obvious features of airplanes and of education systems are also critical to
their success. One reason planes fly is because their wings are sculpted to create
an aerodynamic force (“lift”) that elevates the plane. It is natural to wonder how a
small change in the shape of a wing could make a heavy object fly. Basic laboratory research helps explain the principles of air flow and shows that the shape and
position of wings cause air to flow faster below them than above them, lifting a
plane beyond what might seem possible. In a similar way, hidden yet powerful
psychological forces, also investigated through basic science, can raise student
achievement. An engineer uses theories of fluid dynamics to fine-tune a wing,
which, in the context of other factors, makes a plane fly. Analogously, a socialpsychological perspective uses basic theory and research to identify educationally
important psychological processes and then subtly alters these processes in a complex academic environment to raise performance.
More specifically, social-psychological interventions can seem mysterious for
at least four reasons. First, it is often hard to see the forces on which these interventions operate (see Lewin, 1952; Ross & Nisbett, 1991). We do not see air flowing
over a wing; nor do we directly observe how negative intellectual stereotypes or
beliefs about the nature of intelligence affect students. We may see the power of
these processes only when they are altered. For this reason, below we describe
laboratory experiments that illustrate the causal effect of basic theoretical processes relevant to motivation and then review how interventions designed to alter
these processes affect achievement.
Second, psychological interventions seem “small” relative to traditional educational reforms, and people may assume that large problems require “large”
solutions. How could a brief psychological intervention make headway in the
face of structural problems that contribute enormously to inequality and poor
outcomes in education? To presage later arguments, psychological interventions
do not replace traditional educational reforms but operate within the context of
existing structures to make them more effective. Psychological interventions
change students’ mind-sets to help them take greater advantage of available
learning opportunities.
This analysis draws on a core tenet of social psychology, namely, that every
attitude and behavior exists in a complex field of forces—a “tension system”—in
which some forces promote a behavior whereas other forces restrain that behavior
274
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

Social-Psychological Interventions in Education

(Lewin, 1952; Ross & Nisbett, 1991; Wilson, 2006). One lesson from this analysis
is that the structure of the system determines its potential for change—an intervention that increases students’ motivation to learn or that removes barriers to learning
will improve academic outcomes only when learning opportunities exist in the
educational environment.
Another lesson of this analysis is that there are two routes to behavior change (see
Miller & Prentice, in press). One route is to increase forces that promote a behavior, for
instance by giving students incentives for better grades. But when promoting forces are
adequate—as when, at some level, learning content, teachers, and students' willingness
to learn are present—student success may be held back instead by restraining forces,
such as worries about ability or negative stereotypes. In these cases, less intuitively, one
can remove forces that restrain their learning, allowing students to take greater advantage of learning opportunities. As a consequence, even a seemingly small intervention
but one that removes a critical barrier to learning can produce substantial effects on
academic outcomes. At a broader level, this theoretical foundation underscores the
fundamental inappropriateness of viewing social-psychological interventions as silver
bullets; rather than operating in isolation, such interventions rearrange forces in a complex system.2
A third challenge to understanding the effects of social-psychological interventions is that it is hard to see how relatively brief messages can affect students’
views and behavior, especially when students receive many messages from adults
that seemingly have little effect. As we will explain, social-psychological interventions can be brief yet impactful because they target students’ subjective experiences in school and because they rely on a rich tradition of research on persuasion
and attitude change to powerfully convey psychological ideas.
Fourth, what can seem especially mysterious is how a time-limited or one-shot
social-psychological intervention can generate effects that persist far ahead in
time. For instance, people may assume that an intervention has to remain in mind
to continue to be effective. But like any experience, a psychological intervention
will become less focal as it recedes in time. As we suggest below, a key to understanding the long-lasting effects of social-psychological interventions is to understand how they interact with recursive processes already present in schools, such
as the quality of students’ developing relationships with peers and teachers, their
beliefs about their ability, and their acquisition of academic knowledge. It is by
affecting self-reinforcing recursive processes that psychological interventions can
cause lasting improvements in motivation and achievement even when the original
treatment message has faded in salience (e.g., Walton & Cohen, 2011).
In the next section, we describe how we conducted this review. We then summarize four prominent social-psychological interventions, emphasizing the psychological process each intervention targeted and relevant laboratory and field
research. Next we discuss how the effects of these interventions persisted over
time. In doing so, we aim to provide a more nuanced understanding of how socialpsychological interventions work and to suggest how this understanding can
inform efforts to deliver these interventions more broadly.
Method for the Current Review
This is a theoretical review designed to elucidate the theoretical underpinnings
of social-psychological interventions in education, not a comprehensive review of
275
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

them. To locate relevant interventions, we searched the tables of contents and
abstracts of highly cited relevant journals including Child Development,
Developmental Psychology, Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology,
Journal of Educational Psychology, Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, Psychological Science, and Science (see Table 1). We searched for studies
that (a) evaluated an intervention that communicated a social-psychological message but did not teach academic content, (b) randomly assigned students to treatment or control conditions, and (c) observed effects on students’ grades in a course
or in school overall over time. In addition, we examined the curricula vitae of
prominent psychologists conducting intervention research, searching for replications, extensions, or studies examining boundary conditions. Some important studies were excluded because they met only some of our criteria. Among the excluded
studies were those that used social-psychological strategies to motivate specific
behaviors in school, such as mastering an individual learning objective or performing better on a single task, rather than raising achievement in general (e.g., E.
Aronson, Blaney, Stephin, Sikes, & Snapp, 1976; Destin & Oyserman, 2009;
Duckworth, Grant, Loew, Oettingen, & Gollwitzer, in press; Jamieson, Mendes,
Blackstock, & Schmader, 2009; Ramirez & Beilock, 2011; Vansteenkiste, Simons,
Lens, Sheldon, & Deci, 2004).
Notably, our search targeted specifically social-psychological interventions—
interventions designed to change students’ thoughts and feelings in and about
school. This approach excluded cognitive psychology interventions, which investigate instead how principles of human cognition and learning can inform the
design of effective curricula and pedagogy (and which have been reviewed elsewhere; e.g., Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 1999; Ritter, Anderson, Koedinger, &
Corbett, 2007). Nonetheless, in some cases we use the term psychological interventions as shorthand to refer to social-psychological interventions.
Four Social-Psychological Interventions to Improve Student Achievement
To illustrate general lessons, we focus on basic theory and research underpinning
four prominent social-psychological interventions. These interventions have produced some of the most striking effects observed in the field and illustrate key themes.
Although we present the studies separately, we note that the processes they target are
few in number and interrelated, including students’ beliefs about their potential for
growth and belonging in the classroom and their efforts to cope with negative stereotypes in school. It is important to note, however, that similar conclusions could be
drawn from an analysis of other interventions. Table 1 provides a summary of relevant
studies that we do not discuss in detail (also see Gehlbach, 2010).
Interventions to Change Students’ Attributions for Academic Setbacks
A long line of basic theory and research in social psychology shows that people’s attributions—how they explain the causes of events and experiences—shape
their responses to those events and subsequent behavior (Kelley, 1973; Weiner,
1986). For instance, if a student concludes that a bad grade means that he cannot
cut it in math, the student may not invest the time and effort needed to improve his

276
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

Social-Psychological Interventions in Education

math grades (Bandura, 1977). If so, he may continue to perform poorly, reifying
his attribution of inability, leading to an exacerbation cycle of negative attributions
and poor performance (cf. Storms & Nisbett, 1970; also see Wilson, 2006). On the
other hand, if a student thinks that a bad grade means that she needs time to learn
the ropes, the student may redouble her efforts and perform better over time. Is it
possible to change students’ attributions so they see poor grades as the result of a
temporary and not permanent cause? Would such an intervention improve students’ academic performance over time?
Intervention 1: Wilson and Linville (1982). Wilson and Linville (1982, 1985)
tested this hypothesis (also see Wilson, Damiani, & Shelton, 2002). They developed a brief intervention to teach students that poor academic performance is normal at first in the transition to a new school, that it does not reflect a lack of ability,
and that students’ grades typically improve as they adjust to the new school.
In a series of classic studies, Wilson and Linville (1982, 1985) brought struggling first-year college students to a laboratory and told them that they had interviewed college students about their transition to college. They asked students to
watch some of these videotaped interviews. Students in the treatment group (randomly assigned) saw videos of upperclassmen describing how their grades in college were low at first but got better with time. These upperclassmen attributed their
early poor performance to unstable causes that dissipate, such as a lack of familiarity with college classes. Students in a control group saw videos of the same upperclassmen talking about their academic and social interests with no mention of
first-year grades. A year later, students’ official GPAs were collected. Students in
the treatment group had earned higher GPAs than students in the control group (see
Table 1). Moreover, this effect seemed to gain in strength with each successive
term. This finding is consistent with the hypothesis that the intervention set in
motion a recursive or self-reinforcing attributional process whereby better performance each term reinforced more adaptive attributions for early academic struggles. In addition, treated students were 80% less likely to drop out of college. This
basic intervention has been replicated many times with diverse populations (see
Haynes, Perry, Stupnisky, & Daniels, 2009; Wilson et al., 2002) including adolescents (e.g., Good, Aronson, & Inzlicht, 2003).
Intervention 2: Blackwell et al. (2007). Dweck and colleagues have investigated
how students’ implicit theories of intelligence shape their interpretation of and
response to academic setbacks (Dweck, 2006; Dweck & Leggett, 1988; Molden &
Dweck, 2006). In laboratory research, Dweck finds that students who believe that
intelligence is fixed and unchangeable (an entity theory of intelligence) are more
likely to attribute academic setbacks to a lack of ability than students who believe
that intelligence is malleable and improvable with hard work and effort (an incremental theory of intelligence). Students with the incremental theory instead
see setbacks as the result of insufficient effort or a poor strategy. In turn, such
attributions shape whether students respond to setbacks helplessly (withdrawing
effort) or resiliently (redoubling effort, seeking help, using a better strategy, etc.).

277
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

Yeager & Walton

In one series of laboratory studies, Mueller and Dweck (1998) gave fifth-grade
students a moderately difficult set of logic problems. After completing them, students were praised. Some children (randomly assigned) received intelligence
praise—praise that could induce an entity theory of intelligence (“That’s a really
high score. You must be very smart at these problems”). Others received effort
praise predicted to induce an incremental theory of intelligence (“That’s a really
high score. You must have worked hard at these problems”) or neutral praise
(“That’s a really high score”). Next, students were given an especially difficult set
of problems on which all students performed poorly. Finally, students were given
a crucial third set of problems equally challenging as the first set.
The effect of the type of praise was dramatic. On the final set of problems,
children who received neutral praise performed no better and no worse than they
had on the first set. Children who received effort praise did better and asked to do
more challenging problems in the future. But children who received intelligence
praise solved 30% fewer problems and asked to do only easy problems from then
on. Being led to attribute success to fixed intelligence with just a sentence of praise
undermined students’ motivation and performance following a failure experience
(for a relevant longitudinal study, see Blackwell et al., 2007, Study 1).
On the basis of these and other results, Blackwell and colleagues (2007, Study 2)
designed an intervention to lead middle school students to view intelligence as
malleable. Students in a New York City public school attended an eight-session
workshop in which they learned about study skills and scientific research showing
that the brain grows connections and “gets smarter” when a person works on challenging tasks. Students in a randomized control group learned only about study
skills. Results showed that students in the control group continued the downward
decline in math grades that normally occurs in middle school. But students who
learned the incremental theory reversed this trend and earned better math grades
over the course of the year (see Figure 1). Study skills alone did not lead to
improvement in math; students needed the incremental mind-set and motivation to
put those skills into practice.
The effect of implicit theories is robust. Other implicit theory interventions
have generated similar improvements in diverse populations (e.g., J. Aronson,
Fried, & Good, 2002; Good et al., 2003; see Table 1). In addition, implicit theories
interventions have been implemented structurally in middle and high school math
classes across the United States by the Charles A. Dana Center (2008) at the
University of Texas, yielding large effects on such important outcomes as the percentage of high school students who repeat algebra (e.g., reducing this figure from
24% to 9%).
Interventions to Mitigate Stereotype Threat
A significant problem in education involves the persistence of large differences
in academic achievement between different social groups, such as between racial
or ethnic minority students and nonminority students and, in math and science,
between women and men. Although structural factors contribute to these differences, psychological processes also play an important role (Walton & Spencer,
2009). Research on stereotype threat shows that the worry that one could be

278
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

FIGURE 1. Math grades by experimental condition (covariate-adjusted means) in
Blackwell, Trzesniewski, and Dweck (2007). Reprinted by permission from John Wiley
and Sons, Inc.
Note. Experimental = incremental theory workshop group; control = study skills workshop
group.

perceived through the lens of a negative intellectual stereotype in school can
undermine academic performance (Steele, 2010; Steele, Spencer, & Aronson,
2002). For instance, the stereotype that certain ethnic groups are less intelligent
than others and that women are less skilled in quantitative fields than men creates
stress, distraction, and anxiety for people targeted by negative stereotypes in performance situations, and this, in turn, undermines academic performance (see
Schmader, Johns, & Forbes, 2008). Stereotype threat is so pervasive that it causes
common measures of academic performance including grades and test scores to
systematically underestimate the ability of negatively stereotyped students (Walton
& Spencer, 2009). Can psychological strategies mitigate stereotype threat in field
settings? Could these strategies raise stereotyped students’ performance and reduce
achievement gaps? (For related interventions that raise the performance of ethnic
minority students, see E. Aronson et al., 1978; Steele, 1997.)
Intervention 3: Cohen et al. (2006, 2009). Cohen and colleagues (2006, 2009)
hypothesized that helping reduce the stress and worry caused by stereotype threat
could boost the academic performance of negatively stereotyped students. Their
intervention was designed on the basis of a long line of psychological research
investigating how people cope with threats to their sense of self (Festinger, 1957;
Greenwald, 1980). Most relevant here, self-affirmation theory proposes that people are
motivated to protect their view of themselves as good, moral, and efficacious (Sherman

279
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

Yeager & Walton

& Cohen, 2006; Steele, 1988). When people’s sense of self is threatened, they
experience high levels of stress. Self-affirmation theory proposes that reminding
people of diverse, positive aspects of themselves can lead people to see
negative events and information as less threatening and reduce stress and thus help
people function more effectively (Sherman & Hartson, in press). One way to shore
up people’s sense of self is by asking people to write about values that are personally important to them. Indeed, laboratory experiments find that brief valueaffirmation writing exercises can help negatively stereotyped students perform
better on academic tasks (Martens, Johns, Greenberg, & Schimel, 2006; Taylor &
Walton, in press).
Cohen and colleagues (2006, 2009) tested whether a value affirmation could
improve stereotyped students’ real-world school performance. In a double-blind
randomized controlled experiment, they delivered a value-affirmation intervention
to White and Black seventh grade students as an in-class writing exercise. Half of
students completed a value affirmation—they identified two or three values that
were personally important to them and wrote about why those values mattered to
them. Control students identified values that were not important to them and wrote
about why they might matter to someone else. The 15- to 20-minute exercise was
administered at the beginning of the school year, before a recursive cycle of feelings of threat and poor academic performance could take hold. Teachers were blind
to students’ condition assignment to forestall expectancy effects.
The results were striking. Students’ grades were collected over the next 2 years.
By the end of the first semester, treated Black students earned significantly higher
grades than peers in the control condition, reducing the gap between Black and
White students by about 40%. A boost in students’ GPA across all academic classes
persisted for 2 years with a few additional value-affirmations exercises (see Figure
2; Cohen et al., 2009). This basic effect has been replicated in multiple studies,
including among women in science and with Latino adolescents (see Miyake et al.,
2010; Sherman et al., 2011).
Intervention 4: Walton and Cohen (2007, 2011). One consequence of negative
stereotypes is to cause people to wonder whether they will be fully included
and valued in an academic environment. Anyone may wonder if he or she will
get along with others in a new setting, like a transfer student at a new school.
But students who face negative stereotypes may worry about their belonging
more pervasively. This feeling of uncertainty about belonging can cause students to perceive negative social events in school—such as feelings of loneliness or receiving criticism from an instructor—as evidence that they do not
belong in the school in general, an inference that undermines motivation
(Walton & Cohen, 2007; also see Mendoza-Denton, Purdie, Downey, Davis, &
Pietrzak, 2002).
Walton and Cohen (2007, Experiment 1) examined students’ response to social
adversity directly in a laboratory study. They posed a subtle threat to college students’ sense of social belonging in a field of study. They asked students to list
either two friends who would fit in well in the field or eight such friends (cf.
Schwarz et al., 1991). Listing eight friends was difficult, and equally so for White
and Black students. The question the study tested was what meaning, if any, this
280
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

European Americans—Affirmation & Control
High-Performing African Americans—Affirmation
High-Performing African Americans—Control
Low-Performing African Americans—Affirmation
Low-Performing African Americans—Control
3.5

Mean GPA in Core Courses

3

2.5

2

1.5

Year 1

Term 4

Term 3

Term 2

Term 1

Term 4

Term 3

Term 2

Term 1

Preintervention

1

Year 2

FIGURE 2. Mean GPA in core courses for each term over 2 years, as a function of
student group (African American vs. European American), experimental condition,
and preintervention level of performance of African Americans (an average of the prior
year’s GPA and preintervention seventh-grade performance) in Cohen, Garcia, PurdieVaughns, Apfel, and Brzustoski (2009). Reprinted by permission from the American
Association for the Advancement of Science.
Note. African Americans were categorized into low and high performers based on a median split
within their racial group. Because European Americans in the two conditions did not differ significantly, their data were combined. Means adjusted for baseline covariates and students’
assigned teacher team.

difficulty had for students. For White students, the difficulty listing friends carried
no particular meaning—White students’ interest and motivation in the field were
unchanged whether they had been asked to list eight friends or two. But for Black
students, the difficulty experienced listing eight friends seemed to mean that they
281
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

Yeager & Walton

and, moreover, their racial group did not belong in the field. As compared to control participants, their motivation in the field dropped precipitously, and they discouraged a Black peer from pursuing the field as an area of study.
Building on this laboratory research, Walton and Cohen created an intervention to
forestall global inferences of nonbelonging in school (Experiment 2). Adopting procedures developed by Wilson and Linville (1982, 1985), they gave first-year college
students information indicating that students of all ethnicities worried at first about
their belonging in the transition to college but that these worries dissipated with time
and eventually all students came to feel at home. This information was designed to
convey that doubts about belonging and negative social events are normal at first in
college and are nondiagnostic of an actual lack of belonging. Students then engaged in
a series of activities designed to reinforce the treatment message—for instance, they
wrote an essay for incoming students the next year about how their own feelings of
belonging in college had changed over time (see J. Aronson et al., 2002). Control students went through the same exercises, but the information they were exposed to was
irrelevant to issues of belonging. In total, the intervention lasted about an hour.
The intervention had striking benefits for Black students. In two cohorts of
students and relative to several control groups, the intervention improved Black
students’ grades in college from sophomore through senior year, halving the
Black–White achievement gap (see Figure 3; Walton & Cohen, 2007, 2011). This
effect was statistically mediated by a change in Black students’ construal of social
adversity on campus. Daily diary surveys completed in the week following the
intervention showed that, in the control condition, Black students’ daily sense of
belonging in school rose and fell with the level of adversity they experienced each
day. To these students, negative social events seemed to convey that they did not
belong in the school in general. The treatment cut off this relationship—here,
Black students experienced similar levels of adversity, but adversity no longer led
them to question their belonging. For instance, consider a Black freshman who had
a bad day. Say his teacher criticized him in class or he was not invited to dinner by
dormmates. Already worried about his belonging, he is more likely than a White
student to see it as proof that he does not belong. A student who goes through the
intervention, however, still encounters such events but they no longer carry global
meaning; they are negative, but not diagnostic. Statistically, Walton and Cohen
(2011) found that it was this change in construal that mediated the effect of
the intervention on the 3-year gain in Black students’ GPA. In addition, 3 years
posttreatment, the intervention also improved Black students’ self-reported physical health and happiness, both outcomes linked strongly to a secure sense of
belonging.
In research in progress, tailored versions of the social-belonging intervention
have improved grades and school-related attitudes and behaviors among African
American middle school students (Walton, Cohen, Garcia, Apfel, & Master, 2011)
and female undergraduate engineering students (Walton, Logel, Peach, & Spencer,
2011).
Understanding Social-Psychological Interventions in Education
Readers may wonder, how did these interventions work at all—how could they
change students’ psychology to improve academic outcomes even in the short
282
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

4.00
3.90

Social-Belonging
Treatment

European Americans, Randomized Control
European Americans, Social-Belonging Treatment
African Americans, Randomized Control
African Americans, Social-Belonging Treatment

3.80
3.70
3.60
3.50
3.40
3.30
3.20
3.10
3.00
Fall
Term

Fall
Term
First Year

Spring
Term

Sophomore Year

Fall
Term

Spring
Term

Fall
Term

Junior Year

Spring
Term

Senior Year

FIGURE 3. Mean academic performance as a function of semester, student race, and
experimental condition (raw means) in Walton and Cohen (2011). Reprinted by permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science.

term? And how did they maintain their effects over time? Below we address each
question in turn, followed by a discussion of how social-psychological interventions could be delivered effectively to more students.
How do social-psychological interventions change students’ psychology to improve
academic outcomes in the short term? They do so by precisely targeting students’
experience in school from the student’s perspective and by using impactful delivery
mechanisms. Although the four psychological interventions reviewed above targeted different (albeit related) psychological processes, each began with a precise
understanding of students’ subjective experience in school—what school seems
like to the student in the classroom, not how school appears to an observer,
researcher, or teacher. These interventions may seem “small” to observers, and
often they are in terms of time and cost and in relation to other school reforms.
From the perspective of a researcher or teacher, an implicit theories workshop or
a value-affirmation writing exercise is just one of many classroom experiences
given to students. But to a student sitting at a desk in the third row worrying about
whether a poor test score means she is stupid or whether others will reduce her
to a negative stereotype, an experience like learning that the brain can grow and
form new connections when challenged or being invited to describe personally
283
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

Yeager & Walton

important values may feel quite “large” (E. Aronson et al., 1978). Such interventions directly address students’ experience in school and thus their school-related
behavior.
Critically, if a social-psychological intervention does not deliver its message in
a way that changes how students think or feel about school or about themselves in
school, then nothing has been delivered at all. Each intervention reviewed above
used a delivery mechanism that, although brief, drew on research on the psychology of persuasion to make the experience maximally impactful for students. Rather
than simply delivering an appeal to a student who passively receives it, each intervention enlisted students in actively participating in or generating the intervention
itself (see Lewin, 1952). These strategies can induce deep processing and prepare
students to transfer the content to new settings (Chase, Chin, Oppezzo, & Schwartz,
2009; Schwartz & Martin, 2004). For instance, one delivery mechanism featured
in several interventions involved asking students to write letters to younger students advocating the treatment message (e.g., J. Aronson et al., 2002; Walton &
Cohen, 2007; 2011). As research on the “saying-is-believing” effect shows (E.
Aronson, 1999), generating and then advocating a persuasive message to a receptive audience is a powerful means of persuasion (for a related example, see
Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009).
Although these delivery mechanisms are psychologically powerful, the interventions are in an important sense “stealthy,” a quality that may increase their
effectiveness (Robinson, in press). In none of the interventions were students
exposed to a direct persuasive appeal or told that they were receiving “an intervention” to improve their performance. Students in Wilson and Linville’s (1982, 1985)
intervention thought they were responding to a survey. Students in the Walton and
Cohen (2007, 2011) intervention took the role of mentor to younger students (also
see J. Aronson et al., 2002). They were not told that they themselves were the
targets of the persuasive message. Other studies used class assignments to deliver
the intervention, such as a neuroscience workshop (Blackwell et al., 2007) or an
in-class writing assignment (Cohen et al., 2009; Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009),
both of which had no obvious link to students’ academic performance. Overall,
these indirect approaches may be more effective than overt strategies. They do not
feel controlling and so they minimize resistence and reactance to the message.
They also allow students to take credit for their success rather than risking the possibility that students attribute positive outcomes to a heavy-handed intervention.
Furthermore, stealthy interventions do not stigmatize students—they do not convey to students that they are seen as in need of help or perceived as likely to fail,
which could undermine an intervention’s intended effect. Indeed, telling people
that a value affirmation is intended to make them feel better can reduce its effectiveness (Sherman et al., 2009).
Another way these interventions are “stealthy” is by being brief. One recent randomized field experiment found greater behavior change after a short (5-minute)
intervention to reduce drinking among college student, than after a longer (50-minute) intervention (Kulesza, Apperson, Larimer, & Copeland, 2010; also see Petry,
Weinstock, Ledgerwood, & Morasco, 2008). Although these studies did not focus on
educational outcomes, they contradict the intuition that “bigger” interventions are
necessarily “better.”
284
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

Social-Psychological Interventions in Education

This analysis leads to counterintuitive predictions about how to maximize the
impact of psychological interventions. It would be reasonable to think, for example, that training teachers (or parents) to reinforce psychological messages or doubling the length of an in-class growth mind-set workshop from 8 to 16 sessions
would amplify an intervention’s benefits. However, if adolescents perceive a
teacher’s reinforcement of a psychological idea as conveying that they are seen as
in need of help, teacher training or an extended workshop could undo the effects
of the intervention, not increase its benefits. Moreover, in the case of the Cohen
et al. (2006) intervention, for example, if stereotype threat was a force preventing
students from achieving their potential and this force was removed through a values affirmation, it is not clear that additional strategies to remove the same restraining force in other ways, for instance, by having teachers reinforce a student’s
values, would increase the effect. In this way, the teaching of academic content in
school is fundamentally different from the delivery of psychological interventions.
Academic content is complex and taught layer on layer: The more math students
are taught, in general the more math they learn. Changing students’ psychology, by
contrast, sometimes requires a lighter touch.
Nevertheless, when different interventions target different psychological barriers to learning, combining interventions may produce additive effects. For instance,
one recent study found that both a social-belonging intervention and an intervention to train students to self-affirm in times of stress (an “affirmation training”
intervention) raised the achievement of female engineering students, yet did so
through different mechanisms. The social-belonging intervention led women to
perceive that others viewed female engineers more positively; the affirmationtraining intervention prevented the perception that others viewed female engineers
negatively from undermining women’s engineering grades (Walton, Logel, et al.,
2011). It is intriguing to speculate that a combined intervention could yield greater
effects, provided that the mechanism used to deliver one intervention does not
interfere with the meaning of the other intervention.
In summary, social-psychological interventions change students’ behavior by
(a) targeting students’ experience in school from the student’s perspective and
(b) deploying powerful yet stealthy persuasive tactics to deliver the treatment message effectively without generating problematic side effects, such as stigmatizing
recipients.
How do social-psychological interventions affect student outcomes over long periods of time? They do so by affecting recursive processes that accumulate effects
over time. A critical question about psychological interventions is how brief exercises could improve students’ achievement months and years later. In general, we
think it is exceedingly unlikely that psychological interventions generate longlasting benefits because students keep the treatment message vividly in mind over
long periods. Consistent with this analysis, in Walton and Cohen’s (2011) socialbelonging intervention, students were asked at the end of their college careers to
recall the treatment message. Despite the large benefits of the intervention for
African American students over the 3-year assessment period, few students accurately recalled the treatment message and the vast majority denied that taking part
in the 1-hour study had had any effect on their college experience.
285
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

Yeager & Walton

How then do psychological interventions generate long-lasting benefits?
They do so by setting into motion recursive social, psychological, and intellectual processes in school. As students study and learn and build academic skills
and knowledge, they are better prepared to learn and perform well in the future.
As students feel more secure in their belonging in school and form better relationships with peers and teachers, these become sources of support that promote
feelings of belonging and academic success later. When students achieve success
beyond what they thought possible, their beliefs about their potential may
change, leading them to invest themselves more in school, further improving
performance and reinforcing their belief in their potential for growth. As students do well, they are placed in higher level classes—gateways that raise expectations, expose them to high-achieving peers, and improve subsequent academic
opportunities. Through these recursive processes, students gain momentum and
achieve better academic outcomes over time—or they do not. A well-timed,
well-targeted psychological intervention taps into these recursive processes and
thus changes the trajectory of students’ experiences and outcomes in school (see
Cohen et al., 2009).
Consistent with this analysis, research tracking the long-term effects of socialpsychological interventions finds repeatedly that such interventions change students’ academic trajectories. Indeed, the mean-level effects of psychological
interventions on student grades are accounted for by changes in the trajectory of
students’ academic performance over time. The value-affirmation intervention, for
instance, was delivered to students early in seventh grade and had long-term effects
primarily among previously poor-performing African American students (see
Figure 2; Cohen et al., 2009). Evidence suggests the affirmation cut off a downward spiral in performance, preventing worse performance from leading to greater
feelings of stress and threat and undermining subsequent performance (also see
Blackwell et al., 2007; Sherman & Hartson, in press). Analogously, the Walton and
Cohen (2007, 2011) social-belonging intervention set in motion a positive recursive process that improved students’ grades over 3 years in a steady step-by-step
fashion (see Figure 3; also see Wilson & Linville, 1985).
How do psychological interventions change the trajectory of students’ academic
outcomes? Research directly addresses this question. For example, Blackwell and
colleagues (2007, Study 1) found that when students believed that they could get
smarter over time, they were more likely to believe that working hard could help
them succeed in school and they endorsed the goal of learning from coursework.
These beliefs and goals motivated greater use of effective learning strategies (such
as increasing effort after setbacks) and less use of ineffective strategies (such as
spending less time on a subject after setbacks). Over time, this increased effort and
use of more productive learning strategies helped students take advantage of instruction in school, persist longer, seek help when needed, and ultimately learn more in
school. These changes in beliefs and strategies statistically mediated a 2-year upward
trajectory observed in middle school math grades for students with an incremental
mind-set. By understanding this interaction between psychological processes (e.g.,
students’ beliefs about the nature of intelligence) and school structures (e.g., learning
opportunities present in school), it is easier to see how changing students’ beliefs
could affect their school achievement over long periods.
286
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

Social-Psychological Interventions in Education

Other research investigates how interventions that mitigate concern about negative stereotypes can raise students’ achievement. For example, research shows
that stereotype threat can undermine learning, not just academic performance. In
one laboratory experiment, African American students who studied novel academic material in a threatening rather than nonthreatening learning environment
performed worse on a test of that material a week later even in a nonthreatening
performance setting (Taylor & Walton, in press; also see Rydell, Shiffrin, Boucher,
Van Loo, & Rydell, 2010). This effect did not occur for European Americans. In a
second study, Taylor and Walton (in press) found that a value-affirmation undid
this effect of threat—it helped African American students learn more despite
threat. The results suggest that one way a value-affirmation intervention may
improve long-term academic outcomes is by helping students acquire the building
blocks of academic skills and knowledge needed to perform well in subsequent
academic settings.
Other studies examine recursive social-relational processes. For instance, as
noted, Walton and Cohen’s (2007, 2011) social-belonging intervention led to a
term-by-term improvement in African American students’ grades over 3 years (see
Figure 3), and this boost in grades was mediated by a change in students’ construal
of adverse social events in school—these events no longer carried a global, threatening meaning to students (Walton & Cohen, 2011). If students feel more secure
in their belonging in school, they may approach others in the academic environment more and with more positive attitudes, building better relationships, reinforcing their feelings of belonging, and laying the groundwork for later academic
success (also see Mendoza-Denton et al., 2002).
If effective psychological interventions alter recursive processes in school, then
the timing of these interventions is critical. In many cases, it may be essential to
deliver psychological interventions at key educational junctures, such as at the
beginning of an academic year (Cohen et al., 2006; Cohen et al., 2009), during an
important transition such as when students enter a new school (Walton & Cohen,
2007, 2011; Wilson & Linville, 1982, 1985), or before an academic gateway, such
as before students are tracked into algebra versus lower level math classes
(Crosnoe, Lopez-Gonzalez, & Muller, 2004; Hallinan, 2001) or before a highstakes exam (Papay, Murnane, & Willett, 2010). Illustrating the importance of
timing, one study found that the earlier a value-affirmation intervention was delivered the more it improved students’ grades and, furthermore, that timing mattered
more than frequency (Cook, Purdie-Vaughns, Garcia, & Cohen, 2011). This finding echoes Raudenbush’s (1984) classic meta-analysis of teacher expectancy
effects, which found that teacher expectancy interventions were effective only
when delivered within the first few weeks of school.
The importance of recursive processes in sustaining the effects of psychological
interventions over time reinforces the proposition that these interventions do not
work in isolation; rather, they operate in a complex system involving numerous
structural factors (Lewin, 1952). When well targeted and well timed, a psychological intervention relies on recursive social, psychological, and intellectual processes that are present in school to produce sustained gains in students’ school
achievement.

287
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

Discussion
How Can Social-Psychological Interventions Be Scaled
to Benefit More Students?
The review above discusses how social-psychological interventions can boost
student achievement and address long-standing achievement gaps. But as Bryk
(2009) argues, to scale an educational innovation it is not enough to know that it
can work in one context; “we need to know how to make it work reliably over
many diverse contexts and situations” (p. 598; also see Morris & Hiebert, 2011).
There are several challenges to scaling psychological interventions, many of which
are common to educational innovations in general. Instead of reviewing the vast
literature on scaling educational interventions, in this discussion we address how
lessons from this literature apply specifically to efforts to scale social-psychological interventions and suggest how key challenges might be overcome. In particular, we focus on two topics: (a) What should be scaled, and what are the barriers to
scaling this? and (b) What kinds of strategies and expertise are needed to scale
social-psychological interventions effectively?
What Should Be Scaled, and What Are the Barriers to Scaling This?
It is the specific psychological experience created by a psychological intervention
that should be reproduced at scale, not incidental features of the intervention. For
instance, a scaled-up growth mind-set intervention should lead students to believe that
when they experience setbacks their ability can improve, not necessarily teach them
neuroanatomy. This is analogous to other well-designed reforms in education, where
it is essential to scale the student learning experience rather than the specific activities,
worksheets, or examples used to create this experience. When a psychological intervention is delivered to more students, what barriers can prevent the intended psychological experience from being replicated? We address three barriers below.
First, past research reminds us that it can be easy to scale up superficial features
of an educational innovation without reproducing the intended psychological or
educational experience (see, e.g., Fullan, 2001; Labaree, 1998; Tyack & Cuban,
1995). Under these circumstances the intervention would not be predicted to have
the intended effect. Take the case of the California mission project. The project
began as a small but successful initiative in which fourth grade students conducted
independent research on one of the Spanish missions in California, created a replica of the mission—in some cases, even making adobe bricks by hand—and presented a class report. The project seemed to increase intrinsic motivation (Checkley,
2008); for instance, in news reports teachers said students were highly engaged
and students reported planning summer vacations around visiting their mission
(“Drawings Aid,” 1931; Haessler, 1973). Excited by the early returns, reformers
quickly took the initiative to scale, requiring nearly every fourth grader in
California to do a mission project. Soon enough, local stores sold premade “mission kits” with fact sheets on each. What began as a project requiring original
research and intensive thinking ended as a trip to an arts and crafts store. Although
no formal evaluation has been done, it would be surprising if this version of the
project continued to produce benefits for student motivation. When an intervention
is taken to scale without the theoretically essential components, it will not have the
intended effects.
288
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

Social-Psychological Interventions in Education

Similarly, if scaled improperly, social-psychological interventions could
become something different entirely—not a test of whether the theory works at
scale but a worksheet to be handed out or a lesson to “get through.” It is easy to
imagine, for instance, how a value-affirmation intervention, if delivered poorly,
could become a caricature—a hollow, ego-boosting exercise in self-praise (perhaps one reminiscent of a scene from Saturday Night Live’s Stuart Smalley skit;
“I’m good enough, I’m smart enough, and doggone it, people like me”)—not a tool
for affirming students’ values and reducing stress and threat in school.
Second, even when interventions are delivered with an effort to reproduce theoretically essential components, research finds that they can sometimes be derailed
by seemingly small changes in how the intervention is delivered. This occurs if
such changes lead recipients to perceive a different meaning in the intervention
(for striking examples, compare Langer & Rodin, 1976, to Schulz & Hanusa,
1978; compare Paluck, 2009, to Paluck, 2010; also see Marigold, Holmes & Ross,
2007, Study 3). For instance, in the effective Hulleman and Harackiewicz (2009)
intervention reviewed in Table 1, students generated and wrote reasons why
schoolwork was relevant to their lives, and this led to a .80 grade point (out of 4.0)
boost at the end of the school year for students with low expectations for success
in class. But when students were told why the schoolwork was important instead
of generating their own reasons, the intervention had a negative effect on students
with low expectations for success—in effect, by telling low-ability students how
important their schoolwork was, they were reminded that they might not be able
to accomplish those important goals, leading to less interest (Godes, Hulleman, &
Harackiewicz, 2007).
The challenge of delivering psychological interventions may be more acute
when they are delivered by teachers or other educational practitioners (cf. Morris
& Hiebert, 2011). The history of school reform reminds us that teachers can vary
in whether they deliver an intervention in the way intended or in name only, changing the meaning and effect of the intervention (Fullan, 2001; Tyack & Cuban,
1995). Labaree (1998) argues that each teacher has a “duchy” that operates relatively independently once the classroom door closes, leading to excellence that is
unhampered by outside control in some classrooms and low performance that is
resistant to attempts at improvement in other classrooms. Any educational reform
that relies on teachers to deliver a message in a classroom is affected by this reality.
This certainly applies to social-psychological interventions.
However, unlike many traditional educational reforms, psychological interventions involve relatively brief, discrete exercises, potentially reducing heterogeneity in implementation. For example, a values-affirmation or social-belonging
intervention consists of a self-contained reading and writing activity. Implicit theories interventions can be delivered effectively online (through, e.g., www.brainology.us or www.perts.net; for an evaluation, see Romero, Paunesku, & Dweck,
2011), as could many of the other interventions summarized in Table 1 (also see
Morisano, Hirsh, Peterson, Pihl, & Shore, 2010). Of course, even when using
an online approach, basic preconditions such as classroom management may be
necessary for an intervention to succeed. Just completing an intervention in a
rowdy classroom or one where other students can read or comment on a student’s
responses (e.g., a description of her or his core values) could undermine an intervention’s effectiveness. One study that examined this possibility found that a
289
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

Yeager & Walton

social-psychological intervention administered in classrooms varied in its fidelity
to experimental protocols and yielded no overall positive effect, whereas the same
intervention delivered in a controlled setting (a laboratory) was effective (Hulleman
& Cordray, 2009).
A third potential challenge to scaling psychological interventions involves how
the meaning of an intervention can change in different contexts. If the meaning of
an intervention changes, its effect may change as well. One way to help make an
intervention meaningful for diverse students is to structure the exercise to allow
students to personalize their responses so intervention materials evoke the intended
experience in the way that is most relevant to them. For instance, in an affirmation
intervention, students rank order values in terms of their importance to themselves
and then write about their top-ranked value; they are not told which value to select.
In a social-belonging intervention, students think about their own personal experience in the transition to a new school and write about how their experience illustrates the general process of change students experience transitioning to the school
and coming to feel at home there. This element of personalization allows each
student to make the intervention her or his own. In many settings, identical materials, if administered in well-managed classrooms and with fidelity, may be personally meaningful to diverse students and thus produce positive effects for them.
However, the effectiveness of social-psychological interventions may also be
enhanced by embedding contextually appropriate elements. For instance, the values students rank order in an affirmation intervention should include values that
are, in fact, personally important to students in the population at hand; if the list
does not include a broad range of values and ones important in the local context
(e.g., in some settings more than others, religious values), the intervention may be
less effective. Similarly, contextually appropriate colloquialisms or anecdotes
embedded in a social-belonging intervention—specific stories about older students’ feelings of belonging in the transition to students’ own school—may
increase the intervention’s effectiveness. Of course, making the materials more
specific to some students could reduce an intervention’s relevance for dissimilar
other students.
In addition, relational dynamics between teachers and students could affect the
meaning an intervention carries for students (cf. Raudenbush, 1984). It could seem
insincere if a teacher with whom a student has a hostile relationship asks the student to complete a value affirmation, perhaps undermining the effectiveness of the
intervention. Similarly, an incremental mind-set intervention might have no effect
if students believe that the person who tells them about their potential for growth
and improvement does not believe this himself or herself.
Importantly, the materials and procedures used in an intervention can differ
across contexts and still produce similar psychological experiences. However,
these changes must be guided by theory. For example, Dweck and colleagues have
taught an incremental theory of intelligence by asking participants to read brief
scientific articles describing how the brain can get smarter (e.g., Nussbaum &
Dweck, 2008), by providing effort versus intelligence praise after success (Mueller
& Dweck, 1998), by conducting neuroscience workshops (Blackwell et al., 2007),
by orchestrating email exchanges during a yearlong program with a mentor (Good
et al., 2003), and by asking students to write a pen pal letter to a younger student
(J. Aronson et al., 2002). These approaches differ in various ways. But each
290
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

Social-Psychological Interventions in Education

conveys the core message that intelligence is malleable. When equipped with a
well-specified theory of the psychological experience an intervention is designed
to create, materials and procedures can be modified, as necessary, to create the
target experience most effectively for a particular context and population.
In sum, we do not believe that practitioners should pick up previously effective
experimental materials and freely adapt them without planning or evaluation. Nor do
we believe they should hand out the original materials without considering whether
they would convey the intended meaning in the local context. Although in many
cases materials and procedures developed for one context may work well in a new
context, adapting them might increase their effectiveness. As in a curricular initiative, deciding how, when, and whether to adapt materials and procedures is difficult.
We therefore turn to the question of what kind of expertise is needed to create the
intended psychological experience for students in diverse contexts.
What Kinds of Expertise and Collaborations Are Required to Scale SocialPsychological Interventions Effectively?
To increase the reliability of social-psychological interventions across contexts,
researchers and practitioners will have to decide whether to customize an intervention and, if so, how to do so to best evoke the intended psychological experience.
Making these decisions draws on wisdom in two important areas: (a) theoretical
expertise, or an understanding of the psychological experience that is targeted by
the intervention, and (b) contextual expertise, or an understanding of the psychological experiences and backgrounds of students in the local context
If so, delivering psychological interventions at scale may be done best by creating an equal collaboration between researchers with a basic theoretical understanding of psychological processes and contextual experts, including qualitative
researchers, administrators, and educational practitioners who have profound,
intuitive knowledge or metis (Scott, 1998) of local students and contexts.
Contextual experts can identify areas where the procedures or materials used in an
intervention match or do not match local constraints and meanings. Theoretical
experts can assess whether potential modifications lead an intervention to hit or
miss its intended psychological mark. Because subtle changes to delivery mechanisms can shift the meanings of interventions for students, sometimes in nonobvious or unpredictable ways, researchers and practitioners should approach efforts
to scale psychological interventions with humility and with rigorous, step-by-step
evaluation. Qualitative methods may supplement experimental methods in these
evaluations.
Such equal collaborations have proven effective in other contexts, such as the
National Writing Project (McDonald, Buchanan, & Sterling, 2004), which scaled
an initiative to improve writing instruction using a network of researchers and
teachers who customized, refined, and delivered writing instruction to more than
5,000 students in seven states. Across 15 evaluation studies, National Writing
Project students made more gains in writing than matched comparison group students (National Writing Project, 2010)—a promising result considering the variability in instruction across contexts. Another education research and development
initiative, the Strategic Education Research Partnership (Donovan, Wigdor, &
Snow, 2003), has found similarly positive results for students’ academic vocabulary (also see Morris & Hiebert, 2011). More relevant here, some organizations are
291
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

Yeager & Walton

beginning to apply a similar approach to social-psychological interventions. For
instance, the new education research and development enterprise created by the
Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching has formed a network of
community colleges and researchers focused on the improvement of outcomes for
developmental (or remedial) math students (Bryk, 2009; Bryk, Gomez, & Grunow,
in press). Psychological interventions form one part of this team’s strategy. This
collaboration and others like it between researchers and practitioners can create
relational trust, a critical component of educational change (Bryk & Schneider,
2002; Bryk, Sebring, Allensworth, Luppescu, & Easton, 2010), and may increase
the likelihood that materials and procedures will be appropriate in local contexts.
These collaborations may prove fruitful for scaling psychological interventions.
Along similar lines, it may be useful to revisit past suggestions for creating a
new class of professional—a “psychological engineer”—a person with the expertise needed to scale psychological interventions effectively. Such professionals
would be trained in experimental methodology and psychological theory, although
their primary work would be not to advance psychological theory but to understand and alter psychological dynamics in applied settings. This would require
expertise in user-centered design and related qualitative inquiry, in the conduct of
equal collaborations across the theory–real world divide, in the measurement of
psychological processes, and in the delivery and experimental evaluation of psychological interventions. Such a professional could design and implement interventions, evaluate their effects, and troubleshoot interventions that do not produce
their intended effect. For instance, using measures of psychological processes, a
psychological engineer could examine whether an intervention failed to affect the
intended process and, if so, examine with practitioners how the delivery mechanism could be improved. Alternately, if the intervention affected the intended process, the psychological engineer and practitioners could examine whether this
process was important in the local context in affecting relevant outcomes.
In collaborative efforts to scale social-psychological interventions, the flow of
ideas between theory and application will be a two-way street (Bronfenbrenner,
1979; Lewin, 1952). As interventions are created and deployed and their effects
assessed, theories of psychological processes may be refined, leading to improved
interventions. This is directly analogous to work in other applied sciences, where
basic research and application feed back on each other in a mutually beneficial
cycle. When social-psychological interventions are taken to scale, the constraints
of application at many schools may lead to refinements in their essential elements
and the elimination of less important features, making them more streamlined,
powerful, and robust. For instance, it could be useful for scaling purposes to reduce
Blackwell et al.’s (2007) incremental theory intervention to fewer workshop sessions. But the process of reducing this intervention would require experimental
work to identify the theoretically critical elements, potentially resulting in both
new insights about basic psychological processes and a better intervention.
Second, when interventions are tested on broad samples, important boundary
conditions will likely be discovered. It could be that for some students or in some
conditions the suite of interventions reviewed in Table 1 might be ineffective.
When contextual experts collaborate on these projects and see these results, they
may think of other psychological processes that were not addressed—most likely,
292
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

Social-Psychological Interventions in Education

processes that psychologists did not anticipate. This could lead to new experiments
investigating these processes, new theories, and new interventions. Indeed, an
important source of theory in the social sciences is the attempt to explain failed
interventions (see, e.g., the discussion of McCord, 1978, in Ross & Nisbett, 1991).
This interplay of theory, research, and application would benefit both psychological science and the solution of social problems.
In sum, psychological interventions may be scaled most effectively when
researchers and practitioners combine requisite theoretical and contextual expertise. Existing organizations provide guidance for how to do this, but this process
may also be expedited by the creation of new roles within the field of education.
We anticipate that such efforts will benefit both basic psychological theory and
student outcomes.
Conclusion
Social-psychological interventions are not magic. They are not inputs that go
into a black box and automatically yield positive results. Instead, they are tools to
target important psychological processes in schools. These interventions grew out
of basic laboratory research and theory investigating these processes. They have
produced long-lasting gains in achievement in multiple studies, but they are
dependent on the capacities, meanings, and recursive processes present in local
contexts. If scaled up in appropriate ways, social-psychological interventions have
the potential to contribute, in conjunction with other reforms, to the solution of
endemic problems in education.
Nevertheless, because social-psychological interventions rely on subtle, nonobvious forces, they can lead to polarized reactions—either “uncritical acceptance
and overgeneralization on one hand; [or] vilifying criticism on the other” (Jussim
& Harber, 2005, p. 135; also see Wineburg, 1987; cf. Gawande, 2009). By understanding the mechanisms underlying the effects of social-psychological interventions, we hope that educational researchers can move past such reactions.
Social-psychological interventions complement—and do not replace—traditional
educational reforms. They do not teach students academic content or skills,
restructure schools, or improve teacher training. Instead, they allow students to
take better advantage of learning opportunities that are present in schools and tap
into existing recursive processes to generate long-lasting effects. Just at it would
be absurd to replace skilled surgeons with Gawande’s (2009) one-page checklist,
it would be absurd to replace traditional educational reforms with social-psychological interventions. Instead, as a surgical checklist allows a trained doctor to
perform as well as he or she is capable, social-psychological interventions can
unleash the potential of students and of the educational environments in which
they learn. Indeed, social-psychological interventions may make the effects of
high-quality educational reforms such as improved instruction or curricula more
apparent (Cohen et al., 2009).
Although we are optimistic that social-psychological interventions can be taken
to scale, doing so will require hard work. These are not quick fixes that can be
administered broadly without consideration for local contexts or the meaning students make of them. They will benefit from an R&D model that incorporates
authentic collaborations between researchers and contextual experts and rigorous
293
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

Yeager & Walton

evaluation at each step (Bryk, 2009; Bryk et al., in press; Morris & Hiebert, 2011).
But in a context in which many reforms in education have produced at best uneven
results, psychological interventions have a demonstrated potential to address fundamental problems, including low student achievement and large group differences, at low cost and over significant periods of time. We look forward to future
research that includes psychological strategies in the broader suite of reforms to
promote positive change in education.
Notes
The writing of this article was supported by a Spencer Foundation Dissertation
Fellowship for Research Related to Education and a grant from the Thrive Foundation
for Youth, both to the first author. We are grateful to Tony Bryk, Geoff Cohen, Carol
Dweck, Hunter Gehlbach, Matthew Kloser, Richard Shavelson, David Sherman, James
Stigler, Sander Thomaes, and Uri Treisman for their comments, to Alexandria Ordway
for her original research on the California Mission Project, and to Brian Spitzer for his
help.
1Although analogies can mislead if taken too far, they can also be helpful for understanding new ideas in science and, in particular in this case, for understanding how
multiple variables relate (Duit, 1991; Kuhn, 1979; Thibodeau, & Boroditsky, 2011).
2Poor academic achievement is not the only social problem that social-psychological interventions can address, even in the presence of structural impediments (for an
overview, see Reis & Gosling, 2010). Among other social problems, brief social-psychological interventions can have lasting effects on the health of the elderly (Langer &
Rodin, 1976; Rodin & Langer, 1977) and of college students (Pennebaker, 1997;
Pennebaker & Beall, 1986), the success of dieters (Axsom & Cooper, 1985; Logel &
Cohen, 2011), environmental conservation (Goldstein, Cialdini, & Griskevicius,
2008), youth aggression (Hudley & Graham, 1993; Thomaes, Bushman, Orobio de
Castro, Cohen, & Denissen, 2009; Yeager, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2011), and intergroup relations (e.g., Page-Gould, Mendoza-Denton, & Tropp, 2008; Paluck, 2009; cf.
Paluck, 2010).

References
Aaronovitch, D. (2010, January 23). In a world of hi-tech medicine and machinery, the
best safeguard is the low-tech checklist. The Times. Retrieved from http://entertainment
.timesonline.co.uk/tol/arts_and_entertainment/books/book_reviews/article
6995508 .ece
Aronson, E. (1999). The power of self-persuasion. American Psychologist, 54,
875–884.
Aronson, E., Blaney, N., Stephin, C., Sikes, J., & Snapp, M. (1978). The jigsaw classroom. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Aronson, J., Fried, C., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the effects of stereotype threat on
African American college students by shaping theories of intelligence. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 113–125.
Axsom, D., & Cooper, J. (1985). Cognitive dissonance and psychotherapy: The role of
effort justification in inducing weight loss. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 21, 149–160.
Bandura, A. (1977). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral change.
Psychological Review, 84, 191–215.

294
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

Social-Psychological Interventions in Education

Blackwell, L. A., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Theories of intelligence
and achievement across the junior high school transition: A longitudinal study and
an intervention. Child Development, 78, 246–263.
Bransford, J., Brown, A., & Cocking, R. (1999). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, school. Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences.
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The ecology of human development: Experiments by nature
and design. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bryk, A. S. (2009). Support a science of performance improvement. Phi Delta Kappan,
90, 597–600.
Bryk, A. S., Gomez, L., & Grunow, A. (in press). Ruminations II—Getting ideas into
action: Building networked improvement communities in education. In M. Hallinan
(Ed.), Frontiers of social science research.
Bryk, A. S., & Schneider, B. L. (2002). Trust in schools: A core resource for improvement. New York, NY: Russell Sage.
Bryk, A. S., Sebring, P. B., Allensworth, E., Luppescu, S., & Easton, J. Q. (2010).
Organizing schools for improvement: Lessons from Chicago. Chicago, IL: University
of Chicago Press.
Charles A. Dana Center. (2008). Summary of results from the 2008 evaluation conducted on academic youth development: Improving achievement by shaping the culture of algebra classrooms. Retrieved from http://www.utdanacenter.org/
academicyouth/downloads/implementation/12–ayd-evaluation-results.pdf
Chase, C. S., Chin, D. B., Oppezzo, M. A., & Schwartz, D. L. (2009). Teachable agents
and the protégé effect: Increasing the effort towards learning. Journal of Science and
Educational Technology, 18, 334–352.
Checkley, K. (2008). The essentials of social studies, grades K–8: Effective curriculum, instruction, and assessment. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and
Curriculum Development.
Cialdini, R. B. (2003). Crafting normative messages to protect the environment.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 12, 105–109.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., & Master, A. (2006). Reducing the racial achievement gap: A social-psychological intervention. Science, 313, 1307–1310.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaugns, V., Apfel, N., & Brzustoski, P. (2009).
Recursive processes in self-affirmation: Intervening to close the minority achievement gap. Science, 324, 400–403.
Cook, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. (2011, April). Longitudinal
impact of a values affirmation and its timing on minority students’ belonging and
performance in middle school. Presentation at the biennial meeting for the Society
for Research in Child Development, Montreal, Canada.
Crosnoe, R., Lopez-Gonzalez, L., & Muller, C. (2004). Immigration from Mexico into
the math/science pipeline in American education. Social Science Quarterly, 85,
1208–1226.
Destin, M., & Oyserman, D. (2009). From assets to school outcomes: How finances
shape children’s perceived possibilities and intentions. Psychological Science, 20,
414–418.
Donovan, M. S., Wigdor, A. K., & Snow, C. E. (Eds.). (2003). Strategic education
research partnership. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Drawings aid school studies. (1931, October 25). Oakland Tribune, p. B5.
Duckworth, A. L., Grant, H., Loew, B., Oettingen, G., & Gollwitzer, P. M. (in press).
Self-regulation strategies improve self-discipline in adolescents: Benefits of mental
contrasting and implementation intentions. Educational Psychology.

295
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

Yeager & Walton

Duit, R. (1991). On the role of analogies and metaphors in learning science. Science
Education, 75, 649–660.
Dweck, C. S. (2006). Mindset. New York, NY: Random House.
Dweck, C. S., & Leggett, E. L. (1988). A social-cognitive approach to motivation and
personality. Psychological Review, 95, 256–273.
Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. Evanston, IL: Row, Peterson.
Fullan, M. (2001). The new meaning of educational change. New York, NY: Teachers
College Press.
Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (in press). Social psychology and educational intervention.
In E. Shafir (Ed.), Behavioral foundations of policy. New York, NY: Russell Sage.
Garet, M., Wayne, A., Stancavage, F., Taylor, J., Walters, K., Song, M., & . . . Doolittle, F.
(2010). Middle School Mathematics Professional Development Impact Study:
Findings after the first year of implementation (NCEE 2010–4010). Retrieved from
http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/pubs/20104009/pdf/20104010.pdf
Gawande, A. (2009). The checklist manifesto: How to get things right. New York, NY:
Metropolitan Books.
Gehlbach, H. (2010). The social side of school: Why teachers need social psychology.
Educational Psychology Review, 22, 349–362.
Glazerman, S., Isenberg, E., Dolfin, S., Bleeker, M., Johnson, A., Grider, M., &
Jacobus, M. (2010). Impacts of comprehensive teacher induction: Final results from
a randomized controlled study (NCEE 2010 4028). Retrieved from http://ies.ed.gov/
ncee/pubs/20104027/pdf/20104027.pdf
Godes, O., Hulleman, C. S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2007, April). Boosting students’
interest in math with utility value: Two experimental tests. Paper presented at the
meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Chicago, IL.
Goldstein, N., Cialdini, R., & Griskevicius, V. (2008). A room with a viewpoint: Using
social norms to motivate environmental conservation in hotels. Journal of Consumer
Research, 35, 472–482.
Good, C., Aronson, J., & Inzlicht, M. (2003). Improving adolescents’ standardized test
performance: An intervention to reduce the effects of stereotype threat. Journal of
Applied Developmental Psychology, 24, 645–662.
Greenwald, A. G. (1980). The totalitarian ego: Fabrication and revision of personal
history. American Psychologist, 35, 603–618.
Haessler, J. (1973, April 5). Fourth grade class to build scale model of San Antonio
mission in EDH. Mountain Democrat.
Hallinan, M. (2001). Sociological perspectives on Black/White inequalities in
American schooling. Sociology of Education, Extra Issue, 74, 50–70.
Haynes, A. B., Weiser, T. G., Lipsitz, S. R., Breizat, A-H., Dellinger, E. P., Herbosa, T.,
Joseph, S., Kibatala, P. L., Lapitan, M. C. M., Merry, A. F., Moorthy, K., Reznick, R. K.,
Taylor, B., Gawande, A. A. (2009). A surgical safety checklist to reduce morbidity and
mortality in a global population. The New England Journal of Medicine, 360, 491–499.
Haynes, T. L., Perry, R. P., Stupnisky, R. H., & Daniels, L. M. (2009). A review of
attributional retraining treatments: Fostering engagement and persistence in vulnerable college students. In Higher Education: Handbook of Theory and Research
(pp. 227–271). The Netherlands: Springer.
Hudley, C., & Graham, S. (1993). An attributional intervention to reduce peer-directed
aggression among African-American boys. Child Development, 64, 124–138.
Hulleman, C. S., & Cordray, D. S. (2009). Moving from the lab to the field: The role
of fidelity and achieved relative intervention strength. Journal of Research on
Educational Effectiveness, 2, 88–110.

296
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

Social-Psychological Interventions in Education

Hulleman, C. S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2009). Making education relevant: Increasing
interest and performance in high school science classes. Science, 326, 1410–1412.
James-Burdumy, S., Deke, J., Lugo-Gil, J., Carey, N., Hershey, A., Gersten, R., . . .
Faddis, B. (2010). Effectiveness of selected supplemental reading comprehension
interventions: Findings from two student cohorts (NCEE 2010–4016). Retrieved
from http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/pubs/20104015/pdf/20104016.pdf
Jamieson, J., Mendes, W. B., Blackstock, E., & Schmader, T. (2009). Turning the knots
in your stomach into bows: Reappraising arousal improves performance on the
GRE. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 208–212.
Jussim, L., & Harber, K. D. (2005). Teacher expectations and self-fulfilling prophecies:
Knowns and unknowns, resolved and unresolved controversies. Personality and
Social Psychology Review, 9, 131–155.
Kelley, H. H. (1973). The process of causal attribution. American Psychologist, 28,
107–128.
Kuhn, T. S. (1979). Metaphor in science. In A. Ortony (Ed.), Metaphor and thought
(2nd ed., pp. 403–419). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Kulesza, M., Apperson, M., Larimer, M. E., & Copeland, A. L. (2010). Brief alcohol
intervention for college drinkers: How brief is it? Addictive Behaviors, 35, 730–733.
Labaree, D. F. (1998). Educational researchers: Living with a lesser form of knowledge. Educational Researcher, 27, 4–12.
Langer, E. J., & Rodin, J. (1976). The effects of choice and enhanced personal responsibility for the aged: A field experiment in an institutional setting. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 34, 191–198.
Lewin, K. (1952). Group decision and social change. In G. E. Swanson, T. M.
Newcomb, & E. L. Hartley (Eds.), Readings in social psychology (2nd ed., pp. 330–
344). New York, NY: Holt.
Logel, C., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). The role of the self in physical health: Testing the
effect of a values affirmation intervention on weight loss. Unpublished manuscript,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
Marigold, D. C., Holmes, J. G., & Ross, M. (2007). More than words: Reframing compliments from romantic partners fosters security in low self-esteem individuals.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 232–248.
Martens, A., Johns, M., Greenberg, J., & Schimel, J. (2006). Combating stereotype
threat: The effect of self-affirmation on women’s intellectual performance. Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology, 42, 236–243.
McCord, J. (1978). A thirty-year follow-up of treatment effects. American Psychologist,
33, 284–289.
Mendoza-Denton, R., Purdie, V., Downey, G., Davis, A., & Pietrzak, J. (2002).
Sensitivity to status-based rejection: Implications for African-American students’
college experience. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 896–918.
Miller, D. T., & Prentice, D. A. (in press). Psychological levers of behavior change. In
E. Shafir (Ed.), Behavioral foundations of policy. New York, NY: Russell Sage.
Miyake, A., Kost-Smoth, L. E., Finkelstein, N. D., Pollock, S. J., Cohen, G. L., & Ito, A.
(2010). Reducing the gender achievement gap in college science: A classroom study
of values affirmation. Science, 330, 1234–1237.
Molden, D. C., & Dweck, C. S. (2006). Finding “meaning” in psychology: A lay theories approach to self-regulation, social perception, and social development. American
Psychologist, 61, 192–203.
Morisano, D., Hirsh, J. B., Peterson, J. B., Pihl, R. O., & Shore, B. (2010). Setting,
elaborating, and reflecting on personal goals improves academic performance.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 95, 255–264.

297
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

Yeager & Walton

Morris, A. K., & Hiebert, J. (2011). Creating shared instructional products: An alternative approach to improving teaching. Educational Researcher, 40, 5–13.
Mueller, C. M., & Dweck, C. S. (1998). Praise for intelligence can undermine children’s motivation and performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
75, 33–52.
National Writing Project. (2010). Research brief no. 2. Retrieved from http://www
.nwp.org/cs/public/download/nwp_file/14004/FINAL_2010_Research_Brief.pdf?
x-r=pcfile_d
Nussbaum, A. D., & Dweck, C. S. (2008). Defensiveness vs. remediation: Self-theories
and modes of self-esteem maintenance. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
34, 127–134.
Oyserman, D., Bybee, D., & Terry, K. (2006). Possible selves and academic outcomes:
How and when possible selves impel action. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 91, 188–204.
Page-Gould, E., Mendoza-Denton, R., & Tropp, L. R. (2008). With a little help from
my cross-group friend: Reducing anxiety in intergroup contexts through cross-group
friendship. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 95, 1080–1094.
Paluck, E. L. (2009). Reducing intergroup prejudice and conflict using the media: A
field experiment in Rwanda. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96,
574–587.
Paluck, E. L. (2010). Is it better not to talk? Group polarization, extended contact, and
perspective-taking in eastern Democratic Republic of Congo. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 36, 1170–1185.
Papay, J., Murnane, R., & Willett, J. (2010). The consequences of high school exit
examinations for low-performing urban students: Evidence from Massachusetts.
Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 32, 5–23.
Pennebaker, J. W. (1997). Opening up: The healing power of expressing emotion. New
York, NY: Guilford.
Pennebaker, J. W., & Beall, S. K. (1986). Confronting a traumatic event: Toward an
understanding of inhibition and disease. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 95, 274–
281.
Petry, N. M., Weinstock, J., Ledgerwood, D. M., & Morasco, B. (2008). A randomized
trial of brief interventions for problem and pathological gamblers. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 76, 318–328.
Ramirez, G., & Beilock, S. (2011). Writing about testing worries boosts exam performance in the classroom. Science, 331, 211–213.
Raudenbush, S. (1984). Magnitude of teacher expectancy effects on pupil IQ as a function of the credibility of expectancy induction: A synthesis of findings from 18
experiments. Journal of Educational Psychology, 76, 85–97.
Reis, H. T., & Gosling, S. D. (2010). Social psychological methods outside the laboratory. In S. T. Fiske, D. T. Gilbert, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (5th ed., Vol. 1, pp. 82–114). New York, NY: John Wiley.
Ritter, S., Anderson, J. R., Koedinger, K. R., & Corbett, A. (2007). Cognitive tutor:
Applied research in mathematics education. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14,
249–255.
Robinson, T. N. (in press). Stealth interventions for obesity prevention and control:
Motivating behavior change. In L. Dube, A. Bechara, A. Dagher, A. Drewnowski,
J. LeBel, P. James, D. Richard, R. Denis, R. Yada. (Eds.), Obesity prevention: The
role of brain and society on individual behavior. New York, NY: Elsevier.

298
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

Social-Psychological Interventions in Education

Rodin, J., & Langer, E. J. (1977). Long-term effects of a control-relevant intervention
with the institutionalized aged. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35,
897–902.
Romero, C., Paunesku, D., & Dweck, C. (2011, April). Brainology in the classroom:
An online growth mindset intervention affects GPA, conduct, and implicit theories.
Poster presented at the biennial meeting for the Society for Research in Child
Development, Montreal, Canada.
Ross, L., & Nisbett, R. E. (1991). The person and the situation: Perspectives of social
psychology. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Rydell, R. J., Shiffrin, R. M., Boucher, K. L., Van Loo, K., & Rydell, M. T. (2010).
Stereotype threat prevents perceptual learning. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Science, 107, 14042–14047.
Schmader, T., Johns, M., & Forbes, C. (2008). An integrated process model of stereotype threat effects on performance. Psychological Review, 115, 336–356.
Schulz, R., & Hanusa, B. H. (1978). Long-term effects of control and predictabilityenhancing interventions: Findings and ethical issues. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 36, 1194–1201.
Schwarz, N., Bless, H., Strack, F., Klumpp, G., Rittenauer-Schatka, H., & Simmons,
A. (1991). Ease of retrieval as information: Another look at the availability heuristic.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 195–202.
Schwartz, D. L., & Martin, T. (2004). Inventing to prepare for learning: The hidden
efficiency of original student production in statistics instruction. Cognition &
Instruction, 22, 129–184.
Scott, J. C. (1998). Seeing like a state: How certain schemes to improve the human
condition have failed. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Sherman, D. K., & Cohen, G. L. (2006). The psychology of self-defense: Selfaffirmation theory. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 38, pp. 183–242). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Sherman, D. K., Cohen, G. L., Nelson, L. D., Nussbaum, A. D., Bunyan, D. P., & Garcia,
J. P. (2009). Affirmed yet unaware: Exploring the role of awareness in the process of
self-affirmation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 97, 745–764.
Sherman, D. K., & Hartson, K. A. (2011). Reconciling self-protection with selfimprovement: Self-affirmation theory. In M. Alicke & C. Sedikides (Eds.), The
Handbook of Self-Enhancement and Self-Protection. (pp. 128–151). New York, NY:
Guilford Press.
Sherman, D. K., Hartson, K. A., Binning, K. R., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J.,
Taborsky-Barba, S., Tomassetti, S., Nussbaum, A. D., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). Selfaffirmation, identity threat, and academic performance: Understanding the effects of
a social psychological intervention. Manuscript in preparation.
Somers, M.-A., Corrin, W., Sepanik, S., Salinger, T., Levin, J., & Zmach, C. (2010).
The Enhanced Reading Opportunities Study final report: The impact of supplemental literacy courses for struggling ninth-grade readers (NCEE 2010–4022).
Retrieved from http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/pubs/20104021/pdf/20104021.pdf
Steele, C. (2010). Whistling Vivaldi: And other clues how stereotypes affect us. New
York, NY: Norton.
Steele, C. M. (1988). The psychology of self-affirmation: Sustaining the integrity
of the self. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology
(pp. 261–302). New York, NY: Academic Press.
Steele, C. M. (1997). A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape intellectual identity and
performance. American Psychologist, 52, 613–629.

299
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

Yeager & Walton

Steele, C. M., Spencer, S. J., & Aronson, J. (2002). Contending with group image: The
psychology of stereotype and social identity threat. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances
in experimental social psychology (Vol. 34, pp. 379–440). San Diego, CA: Academic
Press.
Storms, M. D., & Nisbett, R. E. (1970). Insomnia and the attribution process. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 16, 319–328.
Szalavitz, M. (2009, January 14). Study: A simple surgery checklist saves lives. Time.
Retrieved from http://www.time.com/time/health/article/0,8599,1871759,00.html
Taylor, V. J., & Walton, G. (in press). Stereotype threat undermines academic learning.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin.
Thibodeau, P. H., & Boroditsky, L. (2011). Metaphors we think with: The role of
metaphor in reasoning. PLoS ONE, 6(2), e16782. Retrieved from http://www
.plosone.com
Thomaes, S., Bushman, B. J., Orobio de Castro, B., Cohen, G., & Denissen, J. A.
(2009). Reducing narcissistic aggression by buttressing self-esteem: An experimental field study. Psychological Science, 20, 1536–1542.
Tyack, D. B., & Cuban, L. (1995). Tinkering toward utopia: A century of public school
reform. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Vansteenkiste, M., Simons, J., Lens, W., Sheldon, K. M., & Deci, E. L. (2004).
Motivating learning, performance, and persistence: The synergistic role of intrinsic
goals and autonomy-support. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87,
246–260.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2007). A question of belonging: Race, social fit, and
achievement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 82–96.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A brief social-belonging intervention improves
academic and health outcomes among minority students. Science, 331, 1447–1451.
Walton, G. M., Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., & Master, A. (2011). A brief intervention to buttress middle school students’ sense of social-belonging: Effects by race
and gender. Unpublished manuscript, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
Walton, G. M., & Dweck, C. S. (2009). Solving social problems like a psychologist.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 4, 101–102.
Walton, G. M., Logel, C., Peach, J., & Spencer, S. (2011). Two interventions to boost
women’s achievement in engineering: Social-belonging and self-affirmationtraining. Unpublished manuscript, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
Walton, G. M., & Spencer, S. J. (2009). Latent ability: Grades and test scores systematically underestimate the intellectual ability of negatively stereotyped students.
Psychological Science, 20, 1132–1139.
Weiner, B. (1986). An attributional theory of emotion and motivation, New York, NY:
Springer-Verlag.
Wilson, T. D. (2006). The power of social psychological interventions. Science, 313,
1251–1252.
Wilson, T. D., Damiani, M., & Shelton, N. (2002). Improving the academic performance of college students with brief attributional interventions. In J. Aronson (Ed.),
Improving academic achievement: Impact of psychological factors on education
(pp. 88–108). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. (1982). Improving the academic performance of college freshmen: Attribution therapy revisited. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 42, 367–376.

300
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

Social-Psychological Interventions in Education

Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. (1985). Improving the performance of college freshmen with attributional techniques. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
49, 287–293.
Wineburg, S. S. (1987). The self-fulfillment of the self-fulfilling prophecy. Educational
Researcher, 16, 28–37.
Yeager, D. S., Trzesniewski, K., & Dweck, C. S. (2011). An implicit theories intervention
changes aggressive and prosocial responses to peer exclusion and victimization
among high school students. Unpublished manuscript, Stanford University, Stanford,
CA.

Authors
DAVID S. YEAGER is a Ph.D. candidate in the Stanford University School of Education,
Developmental and Psychological Sciences, 271 Jordan Hall, Stanford, CA 94107;
e-mail: dyeager@stanford.edu. He is supported by a dissertation writing fellowship from
the Spencer Foundation. His research focuses on social cognitive development, motivation, adolescence, research methodology, and psychological interventions.
GREGORY M. WALTON is an assistant professor in the Social Psychology area of the
Stanford University Department of Psychology; e-mail: gwalton@stanford.edu. His
research focuses on self and identity, stereotypes, motivation and achievement, and social
cognition.

301
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at Stanford University Libraries on June 7, 2011

RER405999RER10.3102/0034654311405999Yeager

& WaltonSocial-Psychological Inter-

ventions in Education
Review of Educational Research
June 2011, Vol. 81, No. 2, pp. 267–301
DOI: 10.3102/0034654311405999
© 2011 AERA. http://rer.aera.net

Social-Psychological Interventions in Education:
They’re Not Magic
David S. Yeager and Gregory M. Walton
Stanford University

Recent randomized experiments have found that seemingly “small” socialpsychological interventions in education—that is, brief exercises that target
students’ thoughts, feelings, and beliefs in and about school—can lead to
large gains in student achievement and sharply reduce achievement gaps
even months and years later. These interventions do not teach students academic content but instead target students’ psychology, such as their beliefs
that they have the potential to improve their intelligence or that they belong
and are valued in school. When social-psychological interventions have lasting effects, it can seem surprising and even “magical,” leading people either
to think of them as quick fixes to complicated problems or to consider them
unworthy of serious consideration. The present article discourages both
responses. It reviews the theoretical basis of several prominent social-psychological interventions and emphasizes that they have lasting effects
because they target students’ subjective experiences in school, because they
use persuasive yet stealthy methods for conveying psychological ideas, and
because they tap into recursive processes present in educational environments. By understanding psychological interventions as powerful but context-dependent tools, educational researchers will be better equipped to take
them to scale. This review concludes by discussing challenges to scaling psychological interventions and how these challenges may be overcome.

KEYWORDS: social psychology, education policy, implicit theories, stereotype
threat, affirmation, belonging, achievement gaps.
Several years ago a brief intervention was introduced in eight hospitals around
the world in an effort to reduce medical errors. The intervention required surgeons
and nurses to complete a one-page checklist of tasks before beginning a surgery,
such as introducing themselves to one another and correctly timing the application
of antiseptics. An evaluation of this simple intervention found that it reduced surgical complications by 36% and deaths by 47% (Haynes et al., 2009). Observers and
medical professionals have wondered how this small intervention could have a
large effect, especially when it did not address such clearly important factors as
surgeons’ skills and training. Some have hailed the checklist intervention as “a
classic magic bullet” (Aaronovitch, 2010); others have dismissed it as “[not] Harry
267
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Yeager & Walton

Potter’s magic wand” (Szalavitz, 2009). Atul Gawande (2009), creator of the
checklist, argues that this sense of mystery arises because many people assumed
that surgeons were already doing the set of practices included in the checklist.
Hence, the checklist’s effects were not easily understood (Gawande, 2009, p. 159).
With a deeper understanding of why the intervention improved outcomes, he
argues, the medical community would be better able to institutionalize the innovation in standard practice.
Interestingly, something similar is happening in education. In recent years,
several rigorous, randomized field experiments have shown that seemingly
“small” social-psychological interventions—typically brief exercises that do not
teach academic content but instead target students’ thoughts, feelings, and beliefs
in and about school—have had striking effects on educational achievement even
over months and years (see Table 1; for reviews see Garcia & Cohen, in press;
Gehlbach, 2010; Walton & Dweck, 2009; Walton & Spencer, 2009; Wilson,
2006). For example, Blackwell, Trzesniewski, and Dweck (2007) found that
middle school students who attended an eight-session workshop teaching them
that the brain is like a muscle and grows with effort displayed a sharp increase
in math achievement for the rest of the school year, an effect not shown by
students who attended a control workshop that taught them study skills. Walton
and Cohen (2007, 2011) found that a 1-hour session designed to buttress African
American college students’ sense of social belonging in school increased the
GPA of these students over the next 3 years, halving the Black–White achievement gap over this period. And Cohen, Garcia, Apfel, and Master (2006), found
that a 15- to 20-minute writing exercise in which students reflected on their core
personal values reduced the gap in grades between African American and
European American students by nearly 40% at the end of the semester, an effect
that persisted, with a few additional writing exercises, for 2 years (Cohen,
Garcia, Purdie-Vaugns, Apfel, & Brzustoski, 2009).
Like people who hear about Gawande’s checklist, people who learn about
social-psychological interventions may wonder, how could these effects be real?
How could such interventions work? And how could brief experiences change
students’ outcomes months and years later? These questions are especially pressing in a context in which far more expensive and comprehensive interventions in
education often yield disappointing results. For example, of the dozens of randomized controlled trials published by the Institute for Education Sciences in recent
years, most have found no effects on student outcomes beyond the initial treatment
period, including a 1-year new-teacher support program (Glazerman et al., 2010),
a yearlong middle school mathematics professional development program (Garet
et al., 2010), and a 2-year supplemental reading courses (James-Burdumy et al.,
2010; Somers et al., 2010), among many other reforms.
In this context, social-psychological interventions can appear magical. As a
consequence, it is tempting either to deliver these interventions as quickly and as
widely as possible or to dismiss them as snake oil—as entertaining sideshows, but
not worthy of serious consideration in education reform.
We argue that neither response is appropriate. Social-psychological interventions hold significant promise for promoting broad and lasting change in education, but they are not silver bullets. They are powerful tools rooted in theory, but
they are context dependent and reliant on the nature of the educational environment.
(Text continues on p. 274)
268
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

269

Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Student sample

Summary of randomized
treatment and control
group(s)
Summary of results

Effect on
achievement

(continued)

First-year
Leading students to
In one laboratory session, osOne week later, students in the .27 grade points
college
attribute academic
tensibly as a part of a survey,
treatment condition performed
one year later
students
setbacks to unstable
students watched videos of
better on a GRE exam. A year
struggling
factors rather than
upper-year students describlater, these students had earned
academically
stable factors can
ing how their grades in college
higher college GPAs and were
motivate students to
were low at first but improved
80% less likely to have dropped
work harder and not
over time. In a control group,
out of college. The treatment
give up after setbacks students saw videos of the same effect on GPA appeared to gain
in school.
upper-year students talking
strength over time.
about their social and academic
interests.
Blackwell, TrzesLow-income, Teaching students that In 8 sessions over 8 weeks,
At the end of the academic year, .30 grade points
niewski, and Dweck
Black and
people’s core intelstudents took part in workshops the normative decline in math
at the end of
(2007)
Hispanic or
ligence is malleable
on study skills and the function
grades exhibited by students in the school
Latino 7thand grows with effort of the brain and how the brain
the control group was reversed year
grade students and challenge can
can get stronger when a person
such that students in the treatat an urban
motivate students to
works on challenging tasks. Stu- ment condition had earned sigschool
work hard and not
dents in a control group learned nificantly higher math grades.
give up after setbacks only study skills.
in school.

Attributions and
implicit theories of
intelligence
Wilson and
Linville (1982,
1985)

Study

Theoretical
approach

TABLE 1
Summary of Selected Social-Psychological Interventions to Improve Student Achievement

270

Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Student sample

Theoretical
approach

Summary of randomized
treatment and control
group(s)
Summary of results

Effect on
achievement

(continued)

Black and
Teaching students that In a laboratory session, ostensibly At the end of the academic year, .23 grade points
White college people’s core intelas a part of a “pen pal” program both Black and White students’ at the end of
students
ligence is malleable
to support younger students,
GPAs rose significantly in the
the next term
will buffer students
students wrote letters to middle
treatment condition as comfrom the threat of
school students endorsing
pared to both control groups.
being targeted by
the belief that intelligence is
Black students (but not White
negative stereotypes
malleable. In a control group,
students) reported increased
in school.
students wrote “pen pal” letters
engagement and identification
advocating a theory of multiple
with school.
intelligences. A second control
group did not write letters.
Good, Aronson,
Low- and
One treatment group
Students met with college student At the end of the academic year, See notea
and Inzlicht (2003)
middlereceived an attrimentors twice and exchanged
in all three treatment groups
income Black butional retraining
occasional emails throughout
girls’ math scores on a stateand Hispanic
intervention similar to the school year. Mentors were
wide standardized test rose
or Latino 7th- Wilson and Linville
taught to endorse the relevant
relative to the control group,
grade students (1982). A second treat- treatment message. A control
eliminating the gender differat a rural
ment group received
group received an antidrug mes- ence in math performance presschool
an implicit theories of sage from mentors.
ent in the control condition. In
intelligence intervenaddition, both boys’ and girls’
tion. A third treatment
reading scores increased in all
group received both
three treatment groups relative
interventions.
to the control group.

J. Aronson, Fried,
and Good (2002)

Implicit theories of
intelligence and
stereotype threat

Study

TABLE 1 (continued)

271

Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Student sample

Theoretical
approach

Summary of randomized
treatment and control
group(s)
Summary of results

Effect on
achievement

(continued)

Cohen, Garcia,
Low- and
Affirming important
In one or several 15- to 20At the end of the first semester, .30 grade points
Apfel, and Master
middlevalues can buffer
minute classroom sessions
the value-affirmation interven- among Black
(2006); Cohen, Gar- income Black people from the
beginning at the beginning of
tion increased Black students’
students at
cia, Purdie-Vaughns, and White
effects of stereotype
the school year, students wrote
class grades, reducing the gap
the end of
Apfel, and Brzus7th-grade
threat.
about values that were personbetween Black and White
the first term;
toski (2009)
students at
ally important to them as an
students by 40%. Further,
.46 grade
a suburban
in-class writing exercise. In a
among initially low-performing points among
school
control group, students wrote
Black students, the treatment
low-performabout values that were not imraised GPA in all core academic ing Black
portant to them but might matter classes two years posttreatment. students after
to someone else.
two years.
Miyake et al.
Men and
Same as above.
Same as above.
At the end of the 15-week course, .33 grade
(2010)
women in a
the value-affirmation intervenpoints among
college
tion eliminated a substantial
women at the
physics class
gender gap in physics grades
end of the
and on scores on a nationally
termb
normed physics test that was
present in the control condition.
The effect was strongest for
women who endorsed gender
stereotypes.

Stereotype threat

Study

TABLE 1 (continued)

272

Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Oyserman, Bybee,
and Terry (2006)

Possible selves

Walton and Cohen
(2007, 2011)

Study

TABLE 1 (continued)
Summary of randomized
treatment and control
group(s)
Summary of results

Effect on
achievement

Low-income
Black and
Hispanic or
Latino 8thgrade
students

Leading ethnic minority In 10 workshop sessions, students Two years later, students in the
students to see that
wrote about how their future
treatment group had higher
their academic future
selves might be academically
GPAs, fewer absences, fewer
selves are close (and
successful, and completed exer- nominations for disruptive
not far), consistent (not cises to make those future selves behavior, and fewer depressive
inconsistent) with their seem more attainable, to make
symptoms and were 60% less
racial identity, and
challenges seem normal and
likely to repeat 8th grade.
attainable even when
expected, and to make academic
facing challenges will success not seem like “acting
increase students’
White.” A control group took
motivation.
standard elective classes.

(continued)

.28 grade points
two years
later

First-year
Leading students to
In a 1-hour laboratory session, stu- Relative to students in
.24 grade points
Black and
attribute worries about dents read the results of a survey
multiple control groups, Black
among Black
White college belonging to the difindicating that many students feel students in the social-belonging students from
students
ficulty of the transition they do not belong in college at
treatment condition earned
sophomore
to college rather than
first but that such worries dishigher GPAs from sophomore
through
to students’ personal
sipate with time. Students then
through senior year, reducing
senior year of
or racial identity can
wrote an essay and gave a speech the racial achievement gap by
college
buttress ethnic minor- ostensibly for the next year’s
52%, were more likely to be
ity students’ sense of
freshmen about how their worries in the top 25% of their college
social belonging in
about belonging had changed
class, and 3 years posttreatment
school and increase
over time in college. In control
reported being happier and
motivation and perfor- groups, students were exposed to healthier.
mance.
information irrelevant to issues of
belonging.

Student sample

Theoretical
approach

273

Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Student sample

Theoretical
approach

Summary of randomized
treatment and control
group(s)
Summary of results

Effect on
achievement

a. Good et al.’s (2003) attributional retraining, implicit theories, and combined interventions produced effects on girls’ math test scores of the following magnitudes: Cohen’s
d = 1.13, 1.30, and 1.50, respectively.
b. Miyake et al. (2010) reported grades on a 100-point scale, so these numbers were converted to grade points for inclusion in this table.

Hulleman and Har- MiddleMaking science classes Every 3 or 4 weeks starting at
At the end of the semester treated .80 grade
ackiewicz (2009)
income, ethni- personally relevant
the beginning of the semester
students who expected to
points among
cally diverse
will increase interest students wrote a brief essay
perform poorly in science had
students
9th-grade
in science, engagedescribing how the material
earned higher science grades;
with low
students
ment with the learnstudied in their high school sci- no effects were found among
expectations
ing process, and imence class that week could be
students with high expectations for success
proved performance
applied in their lives. Control
for success in science.
in science at
especially among
students summarized the week’s
the end of the
students who do not
science class topic.
semester
expect to succeed in
science.

Expectancy-value
theory

Study

TABLE 1 (continued)

Yeager & Walton

Although we believe that social-psychological interventions can be scaled effectively
to reach larger numbers of students, how to do so is not simply a matter of handing
out a worksheet. Rather, scaling social-psychological interventions raises important theoretical, practical, and ethical questions that as yet have not been adequately explored.
To illustrate the effects of social-psychological interventions, take a second
analogy.1 Consider a passenger jet that speeds down a runway and lifts into the air.
It can seem surprising even to an experienced flier how an object that weighs many
tons could fly. This is because the miracle of flight relies on numerous interrelated
forces, some more obvious than others. It is not hard to see that a plane needs an
engine, wings, and a pilot to fly. Similarly, a student needs content to learn, a
teacher to teach, and a place or community to support that learning. These factors
shape the objective school environment and create essential capacities for success.
But less obvious features of airplanes and of education systems are also critical to
their success. One reason planes fly is because their wings are sculpted to create
an aerodynamic force (“lift”) that elevates the plane. It is natural to wonder how a
small change in the shape of a wing could make a heavy object fly. Basic laboratory research helps explain the principles of air flow and shows that the shape and
position of wings cause air to flow faster below them than above them, lifting a
plane beyond what might seem possible. In a similar way, hidden yet powerful
psychological forces, also investigated through basic science, can raise student
achievement. An engineer uses theories of fluid dynamics to fine-tune a wing,
which, in the context of other factors, makes a plane fly. Analogously, a socialpsychological perspective uses basic theory and research to identify educationally
important psychological processes and then subtly alters these processes in a complex academic environment to raise performance.
More specifically, social-psychological interventions can seem mysterious for
at least four reasons. First, it is often hard to see the forces on which these interventions operate (see Lewin, 1952; Ross & Nisbett, 1991). We do not see air flowing
over a wing; nor do we directly observe how negative intellectual stereotypes or
beliefs about the nature of intelligence affect students. We may see the power of
these processes only when they are altered. For this reason, below we describe
laboratory experiments that illustrate the causal effect of basic theoretical processes relevant to motivation and then review how interventions designed to alter
these processes affect achievement.
Second, psychological interventions seem “small” relative to traditional educational reforms, and people may assume that large problems require “large”
solutions. How could a brief psychological intervention make headway in the
face of structural problems that contribute enormously to inequality and poor
outcomes in education? To presage later arguments, psychological interventions
do not replace traditional educational reforms but operate within the context of
existing structures to make them more effective. Psychological interventions
change students’ mind-sets to help them take greater advantage of available
learning opportunities.
This analysis draws on a core tenet of social psychology, namely, that every
attitude and behavior exists in a complex field of forces—a “tension system”—in
which some forces promote a behavior whereas other forces restrain that behavior
274
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Social-Psychological Interventions in Education

(Lewin, 1952; Ross & Nisbett, 1991; Wilson, 2006). One lesson from this analysis
is that the structure of the system determines its potential for change—an intervention that increases students’ motivation to learn or that removes barriers to learning
will improve academic outcomes only when learning opportunities exist in the
educational environment.
Another lesson of this analysis is that there are two routes to behavior change (see
Miller & Prentice, in press). One route is to increase forces that promote a behavior, for
instance by giving students incentives for better grades. But when promoting forces are
adequate—as when, at some level, learning content, teachers, and students' willingness
to learn are present—student success may be held back instead by restraining forces,
such as worries about ability or negative stereotypes. In these cases, less intuitively, one
can remove forces that restrain their learning, allowing students to take greater advantage of learning opportunities. As a consequence, even a seemingly small intervention
but one that removes a critical barrier to learning can produce substantial effects on
academic outcomes. At a broader level, this theoretical foundation underscores the
fundamental inappropriateness of viewing social-psychological interventions as silver
bullets; rather than operating in isolation, such interventions rearrange forces in a complex system.2
A third challenge to understanding the effects of social-psychological interventions is that it is hard to see how relatively brief messages can affect students’
views and behavior, especially when students receive many messages from adults
that seemingly have little effect. As we will explain, social-psychological interventions can be brief yet impactful because they target students’ subjective experiences in school and because they rely on a rich tradition of research on persuasion
and attitude change to powerfully convey psychological ideas.
Fourth, what can seem especially mysterious is how a time-limited or one-shot
social-psychological intervention can generate effects that persist far ahead in
time. For instance, people may assume that an intervention has to remain in mind
to continue to be effective. But like any experience, a psychological intervention
will become less focal as it recedes in time. As we suggest below, a key to understanding the long-lasting effects of social-psychological interventions is to understand how they interact with recursive processes already present in schools, such
as the quality of students’ developing relationships with peers and teachers, their
beliefs about their ability, and their acquisition of academic knowledge. It is by
affecting self-reinforcing recursive processes that psychological interventions can
cause lasting improvements in motivation and achievement even when the original
treatment message has faded in salience (e.g., Walton & Cohen, 2011).
In the next section, we describe how we conducted this review. We then summarize four prominent social-psychological interventions, emphasizing the psychological process each intervention targeted and relevant laboratory and field
research. Next we discuss how the effects of these interventions persisted over
time. In doing so, we aim to provide a more nuanced understanding of how socialpsychological interventions work and to suggest how this understanding can
inform efforts to deliver these interventions more broadly.
Method for the Current Review
This is a theoretical review designed to elucidate the theoretical underpinnings
of social-psychological interventions in education, not a comprehensive review of
275
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

them. To locate relevant interventions, we searched the tables of contents and
abstracts of highly cited relevant journals including Child Development,
Developmental Psychology, Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology,
Journal of Educational Psychology, Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, Psychological Science, and Science (see Table 1). We searched for studies
that (a) evaluated an intervention that communicated a social-psychological message but did not teach academic content, (b) randomly assigned students to treatment or control conditions, and (c) observed effects on students’ grades in a course
or in school overall over time. In addition, we examined the curricula vitae of
prominent psychologists conducting intervention research, searching for replications, extensions, or studies examining boundary conditions. Some important studies were excluded because they met only some of our criteria. Among the excluded
studies were those that used social-psychological strategies to motivate specific
behaviors in school, such as mastering an individual learning objective or performing better on a single task, rather than raising achievement in general (e.g., E.
Aronson, Blaney, Stephin, Sikes, & Snapp, 1976; Destin & Oyserman, 2009;
Duckworth, Grant, Loew, Oettingen, & Gollwitzer, in press; Jamieson, Mendes,
Blackstock, & Schmader, 2009; Ramirez & Beilock, 2011; Vansteenkiste, Simons,
Lens, Sheldon, & Deci, 2004).
Notably, our search targeted specifically social-psychological interventions—
interventions designed to change students’ thoughts and feelings in and about
school. This approach excluded cognitive psychology interventions, which investigate instead how principles of human cognition and learning can inform the
design of effective curricula and pedagogy (and which have been reviewed elsewhere; e.g., Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 1999; Ritter, Anderson, Koedinger, &
Corbett, 2007). Nonetheless, in some cases we use the term psychological interventions as shorthand to refer to social-psychological interventions.
Four Social-Psychological Interventions to Improve Student Achievement
To illustrate general lessons, we focus on basic theory and research underpinning
four prominent social-psychological interventions. These interventions have produced some of the most striking effects observed in the field and illustrate key themes.
Although we present the studies separately, we note that the processes they target are
few in number and interrelated, including students’ beliefs about their potential for
growth and belonging in the classroom and their efforts to cope with negative stereotypes in school. It is important to note, however, that similar conclusions could be
drawn from an analysis of other interventions. Table 1 provides a summary of relevant
studies that we do not discuss in detail (also see Gehlbach, 2010).
Interventions to Change Students’ Attributions for Academic Setbacks
A long line of basic theory and research in social psychology shows that people’s attributions—how they explain the causes of events and experiences—shape
their responses to those events and subsequent behavior (Kelley, 1973; Weiner,
1986). For instance, if a student concludes that a bad grade means that he cannot
cut it in math, the student may not invest the time and effort needed to improve his

276
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Social-Psychological Interventions in Education

math grades (Bandura, 1977). If so, he may continue to perform poorly, reifying
his attribution of inability, leading to an exacerbation cycle of negative attributions
and poor performance (cf. Storms & Nisbett, 1970; also see Wilson, 2006). On the
other hand, if a student thinks that a bad grade means that she needs time to learn
the ropes, the student may redouble her efforts and perform better over time. Is it
possible to change students’ attributions so they see poor grades as the result of a
temporary and not permanent cause? Would such an intervention improve students’ academic performance over time?
Intervention 1: Wilson and Linville (1982). Wilson and Linville (1982, 1985)
tested this hypothesis (also see Wilson, Damiani, & Shelton, 2002). They developed a brief intervention to teach students that poor academic performance is normal at first in the transition to a new school, that it does not reflect a lack of ability,
and that students’ grades typically improve as they adjust to the new school.
In a series of classic studies, Wilson and Linville (1982, 1985) brought struggling first-year college students to a laboratory and told them that they had interviewed college students about their transition to college. They asked students to
watch some of these videotaped interviews. Students in the treatment group (randomly assigned) saw videos of upperclassmen describing how their grades in college were low at first but got better with time. These upperclassmen attributed their
early poor performance to unstable causes that dissipate, such as a lack of familiarity with college classes. Students in a control group saw videos of the same upperclassmen talking about their academic and social interests with no mention of
first-year grades. A year later, students’ official GPAs were collected. Students in
the treatment group had earned higher GPAs than students in the control group (see
Table 1). Moreover, this effect seemed to gain in strength with each successive
term. This finding is consistent with the hypothesis that the intervention set in
motion a recursive or self-reinforcing attributional process whereby better performance each term reinforced more adaptive attributions for early academic struggles. In addition, treated students were 80% less likely to drop out of college. This
basic intervention has been replicated many times with diverse populations (see
Haynes, Perry, Stupnisky, & Daniels, 2009; Wilson et al., 2002) including adolescents (e.g., Good, Aronson, & Inzlicht, 2003).
Intervention 2: Blackwell et al. (2007). Dweck and colleagues have investigated
how students’ implicit theories of intelligence shape their interpretation of and
response to academic setbacks (Dweck, 2006; Dweck & Leggett, 1988; Molden &
Dweck, 2006). In laboratory research, Dweck finds that students who believe that
intelligence is fixed and unchangeable (an entity theory of intelligence) are more
likely to attribute academic setbacks to a lack of ability than students who believe
that intelligence is malleable and improvable with hard work and effort (an incremental theory of intelligence). Students with the incremental theory instead
see setbacks as the result of insufficient effort or a poor strategy. In turn, such
attributions shape whether students respond to setbacks helplessly (withdrawing
effort) or resiliently (redoubling effort, seeking help, using a better strategy, etc.).

277
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Yeager & Walton

In one series of laboratory studies, Mueller and Dweck (1998) gave fifth-grade
students a moderately difficult set of logic problems. After completing them, students were praised. Some children (randomly assigned) received intelligence
praise—praise that could induce an entity theory of intelligence (“That’s a really
high score. You must be very smart at these problems”). Others received effort
praise predicted to induce an incremental theory of intelligence (“That’s a really
high score. You must have worked hard at these problems”) or neutral praise
(“That’s a really high score”). Next, students were given an especially difficult set
of problems on which all students performed poorly. Finally, students were given
a crucial third set of problems equally challenging as the first set.
The effect of the type of praise was dramatic. On the final set of problems,
children who received neutral praise performed no better and no worse than they
had on the first set. Children who received effort praise did better and asked to do
more challenging problems in the future. But children who received intelligence
praise solved 30% fewer problems and asked to do only easy problems from then
on. Being led to attribute success to fixed intelligence with just a sentence of praise
undermined students’ motivation and performance following a failure experience
(for a relevant longitudinal study, see Blackwell et al., 2007, Study 1).
On the basis of these and other results, Blackwell and colleagues (2007, Study 2)
designed an intervention to lead middle school students to view intelligence as
malleable. Students in a New York City public school attended an eight-session
workshop in which they learned about study skills and scientific research showing
that the brain grows connections and “gets smarter” when a person works on challenging tasks. Students in a randomized control group learned only about study
skills. Results showed that students in the control group continued the downward
decline in math grades that normally occurs in middle school. But students who
learned the incremental theory reversed this trend and earned better math grades
over the course of the year (see Figure 1). Study skills alone did not lead to
improvement in math; students needed the incremental mind-set and motivation to
put those skills into practice.
The effect of implicit theories is robust. Other implicit theory interventions
have generated similar improvements in diverse populations (e.g., J. Aronson,
Fried, & Good, 2002; Good et al., 2003; see Table 1). In addition, implicit theories
interventions have been implemented structurally in middle and high school math
classes across the United States by the Charles A. Dana Center (2008) at the
University of Texas, yielding large effects on such important outcomes as the percentage of high school students who repeat algebra (e.g., reducing this figure from
24% to 9%).
Interventions to Mitigate Stereotype Threat
A significant problem in education involves the persistence of large differences
in academic achievement between different social groups, such as between racial
or ethnic minority students and nonminority students and, in math and science,
between women and men. Although structural factors contribute to these differences, psychological processes also play an important role (Walton & Spencer,
2009). Research on stereotype threat shows that the worry that one could be

278
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

FIGURE 1. Math grades by experimental condition (covariate-adjusted means) in
Blackwell, Trzesniewski, and Dweck (2007). Reprinted by permission from John Wiley
and Sons, Inc.
Note. Experimental = incremental theory workshop group; control = study skills workshop
group.

perceived through the lens of a negative intellectual stereotype in school can
undermine academic performance (Steele, 2010; Steele, Spencer, & Aronson,
2002). For instance, the stereotype that certain ethnic groups are less intelligent
than others and that women are less skilled in quantitative fields than men creates
stress, distraction, and anxiety for people targeted by negative stereotypes in performance situations, and this, in turn, undermines academic performance (see
Schmader, Johns, & Forbes, 2008). Stereotype threat is so pervasive that it causes
common measures of academic performance including grades and test scores to
systematically underestimate the ability of negatively stereotyped students (Walton
& Spencer, 2009). Can psychological strategies mitigate stereotype threat in field
settings? Could these strategies raise stereotyped students’ performance and reduce
achievement gaps? (For related interventions that raise the performance of ethnic
minority students, see E. Aronson et al., 1978; Steele, 1997.)
Intervention 3: Cohen et al. (2006, 2009). Cohen and colleagues (2006, 2009)
hypothesized that helping reduce the stress and worry caused by stereotype threat
could boost the academic performance of negatively stereotyped students. Their
intervention was designed on the basis of a long line of psychological research
investigating how people cope with threats to their sense of self (Festinger, 1957;
Greenwald, 1980). Most relevant here, self-affirmation theory proposes that people are
motivated to protect their view of themselves as good, moral, and efficacious (Sherman

279
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Yeager & Walton

& Cohen, 2006; Steele, 1988). When people’s sense of self is threatened, they
experience high levels of stress. Self-affirmation theory proposes that reminding
people of diverse, positive aspects of themselves can lead people to see
negative events and information as less threatening and reduce stress and thus help
people function more effectively (Sherman & Hartson, in press). One way to shore
up people’s sense of self is by asking people to write about values that are personally important to them. Indeed, laboratory experiments find that brief valueaffirmation writing exercises can help negatively stereotyped students perform
better on academic tasks (Martens, Johns, Greenberg, & Schimel, 2006; Taylor &
Walton, in press).
Cohen and colleagues (2006, 2009) tested whether a value affirmation could
improve stereotyped students’ real-world school performance. In a double-blind
randomized controlled experiment, they delivered a value-affirmation intervention
to White and Black seventh grade students as an in-class writing exercise. Half of
students completed a value affirmation—they identified two or three values that
were personally important to them and wrote about why those values mattered to
them. Control students identified values that were not important to them and wrote
about why they might matter to someone else. The 15- to 20-minute exercise was
administered at the beginning of the school year, before a recursive cycle of feelings of threat and poor academic performance could take hold. Teachers were blind
to students’ condition assignment to forestall expectancy effects.
The results were striking. Students’ grades were collected over the next 2 years.
By the end of the first semester, treated Black students earned significantly higher
grades than peers in the control condition, reducing the gap between Black and
White students by about 40%. A boost in students’ GPA across all academic classes
persisted for 2 years with a few additional value-affirmations exercises (see Figure
2; Cohen et al., 2009). This basic effect has been replicated in multiple studies,
including among women in science and with Latino adolescents (see Miyake et al.,
2010; Sherman et al., 2011).
Intervention 4: Walton and Cohen (2007, 2011). One consequence of negative
stereotypes is to cause people to wonder whether they will be fully included
and valued in an academic environment. Anyone may wonder if he or she will
get along with others in a new setting, like a transfer student at a new school.
But students who face negative stereotypes may worry about their belonging
more pervasively. This feeling of uncertainty about belonging can cause students to perceive negative social events in school—such as feelings of loneliness or receiving criticism from an instructor—as evidence that they do not
belong in the school in general, an inference that undermines motivation
(Walton & Cohen, 2007; also see Mendoza-Denton, Purdie, Downey, Davis, &
Pietrzak, 2002).
Walton and Cohen (2007, Experiment 1) examined students’ response to social
adversity directly in a laboratory study. They posed a subtle threat to college students’ sense of social belonging in a field of study. They asked students to list
either two friends who would fit in well in the field or eight such friends (cf.
Schwarz et al., 1991). Listing eight friends was difficult, and equally so for White
and Black students. The question the study tested was what meaning, if any, this
280
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

European Americans—Affirmation & Control
High-Performing African Americans—Affirmation
High-Performing African Americans—Control
Low-Performing African Americans—Affirmation
Low-Performing African Americans—Control
3.5

Mean GPA in Core Courses

3

2.5

2

1.5

Year 1

Term 4

Term 3

Term 2

Term 1

Term 4

Term 3

Term 2

Term 1

Preintervention

1

Year 2

FIGURE 2. Mean GPA in core courses for each term over 2 years, as a function of
student group (African American vs. European American), experimental condition,
and preintervention level of performance of African Americans (an average of the prior
year’s GPA and preintervention seventh-grade performance) in Cohen, Garcia, PurdieVaughns, Apfel, and Brzustoski (2009). Reprinted by permission from the American
Association for the Advancement of Science.
Note. African Americans were categorized into low and high performers based on a median split
within their racial group. Because European Americans in the two conditions did not differ significantly, their data were combined. Means adjusted for baseline covariates and students’
assigned teacher team.

difficulty had for students. For White students, the difficulty listing friends carried
no particular meaning—White students’ interest and motivation in the field were
unchanged whether they had been asked to list eight friends or two. But for Black
students, the difficulty experienced listing eight friends seemed to mean that they
281
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Yeager & Walton

and, moreover, their racial group did not belong in the field. As compared to control participants, their motivation in the field dropped precipitously, and they discouraged a Black peer from pursuing the field as an area of study.
Building on this laboratory research, Walton and Cohen created an intervention to
forestall global inferences of nonbelonging in school (Experiment 2). Adopting procedures developed by Wilson and Linville (1982, 1985), they gave first-year college
students information indicating that students of all ethnicities worried at first about
their belonging in the transition to college but that these worries dissipated with time
and eventually all students came to feel at home. This information was designed to
convey that doubts about belonging and negative social events are normal at first in
college and are nondiagnostic of an actual lack of belonging. Students then engaged in
a series of activities designed to reinforce the treatment message—for instance, they
wrote an essay for incoming students the next year about how their own feelings of
belonging in college had changed over time (see J. Aronson et al., 2002). Control students went through the same exercises, but the information they were exposed to was
irrelevant to issues of belonging. In total, the intervention lasted about an hour.
The intervention had striking benefits for Black students. In two cohorts of
students and relative to several control groups, the intervention improved Black
students’ grades in college from sophomore through senior year, halving the
Black–White achievement gap (see Figure 3; Walton & Cohen, 2007, 2011). This
effect was statistically mediated by a change in Black students’ construal of social
adversity on campus. Daily diary surveys completed in the week following the
intervention showed that, in the control condition, Black students’ daily sense of
belonging in school rose and fell with the level of adversity they experienced each
day. To these students, negative social events seemed to convey that they did not
belong in the school in general. The treatment cut off this relationship—here,
Black students experienced similar levels of adversity, but adversity no longer led
them to question their belonging. For instance, consider a Black freshman who had
a bad day. Say his teacher criticized him in class or he was not invited to dinner by
dormmates. Already worried about his belonging, he is more likely than a White
student to see it as proof that he does not belong. A student who goes through the
intervention, however, still encounters such events but they no longer carry global
meaning; they are negative, but not diagnostic. Statistically, Walton and Cohen
(2011) found that it was this change in construal that mediated the effect of
the intervention on the 3-year gain in Black students’ GPA. In addition, 3 years
posttreatment, the intervention also improved Black students’ self-reported physical health and happiness, both outcomes linked strongly to a secure sense of
belonging.
In research in progress, tailored versions of the social-belonging intervention
have improved grades and school-related attitudes and behaviors among African
American middle school students (Walton, Cohen, Garcia, Apfel, & Master, 2011)
and female undergraduate engineering students (Walton, Logel, Peach, & Spencer,
2011).
Understanding Social-Psychological Interventions in Education
Readers may wonder, how did these interventions work at all—how could they
change students’ psychology to improve academic outcomes even in the short
282
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

4.00
3.90

Social-Belonging
Treatment

European Americans, Randomized Control
European Americans, Social-Belonging Treatment
African Americans, Randomized Control
African Americans, Social-Belonging Treatment

3.80
3.70
3.60
3.50
3.40
3.30
3.20
3.10
3.00
Fall
Term
First Year

Fall
Term

Spring
Term

Sophomore Year

Fall
Term

Spring
Term

Junior Year

Fall
Term

Spring
Term

Senior Year

FIGURE 3. Mean academic performance as a function of semester, student race, and
experimental condition (raw means) in Walton and Cohen (2011). Reprinted by permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science.

term? And how did they maintain their effects over time? Below we address each
question in turn, followed by a discussion of how social-psychological interventions could be delivered effectively to more students.
How do social-psychological interventions change students’ psychology to improve
academic outcomes in the short term? They do so by precisely targeting students’
experience in school from the student’s perspective and by using impactful delivery
mechanisms. Although the four psychological interventions reviewed above targeted different (albeit related) psychological processes, each began with a precise
understanding of students’ subjective experience in school—what school seems
like to the student in the classroom, not how school appears to an observer,
researcher, or teacher. These interventions may seem “small” to observers, and
often they are in terms of time and cost and in relation to other school reforms.
From the perspective of a researcher or teacher, an implicit theories workshop or
a value-affirmation writing exercise is just one of many classroom experiences
given to students. But to a student sitting at a desk in the third row worrying about
whether a poor test score means she is stupid or whether others will reduce her
to a negative stereotype, an experience like learning that the brain can grow and
form new connections when challenged or being invited to describe personally
283
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Yeager & Walton

important values may feel quite “large” (E. Aronson et al., 1978). Such interventions directly address students’ experience in school and thus their school-related
behavior.
Critically, if a social-psychological intervention does not deliver its message in
a way that changes how students think or feel about school or about themselves in
school, then nothing has been delivered at all. Each intervention reviewed above
used a delivery mechanism that, although brief, drew on research on the psychology of persuasion to make the experience maximally impactful for students. Rather
than simply delivering an appeal to a student who passively receives it, each intervention enlisted students in actively participating in or generating the intervention
itself (see Lewin, 1952). These strategies can induce deep processing and prepare
students to transfer the content to new settings (Chase, Chin, Oppezzo, & Schwartz,
2009; Schwartz & Martin, 2004). For instance, one delivery mechanism featured
in several interventions involved asking students to write letters to younger students advocating the treatment message (e.g., J. Aronson et al., 2002; Walton &
Cohen, 2007; 2011). As research on the “saying-is-believing” effect shows (E.
Aronson, 1999), generating and then advocating a persuasive message to a receptive audience is a powerful means of persuasion (for a related example, see
Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009).
Although these delivery mechanisms are psychologically powerful, the interventions are in an important sense “stealthy,” a quality that may increase their
effectiveness (Robinson, in press). In none of the interventions were students
exposed to a direct persuasive appeal or told that they were receiving “an intervention” to improve their performance. Students in Wilson and Linville’s (1982, 1985)
intervention thought they were responding to a survey. Students in the Walton and
Cohen (2007, 2011) intervention took the role of mentor to younger students (also
see J. Aronson et al., 2002). They were not told that they themselves were the
targets of the persuasive message. Other studies used class assignments to deliver
the intervention, such as a neuroscience workshop (Blackwell et al., 2007) or an
in-class writing assignment (Cohen et al., 2009; Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009),
both of which had no obvious link to students’ academic performance. Overall,
these indirect approaches may be more effective than overt strategies. They do not
feel controlling and so they minimize resistence and reactance to the message.
They also allow students to take credit for their success rather than risking the possibility that students attribute positive outcomes to a heavy-handed intervention.
Furthermore, stealthy interventions do not stigmatize students—they do not convey to students that they are seen as in need of help or perceived as likely to fail,
which could undermine an intervention’s intended effect. Indeed, telling people
that a value affirmation is intended to make them feel better can reduce its effectiveness (Sherman et al., 2009).
Another way these interventions are “stealthy” is by being brief. One recent randomized field experiment found greater behavior change after a short (5-minute)
intervention to reduce drinking among college student, than after a longer (50-minute) intervention (Kulesza, Apperson, Larimer, & Copeland, 2010; also see Petry,
Weinstock, Ledgerwood, & Morasco, 2008). Although these studies did not focus on
educational outcomes, they contradict the intuition that “bigger” interventions are
necessarily “better.”
284
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Social-Psychological Interventions in Education

This analysis leads to counterintuitive predictions about how to maximize the
impact of psychological interventions. It would be reasonable to think, for example, that training teachers (or parents) to reinforce psychological messages or doubling the length of an in-class growth mind-set workshop from 8 to 16 sessions
would amplify an intervention’s benefits. However, if adolescents perceive a
teacher’s reinforcement of a psychological idea as conveying that they are seen as
in need of help, teacher training or an extended workshop could undo the effects
of the intervention, not increase its benefits. Moreover, in the case of the Cohen
et al. (2006) intervention, for example, if stereotype threat was a force preventing
students from achieving their potential and this force was removed through a values affirmation, it is not clear that additional strategies to remove the same restraining force in other ways, for instance, by having teachers reinforce a student’s
values, would increase the effect. In this way, the teaching of academic content in
school is fundamentally different from the delivery of psychological interventions.
Academic content is complex and taught layer on layer: The more math students
are taught, in general the more math they learn. Changing students’ psychology, by
contrast, sometimes requires a lighter touch.
Nevertheless, when different interventions target different psychological barriers to learning, combining interventions may produce additive effects. For instance,
one recent study found that both a social-belonging intervention and an intervention to train students to self-affirm in times of stress (an “affirmation training”
intervention) raised the achievement of female engineering students, yet did so
through different mechanisms. The social-belonging intervention led women to
perceive that others viewed female engineers more positively; the affirmationtraining intervention prevented the perception that others viewed female engineers
negatively from undermining women’s engineering grades (Walton, Logel, et al.,
2011). It is intriguing to speculate that a combined intervention could yield greater
effects, provided that the mechanism used to deliver one intervention does not
interfere with the meaning of the other intervention.
In summary, social-psychological interventions change students’ behavior by
(a) targeting students’ experience in school from the student’s perspective and
(b) deploying powerful yet stealthy persuasive tactics to deliver the treatment message effectively without generating problematic side effects, such as stigmatizing
recipients.
How do social-psychological interventions affect student outcomes over long periods of time? They do so by affecting recursive processes that accumulate effects
over time. A critical question about psychological interventions is how brief exercises could improve students’ achievement months and years later. In general, we
think it is exceedingly unlikely that psychological interventions generate longlasting benefits because students keep the treatment message vividly in mind over
long periods. Consistent with this analysis, in Walton and Cohen’s (2011) socialbelonging intervention, students were asked at the end of their college careers to
recall the treatment message. Despite the large benefits of the intervention for
African American students over the 3-year assessment period, few students accurately recalled the treatment message and the vast majority denied that taking part
in the 1-hour study had had any effect on their college experience.
285
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Yeager & Walton

How then do psychological interventions generate long-lasting benefits?
They do so by setting into motion recursive social, psychological, and intellectual processes in school. As students study and learn and build academic skills
and knowledge, they are better prepared to learn and perform well in the future.
As students feel more secure in their belonging in school and form better relationships with peers and teachers, these become sources of support that promote
feelings of belonging and academic success later. When students achieve success
beyond what they thought possible, their beliefs about their potential may
change, leading them to invest themselves more in school, further improving
performance and reinforcing their belief in their potential for growth. As students do well, they are placed in higher level classes—gateways that raise expectations, expose them to high-achieving peers, and improve subsequent academic
opportunities. Through these recursive processes, students gain momentum and
achieve better academic outcomes over time—or they do not. A well-timed,
well-targeted psychological intervention taps into these recursive processes and
thus changes the trajectory of students’ experiences and outcomes in school (see
Cohen et al., 2009).
Consistent with this analysis, research tracking the long-term effects of socialpsychological interventions finds repeatedly that such interventions change students’ academic trajectories. Indeed, the mean-level effects of psychological
interventions on student grades are accounted for by changes in the trajectory of
students’ academic performance over time. The value-affirmation intervention, for
instance, was delivered to students early in seventh grade and had long-term effects
primarily among previously poor-performing African American students (see
Figure 2; Cohen et al., 2009). Evidence suggests the affirmation cut off a downward spiral in performance, preventing worse performance from leading to greater
feelings of stress and threat and undermining subsequent performance (also see
Blackwell et al., 2007; Sherman & Hartson, in press). Analogously, the Walton and
Cohen (2007, 2011) social-belonging intervention set in motion a positive recursive process that improved students’ grades over 3 years in a steady step-by-step
fashion (see Figure 3; also see Wilson & Linville, 1985).
How do psychological interventions change the trajectory of students’ academic
outcomes? Research directly addresses this question. For example, Blackwell and
colleagues (2007, Study 1) found that when students believed that they could get
smarter over time, they were more likely to believe that working hard could help
them succeed in school and they endorsed the goal of learning from coursework.
These beliefs and goals motivated greater use of effective learning strategies (such
as increasing effort after setbacks) and less use of ineffective strategies (such as
spending less time on a subject after setbacks). Over time, this increased effort and
use of more productive learning strategies helped students take advantage of instruction in school, persist longer, seek help when needed, and ultimately learn more in
school. These changes in beliefs and strategies statistically mediated a 2-year upward
trajectory observed in middle school math grades for students with an incremental
mind-set. By understanding this interaction between psychological processes (e.g.,
students’ beliefs about the nature of intelligence) and school structures (e.g., learning
opportunities present in school), it is easier to see how changing students’ beliefs
could affect their school achievement over long periods.
286
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Social-Psychological Interventions in Education

Other research investigates how interventions that mitigate concern about negative stereotypes can raise students’ achievement. For example, research shows
that stereotype threat can undermine learning, not just academic performance. In
one laboratory experiment, African American students who studied novel academic material in a threatening rather than nonthreatening learning environment
performed worse on a test of that material a week later even in a nonthreatening
performance setting (Taylor & Walton, in press; also see Rydell, Shiffrin, Boucher,
Van Loo, & Rydell, 2010). This effect did not occur for European Americans. In a
second study, Taylor and Walton (in press) found that a value-affirmation undid
this effect of threat—it helped African American students learn more despite
threat. The results suggest that one way a value-affirmation intervention may
improve long-term academic outcomes is by helping students acquire the building
blocks of academic skills and knowledge needed to perform well in subsequent
academic settings.
Other studies examine recursive social-relational processes. For instance, as
noted, Walton and Cohen’s (2007, 2011) social-belonging intervention led to a
term-by-term improvement in African American students’ grades over 3 years (see
Figure 3), and this boost in grades was mediated by a change in students’ construal
of adverse social events in school—these events no longer carried a global, threatening meaning to students (Walton & Cohen, 2011). If students feel more secure
in their belonging in school, they may approach others in the academic environment more and with more positive attitudes, building better relationships, reinforcing their feelings of belonging, and laying the groundwork for later academic
success (also see Mendoza-Denton et al., 2002).
If effective psychological interventions alter recursive processes in school, then
the timing of these interventions is critical. In many cases, it may be essential to
deliver psychological interventions at key educational junctures, such as at the
beginning of an academic year (Cohen et al., 2006; Cohen et al., 2009), during an
important transition such as when students enter a new school (Walton & Cohen,
2007, 2011; Wilson & Linville, 1982, 1985), or before an academic gateway, such
as before students are tracked into algebra versus lower level math classes
(Crosnoe, Lopez-Gonzalez, & Muller, 2004; Hallinan, 2001) or before a highstakes exam (Papay, Murnane, & Willett, 2010). Illustrating the importance of
timing, one study found that the earlier a value-affirmation intervention was delivered the more it improved students’ grades and, furthermore, that timing mattered
more than frequency (Cook, Purdie-Vaughns, Garcia, & Cohen, 2011). This finding echoes Raudenbush’s (1984) classic meta-analysis of teacher expectancy
effects, which found that teacher expectancy interventions were effective only
when delivered within the first few weeks of school.
The importance of recursive processes in sustaining the effects of psychological
interventions over time reinforces the proposition that these interventions do not
work in isolation; rather, they operate in a complex system involving numerous
structural factors (Lewin, 1952). When well targeted and well timed, a psychological intervention relies on recursive social, psychological, and intellectual processes that are present in school to produce sustained gains in students’ school
achievement.

287
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Discussion
How Can Social-Psychological Interventions Be Scaled
to Benefit More Students?
The review above discusses how social-psychological interventions can boost
student achievement and address long-standing achievement gaps. But as Bryk
(2009) argues, to scale an educational innovation it is not enough to know that it
can work in one context; “we need to know how to make it work reliably over
many diverse contexts and situations” (p. 598; also see Morris & Hiebert, 2011).
There are several challenges to scaling psychological interventions, many of which
are common to educational innovations in general. Instead of reviewing the vast
literature on scaling educational interventions, in this discussion we address how
lessons from this literature apply specifically to efforts to scale social-psychological interventions and suggest how key challenges might be overcome. In particular, we focus on two topics: (a) What should be scaled, and what are the barriers to
scaling this? and (b) What kinds of strategies and expertise are needed to scale
social-psychological interventions effectively?
What Should Be Scaled, and What Are the Barriers to Scaling This?
It is the specific psychological experience created by a psychological intervention
that should be reproduced at scale, not incidental features of the intervention. For
instance, a scaled-up growth mind-set intervention should lead students to believe that
when they experience setbacks their ability can improve, not necessarily teach them
neuroanatomy. This is analogous to other well-designed reforms in education, where
it is essential to scale the student learning experience rather than the specific activities,
worksheets, or examples used to create this experience. When a psychological intervention is delivered to more students, what barriers can prevent the intended psychological experience from being replicated? We address three barriers below.
First, past research reminds us that it can be easy to scale up superficial features
of an educational innovation without reproducing the intended psychological or
educational experience (see, e.g., Fullan, 2001; Labaree, 1998; Tyack & Cuban,
1995). Under these circumstances the intervention would not be predicted to have
the intended effect. Take the case of the California mission project. The project
began as a small but successful initiative in which fourth grade students conducted
independent research on one of the Spanish missions in California, created a replica of the mission—in some cases, even making adobe bricks by hand—and presented a class report. The project seemed to increase intrinsic motivation (Checkley,
2008); for instance, in news reports teachers said students were highly engaged
and students reported planning summer vacations around visiting their mission
(“Drawings Aid,” 1931; Haessler, 1973). Excited by the early returns, reformers
quickly took the initiative to scale, requiring nearly every fourth grader in
California to do a mission project. Soon enough, local stores sold premade “mission kits” with fact sheets on each. What began as a project requiring original
research and intensive thinking ended as a trip to an arts and crafts store. Although
no formal evaluation has been done, it would be surprising if this version of the
project continued to produce benefits for student motivation. When an intervention
is taken to scale without the theoretically essential components, it will not have the
intended effects.
288
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Social-Psychological Interventions in Education

Similarly, if scaled improperly, social-psychological interventions could
become something different entirely—not a test of whether the theory works at
scale but a worksheet to be handed out or a lesson to “get through.” It is easy to
imagine, for instance, how a value-affirmation intervention, if delivered poorly,
could become a caricature—a hollow, ego-boosting exercise in self-praise (perhaps one reminiscent of a scene from Saturday Night Live’s Stuart Smalley skit;
“I’m good enough, I’m smart enough, and doggone it, people like me”)—not a tool
for affirming students’ values and reducing stress and threat in school.
Second, even when interventions are delivered with an effort to reproduce theoretically essential components, research finds that they can sometimes be derailed
by seemingly small changes in how the intervention is delivered. This occurs if
such changes lead recipients to perceive a different meaning in the intervention
(for striking examples, compare Langer & Rodin, 1976, to Schulz & Hanusa,
1978; compare Paluck, 2009, to Paluck, 2010; also see Marigold, Holmes & Ross,
2007, Study 3). For instance, in the effective Hulleman and Harackiewicz (2009)
intervention reviewed in Table 1, students generated and wrote reasons why
schoolwork was relevant to their lives, and this led to a .80 grade point (out of 4.0)
boost at the end of the school year for students with low expectations for success
in class. But when students were told why the schoolwork was important instead
of generating their own reasons, the intervention had a negative effect on students
with low expectations for success—in effect, by telling low-ability students how
important their schoolwork was, they were reminded that they might not be able
to accomplish those important goals, leading to less interest (Godes, Hulleman, &
Harackiewicz, 2007).
The challenge of delivering psychological interventions may be more acute
when they are delivered by teachers or other educational practitioners (cf. Morris
& Hiebert, 2011). The history of school reform reminds us that teachers can vary
in whether they deliver an intervention in the way intended or in name only, changing the meaning and effect of the intervention (Fullan, 2001; Tyack & Cuban,
1995). Labaree (1998) argues that each teacher has a “duchy” that operates relatively independently once the classroom door closes, leading to excellence that is
unhampered by outside control in some classrooms and low performance that is
resistant to attempts at improvement in other classrooms. Any educational reform
that relies on teachers to deliver a message in a classroom is affected by this reality.
This certainly applies to social-psychological interventions.
However, unlike many traditional educational reforms, psychological interventions involve relatively brief, discrete exercises, potentially reducing heterogeneity in implementation. For example, a values-affirmation or social-belonging
intervention consists of a self-contained reading and writing activity. Implicit theories interventions can be delivered effectively online (through, e.g., www.brainology.us or www.perts.net; for an evaluation, see Romero, Paunesku, & Dweck,
2011), as could many of the other interventions summarized in Table 1 (also see
Morisano, Hirsh, Peterson, Pihl, & Shore, 2010). Of course, even when using
an online approach, basic preconditions such as classroom management may be
necessary for an intervention to succeed. Just completing an intervention in a
rowdy classroom or one where other students can read or comment on a student’s
responses (e.g., a description of her or his core values) could undermine an intervention’s effectiveness. One study that examined this possibility found that a
289
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Yeager & Walton

social-psychological intervention administered in classrooms varied in its fidelity
to experimental protocols and yielded no overall positive effect, whereas the same
intervention delivered in a controlled setting (a laboratory) was effective (Hulleman
& Cordray, 2009).
A third potential challenge to scaling psychological interventions involves how
the meaning of an intervention can change in different contexts. If the meaning of
an intervention changes, its effect may change as well. One way to help make an
intervention meaningful for diverse students is to structure the exercise to allow
students to personalize their responses so intervention materials evoke the intended
experience in the way that is most relevant to them. For instance, in an affirmation
intervention, students rank order values in terms of their importance to themselves
and then write about their top-ranked value; they are not told which value to select.
In a social-belonging intervention, students think about their own personal experience in the transition to a new school and write about how their experience illustrates the general process of change students experience transitioning to the school
and coming to feel at home there. This element of personalization allows each
student to make the intervention her or his own. In many settings, identical materials, if administered in well-managed classrooms and with fidelity, may be personally meaningful to diverse students and thus produce positive effects for them.
However, the effectiveness of social-psychological interventions may also be
enhanced by embedding contextually appropriate elements. For instance, the values students rank order in an affirmation intervention should include values that
are, in fact, personally important to students in the population at hand; if the list
does not include a broad range of values and ones important in the local context
(e.g., in some settings more than others, religious values), the intervention may be
less effective. Similarly, contextually appropriate colloquialisms or anecdotes
embedded in a social-belonging intervention—specific stories about older students’ feelings of belonging in the transition to students’ own school—may
increase the intervention’s effectiveness. Of course, making the materials more
specific to some students could reduce an intervention’s relevance for dissimilar
other students.
In addition, relational dynamics between teachers and students could affect the
meaning an intervention carries for students (cf. Raudenbush, 1984). It could seem
insincere if a teacher with whom a student has a hostile relationship asks the student to complete a value affirmation, perhaps undermining the effectiveness of the
intervention. Similarly, an incremental mind-set intervention might have no effect
if students believe that the person who tells them about their potential for growth
and improvement does not believe this himself or herself.
Importantly, the materials and procedures used in an intervention can differ
across contexts and still produce similar psychological experiences. However,
these changes must be guided by theory. For example, Dweck and colleagues have
taught an incremental theory of intelligence by asking participants to read brief
scientific articles describing how the brain can get smarter (e.g., Nussbaum &
Dweck, 2008), by providing effort versus intelligence praise after success (Mueller
& Dweck, 1998), by conducting neuroscience workshops (Blackwell et al., 2007),
by orchestrating email exchanges during a yearlong program with a mentor (Good
et al., 2003), and by asking students to write a pen pal letter to a younger student
(J. Aronson et al., 2002). These approaches differ in various ways. But each
290
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Social-Psychological Interventions in Education

conveys the core message that intelligence is malleable. When equipped with a
well-specified theory of the psychological experience an intervention is designed
to create, materials and procedures can be modified, as necessary, to create the
target experience most effectively for a particular context and population.
In sum, we do not believe that practitioners should pick up previously effective
experimental materials and freely adapt them without planning or evaluation. Nor do
we believe they should hand out the original materials without considering whether
they would convey the intended meaning in the local context. Although in many
cases materials and procedures developed for one context may work well in a new
context, adapting them might increase their effectiveness. As in a curricular initiative, deciding how, when, and whether to adapt materials and procedures is difficult.
We therefore turn to the question of what kind of expertise is needed to create the
intended psychological experience for students in diverse contexts.
What Kinds of Expertise and Collaborations Are Required to Scale SocialPsychological Interventions Effectively?
To increase the reliability of social-psychological interventions across contexts,
researchers and practitioners will have to decide whether to customize an intervention and, if so, how to do so to best evoke the intended psychological experience.
Making these decisions draws on wisdom in two important areas: (a) theoretical
expertise, or an understanding of the psychological experience that is targeted by
the intervention, and (b) contextual expertise, or an understanding of the psychological experiences and backgrounds of students in the local context
If so, delivering psychological interventions at scale may be done best by creating an equal collaboration between researchers with a basic theoretical understanding of psychological processes and contextual experts, including qualitative
researchers, administrators, and educational practitioners who have profound,
intuitive knowledge or metis (Scott, 1998) of local students and contexts.
Contextual experts can identify areas where the procedures or materials used in an
intervention match or do not match local constraints and meanings. Theoretical
experts can assess whether potential modifications lead an intervention to hit or
miss its intended psychological mark. Because subtle changes to delivery mechanisms can shift the meanings of interventions for students, sometimes in nonobvious or unpredictable ways, researchers and practitioners should approach efforts
to scale psychological interventions with humility and with rigorous, step-by-step
evaluation. Qualitative methods may supplement experimental methods in these
evaluations.
Such equal collaborations have proven effective in other contexts, such as the
National Writing Project (McDonald, Buchanan, & Sterling, 2004), which scaled
an initiative to improve writing instruction using a network of researchers and
teachers who customized, refined, and delivered writing instruction to more than
5,000 students in seven states. Across 15 evaluation studies, National Writing
Project students made more gains in writing than matched comparison group students (National Writing Project, 2010)—a promising result considering the variability in instruction across contexts. Another education research and development
initiative, the Strategic Education Research Partnership (Donovan, Wigdor, &
Snow, 2003), has found similarly positive results for students’ academic vocabulary (also see Morris & Hiebert, 2011). More relevant here, some organizations are
291
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Yeager & Walton

beginning to apply a similar approach to social-psychological interventions. For
instance, the new education research and development enterprise created by the
Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching has formed a network of
community colleges and researchers focused on the improvement of outcomes for
developmental (or remedial) math students (Bryk, 2009; Bryk, Gomez, & Grunow,
in press). Psychological interventions form one part of this team’s strategy. This
collaboration and others like it between researchers and practitioners can create
relational trust, a critical component of educational change (Bryk & Schneider,
2002; Bryk, Sebring, Allensworth, Luppescu, & Easton, 2010), and may increase
the likelihood that materials and procedures will be appropriate in local contexts.
These collaborations may prove fruitful for scaling psychological interventions.
Along similar lines, it may be useful to revisit past suggestions for creating a
new class of professional—a “psychological engineer”—a person with the expertise needed to scale psychological interventions effectively. Such professionals
would be trained in experimental methodology and psychological theory, although
their primary work would be not to advance psychological theory but to understand and alter psychological dynamics in applied settings. This would require
expertise in user-centered design and related qualitative inquiry, in the conduct of
equal collaborations across the theory–real world divide, in the measurement of
psychological processes, and in the delivery and experimental evaluation of psychological interventions. Such a professional could design and implement interventions, evaluate their effects, and troubleshoot interventions that do not produce
their intended effect. For instance, using measures of psychological processes, a
psychological engineer could examine whether an intervention failed to affect the
intended process and, if so, examine with practitioners how the delivery mechanism could be improved. Alternately, if the intervention affected the intended process, the psychological engineer and practitioners could examine whether this
process was important in the local context in affecting relevant outcomes.
In collaborative efforts to scale social-psychological interventions, the flow of
ideas between theory and application will be a two-way street (Bronfenbrenner,
1979; Lewin, 1952). As interventions are created and deployed and their effects
assessed, theories of psychological processes may be refined, leading to improved
interventions. This is directly analogous to work in other applied sciences, where
basic research and application feed back on each other in a mutually beneficial
cycle. When social-psychological interventions are taken to scale, the constraints
of application at many schools may lead to refinements in their essential elements
and the elimination of less important features, making them more streamlined,
powerful, and robust. For instance, it could be useful for scaling purposes to reduce
Blackwell et al.’s (2007) incremental theory intervention to fewer workshop sessions. But the process of reducing this intervention would require experimental
work to identify the theoretically critical elements, potentially resulting in both
new insights about basic psychological processes and a better intervention.
Second, when interventions are tested on broad samples, important boundary
conditions will likely be discovered. It could be that for some students or in some
conditions the suite of interventions reviewed in Table 1 might be ineffective.
When contextual experts collaborate on these projects and see these results, they
may think of other psychological processes that were not addressed—most likely,
292
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Social-Psychological Interventions in Education

processes that psychologists did not anticipate. This could lead to new experiments
investigating these processes, new theories, and new interventions. Indeed, an
important source of theory in the social sciences is the attempt to explain failed
interventions (see, e.g., the discussion of McCord, 1978, in Ross & Nisbett, 1991).
This interplay of theory, research, and application would benefit both psychological science and the solution of social problems.
In sum, psychological interventions may be scaled most effectively when
researchers and practitioners combine requisite theoretical and contextual expertise. Existing organizations provide guidance for how to do this, but this process
may also be expedited by the creation of new roles within the field of education.
We anticipate that such efforts will benefit both basic psychological theory and
student outcomes.
Conclusion
Social-psychological interventions are not magic. They are not inputs that go
into a black box and automatically yield positive results. Instead, they are tools to
target important psychological processes in schools. These interventions grew out
of basic laboratory research and theory investigating these processes. They have
produced long-lasting gains in achievement in multiple studies, but they are
dependent on the capacities, meanings, and recursive processes present in local
contexts. If scaled up in appropriate ways, social-psychological interventions have
the potential to contribute, in conjunction with other reforms, to the solution of
endemic problems in education.
Nevertheless, because social-psychological interventions rely on subtle, nonobvious forces, they can lead to polarized reactions—either “uncritical acceptance
and overgeneralization on one hand; [or] vilifying criticism on the other” (Jussim
& Harber, 2005, p. 135; also see Wineburg, 1987; cf. Gawande, 2009). By understanding the mechanisms underlying the effects of social-psychological interventions, we hope that educational researchers can move past such reactions.
Social-psychological interventions complement—and do not replace—traditional
educational reforms. They do not teach students academic content or skills,
restructure schools, or improve teacher training. Instead, they allow students to
take better advantage of learning opportunities that are present in schools and tap
into existing recursive processes to generate long-lasting effects. Just at it would
be absurd to replace skilled surgeons with Gawande’s (2009) one-page checklist,
it would be absurd to replace traditional educational reforms with social-psychological interventions. Instead, as a surgical checklist allows a trained doctor to
perform as well as he or she is capable, social-psychological interventions can
unleash the potential of students and of the educational environments in which
they learn. Indeed, social-psychological interventions may make the effects of
high-quality educational reforms such as improved instruction or curricula more
apparent (Cohen et al., 2009).
Although we are optimistic that social-psychological interventions can be taken
to scale, doing so will require hard work. These are not quick fixes that can be
administered broadly without consideration for local contexts or the meaning students make of them. They will benefit from an R&D model that incorporates
authentic collaborations between researchers and contextual experts and rigorous
293
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Yeager & Walton

evaluation at each step (Bryk, 2009; Bryk et al., in press; Morris & Hiebert, 2011).
But in a context in which many reforms in education have produced at best uneven
results, psychological interventions have a demonstrated potential to address fundamental problems, including low student achievement and large group differences, at low cost and over significant periods of time. We look forward to future
research that includes psychological strategies in the broader suite of reforms to
promote positive change in education.
Notes
The writing of this article was supported by a Spencer Foundation Dissertation
Fellowship for Research Related to Education and a grant from the Thrive Foundation
for Youth, both to the first author. We are grateful to Tony Bryk, Geoff Cohen, Carol
Dweck, Hunter Gehlbach, Matthew Kloser, Richard Shavelson, David Sherman, James
Stigler, Sander Thomaes, and Uri Treisman for their comments, to Alexandria Ordway
for her original research on the California Mission Project, and to Brian Spitzer for his
help.
1Although analogies can mislead if taken too far, they can also be helpful for understanding new ideas in science and, in particular in this case, for understanding how
multiple variables relate (Duit, 1991; Kuhn, 1979; Thibodeau, & Boroditsky, 2011).
2Poor academic achievement is not the only social problem that social-psychological interventions can address, even in the presence of structural impediments (for an
overview, see Reis & Gosling, 2010). Among other social problems, brief social-psychological interventions can have lasting effects on the health of the elderly (Langer &
Rodin, 1976; Rodin & Langer, 1977) and of college students (Pennebaker, 1997;
Pennebaker & Beall, 1986), the success of dieters (Axsom & Cooper, 1985; Logel &
Cohen, 2011), environmental conservation (Goldstein, Cialdini, & Griskevicius,
2008), youth aggression (Hudley & Graham, 1993; Thomaes, Bushman, Orobio de
Castro, Cohen, & Denissen, 2009; Yeager, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2011), and intergroup relations (e.g., Page-Gould, Mendoza-Denton, & Tropp, 2008; Paluck, 2009; cf.
Paluck, 2010).

References
Aaronovitch, D. (2010, January 23). In a world of hi-tech medicine and machinery, the
best safeguard is the low-tech checklist. The Times. Retrieved from http://entertainment
.timesonline.co.uk/tol/arts_and_entertainment/books/book_reviews/article
6995508 .ece
Aronson, E. (1999). The power of self-persuasion. American Psychologist, 54,
875–884.
Aronson, E., Blaney, N., Stephin, C., Sikes, J., & Snapp, M. (1978). The jigsaw classroom. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Aronson, J., Fried, C., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the effects of stereotype threat on
African American college students by shaping theories of intelligence. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 113–125.
Axsom, D., & Cooper, J. (1985). Cognitive dissonance and psychotherapy: The role of
effort justification in inducing weight loss. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 21, 149–160.
Bandura, A. (1977). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral change.
Psychological Review, 84, 191–215.

294
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Social-Psychological Interventions in Education

Blackwell, L. A., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Theories of intelligence
and achievement across the junior high school transition: A longitudinal study and
an intervention. Child Development, 78, 246–263.
Bransford, J., Brown, A., & Cocking, R. (1999). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, school. Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences.
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The ecology of human development: Experiments by nature
and design. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bryk, A. S. (2009). Support a science of performance improvement. Phi Delta Kappan,
90, 597–600.
Bryk, A. S., Gomez, L., & Grunow, A. (in press). Ruminations II—Getting ideas into
action: Building networked improvement communities in education. In M. Hallinan
(Ed.), Frontiers of social science research.
Bryk, A. S., & Schneider, B. L. (2002). Trust in schools: A core resource for improvement. New York, NY: Russell Sage.
Bryk, A. S., Sebring, P. B., Allensworth, E., Luppescu, S., & Easton, J. Q. (2010).
Organizing schools for improvement: Lessons from Chicago. Chicago, IL: University
of Chicago Press.
Charles A. Dana Center. (2008). Summary of results from the 2008 evaluation conducted on academic youth development: Improving achievement by shaping the culture of algebra classrooms. Retrieved from http://www.utdanacenter.org/
academicyouth/downloads/implementation/12–ayd-evaluation-results.pdf
Chase, C. S., Chin, D. B., Oppezzo, M. A., & Schwartz, D. L. (2009). Teachable agents
and the protégé effect: Increasing the effort towards learning. Journal of Science and
Educational Technology, 18, 334–352.
Checkley, K. (2008). The essentials of social studies, grades K–8: Effective curriculum, instruction, and assessment. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and
Curriculum Development.
Cialdini, R. B. (2003). Crafting normative messages to protect the environment.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 12, 105–109.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., & Master, A. (2006). Reducing the racial achievement gap: A social-psychological intervention. Science, 313, 1307–1310.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaugns, V., Apfel, N., & Brzustoski, P. (2009).
Recursive processes in self-affirmation: Intervening to close the minority achievement gap. Science, 324, 400–403.
Cook, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. (2011, April). Longitudinal
impact of a values affirmation and its timing on minority students’ belonging and
performance in middle school. Presentation at the biennial meeting for the Society
for Research in Child Development, Montreal, Canada.
Crosnoe, R., Lopez-Gonzalez, L., & Muller, C. (2004). Immigration from Mexico into
the math/science pipeline in American education. Social Science Quarterly, 85,
1208–1226.
Destin, M., & Oyserman, D. (2009). From assets to school outcomes: How finances
shape children’s perceived possibilities and intentions. Psychological Science, 20,
414–418.
Donovan, M. S., Wigdor, A. K., & Snow, C. E. (Eds.). (2003). Strategic education
research partnership. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Drawings aid school studies. (1931, October 25). Oakland Tribune, p. B5.
Duckworth, A. L., Grant, H., Loew, B., Oettingen, G., & Gollwitzer, P. M. (in press).
Self-regulation strategies improve self-discipline in adolescents: Benefits of mental
contrasting and implementation intentions. Educational Psychology.

295
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Yeager & Walton

Duit, R. (1991). On the role of analogies and metaphors in learning science. Science
Education, 75, 649–660.
Dweck, C. S. (2006). Mindset. New York, NY: Random House.
Dweck, C. S., & Leggett, E. L. (1988). A social-cognitive approach to motivation and
personality. Psychological Review, 95, 256–273.
Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. Evanston, IL: Row, Peterson.
Fullan, M. (2001). The new meaning of educational change. New York, NY: Teachers
College Press.
Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (in press). Social psychology and educational intervention.
In E. Shafir (Ed.), Behavioral foundations of policy. New York, NY: Russell Sage.
Garet, M., Wayne, A., Stancavage, F., Taylor, J., Walters, K., Song, M., & . . . Doolittle, F.
(2010). Middle School Mathematics Professional Development Impact Study:
Findings after the first year of implementation (NCEE 2010–4010). Retrieved from
http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/pubs/20104009/pdf/20104010.pdf
Gawande, A. (2009). The checklist manifesto: How to get things right. New York, NY:
Metropolitan Books.
Gehlbach, H. (2010). The social side of school: Why teachers need social psychology.
Educational Psychology Review, 22, 349–362.
Glazerman, S., Isenberg, E., Dolfin, S., Bleeker, M., Johnson, A., Grider, M., &
Jacobus, M. (2010). Impacts of comprehensive teacher induction: Final results from
a randomized controlled study (NCEE 2010 4028). Retrieved from http://ies.ed.gov/
ncee/pubs/20104027/pdf/20104027.pdf
Godes, O., Hulleman, C. S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2007, April). Boosting students’
interest in math with utility value: Two experimental tests. Paper presented at the
meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Chicago, IL.
Goldstein, N., Cialdini, R., & Griskevicius, V. (2008). A room with a viewpoint: Using
social norms to motivate environmental conservation in hotels. Journal of Consumer
Research, 35, 472–482.
Good, C., Aronson, J., & Inzlicht, M. (2003). Improving adolescents’ standardized test
performance: An intervention to reduce the effects of stereotype threat. Journal of
Applied Developmental Psychology, 24, 645–662.
Greenwald, A. G. (1980). The totalitarian ego: Fabrication and revision of personal
history. American Psychologist, 35, 603–618.
Haessler, J. (1973, April 5). Fourth grade class to build scale model of San Antonio
mission in EDH. Mountain Democrat.
Hallinan, M. (2001). Sociological perspectives on Black/White inequalities in
American schooling. Sociology of Education, Extra Issue, 74, 50–70.
Haynes, A. B., Weiser, T. G., Lipsitz, S. R., Breizat, A-H., Dellinger, E. P., Herbosa, T.,
Joseph, S., Kibatala, P. L., Lapitan, M. C. M., Merry, A. F., Moorthy, K., Reznick, R. K.,
Taylor, B., Gawande, A. A. (2009). A surgical safety checklist to reduce morbidity and
mortality in a global population. The New England Journal of Medicine, 360, 491–499.
Haynes, T. L., Perry, R. P., Stupnisky, R. H., & Daniels, L. M. (2009). A review of
attributional retraining treatments: Fostering engagement and persistence in vulnerable college students. In Higher Education: Handbook of Theory and Research
(pp. 227–271). The Netherlands: Springer.
Hudley, C., & Graham, S. (1993). An attributional intervention to reduce peer-directed
aggression among African-American boys. Child Development, 64, 124–138.
Hulleman, C. S., & Cordray, D. S. (2009). Moving from the lab to the field: The role
of fidelity and achieved relative intervention strength. Journal of Research on
Educational Effectiveness, 2, 88–110.

296
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Social-Psychological Interventions in Education

Hulleman, C. S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2009). Making education relevant: Increasing
interest and performance in high school science classes. Science, 326, 1410–1412.
James-Burdumy, S., Deke, J., Lugo-Gil, J., Carey, N., Hershey, A., Gersten, R., . . .
Faddis, B. (2010). Effectiveness of selected supplemental reading comprehension
interventions: Findings from two student cohorts (NCEE 2010–4016). Retrieved
from http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/pubs/20104015/pdf/20104016.pdf
Jamieson, J., Mendes, W. B., Blackstock, E., & Schmader, T. (2009). Turning the knots
in your stomach into bows: Reappraising arousal improves performance on the
GRE. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 208–212.
Jussim, L., & Harber, K. D. (2005). Teacher expectations and self-fulfilling prophecies:
Knowns and unknowns, resolved and unresolved controversies. Personality and
Social Psychology Review, 9, 131–155.
Kelley, H. H. (1973). The process of causal attribution. American Psychologist, 28,
107–128.
Kuhn, T. S. (1979). Metaphor in science. In A. Ortony (Ed.), Metaphor and thought
(2nd ed., pp. 403–419). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Kulesza, M., Apperson, M., Larimer, M. E., & Copeland, A. L. (2010). Brief alcohol
intervention for college drinkers: How brief is it? Addictive Behaviors, 35, 730–733.
Labaree, D. F. (1998). Educational researchers: Living with a lesser form of knowledge. Educational Researcher, 27, 4–12.
Langer, E. J., & Rodin, J. (1976). The effects of choice and enhanced personal responsibility for the aged: A field experiment in an institutional setting. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 34, 191–198.
Lewin, K. (1952). Group decision and social change. In G. E. Swanson, T. M.
Newcomb, & E. L. Hartley (Eds.), Readings in social psychology (2nd ed., pp. 330–
344). New York, NY: Holt.
Logel, C., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). The role of the self in physical health: Testing the
effect of a values affirmation intervention on weight loss. Unpublished manuscript,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
Marigold, D. C., Holmes, J. G., & Ross, M. (2007). More than words: Reframing compliments from romantic partners fosters security in low self-esteem individuals.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 232–248.
Martens, A., Johns, M., Greenberg, J., & Schimel, J. (2006). Combating stereotype
threat: The effect of self-affirmation on women’s intellectual performance. Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology, 42, 236–243.
McCord, J. (1978). A thirty-year follow-up of treatment effects. American Psychologist,
33, 284–289.
Mendoza-Denton, R., Purdie, V., Downey, G., Davis, A., & Pietrzak, J. (2002).
Sensitivity to status-based rejection: Implications for African-American students’
college experience. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 896–918.
Miller, D. T., & Prentice, D. A. (in press). Psychological levers of behavior change. In
E. Shafir (Ed.), Behavioral foundations of policy. New York, NY: Russell Sage.
Miyake, A., Kost-Smoth, L. E., Finkelstein, N. D., Pollock, S. J., Cohen, G. L., & Ito, A.
(2010). Reducing the gender achievement gap in college science: A classroom study
of values affirmation. Science, 330, 1234–1237.
Molden, D. C., & Dweck, C. S. (2006). Finding “meaning” in psychology: A lay theories approach to self-regulation, social perception, and social development. American
Psychologist, 61, 192–203.
Morisano, D., Hirsh, J. B., Peterson, J. B., Pihl, R. O., & Shore, B. (2010). Setting,
elaborating, and reflecting on personal goals improves academic performance.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 95, 255–264.

297
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Yeager & Walton

Morris, A. K., & Hiebert, J. (2011). Creating shared instructional products: An alternative approach to improving teaching. Educational Researcher, 40, 5–13.
Mueller, C. M., & Dweck, C. S. (1998). Praise for intelligence can undermine children’s motivation and performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
75, 33–52.
National Writing Project. (2010). Research brief no. 2. Retrieved from http://www
.nwp.org/cs/public/download/nwp_file/14004/FINAL_2010_Research_Brief.pdf?
x-r=pcfile_d
Nussbaum, A. D., & Dweck, C. S. (2008). Defensiveness vs. remediation: Self-theories
and modes of self-esteem maintenance. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
34, 127–134.
Oyserman, D., Bybee, D., & Terry, K. (2006). Possible selves and academic outcomes:
How and when possible selves impel action. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 91, 188–204.
Page-Gould, E., Mendoza-Denton, R., & Tropp, L. R. (2008). With a little help from
my cross-group friend: Reducing anxiety in intergroup contexts through cross-group
friendship. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 95, 1080–1094.
Paluck, E. L. (2009). Reducing intergroup prejudice and conflict using the media: A
field experiment in Rwanda. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96,
574–587.
Paluck, E. L. (2010). Is it better not to talk? Group polarization, extended contact, and
perspective-taking in eastern Democratic Republic of Congo. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 36, 1170–1185.
Papay, J., Murnane, R., & Willett, J. (2010). The consequences of high school exit
examinations for low-performing urban students: Evidence from Massachusetts.
Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 32, 5–23.
Pennebaker, J. W. (1997). Opening up: The healing power of expressing emotion. New
York, NY: Guilford.
Pennebaker, J. W., & Beall, S. K. (1986). Confronting a traumatic event: Toward an
understanding of inhibition and disease. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 95, 274–
281.
Petry, N. M., Weinstock, J., Ledgerwood, D. M., & Morasco, B. (2008). A randomized
trial of brief interventions for problem and pathological gamblers. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 76, 318–328.
Ramirez, G., & Beilock, S. (2011). Writing about testing worries boosts exam performance in the classroom. Science, 331, 211–213.
Raudenbush, S. (1984). Magnitude of teacher expectancy effects on pupil IQ as a function of the credibility of expectancy induction: A synthesis of findings from 18
experiments. Journal of Educational Psychology, 76, 85–97.
Reis, H. T., & Gosling, S. D. (2010). Social psychological methods outside the laboratory. In S. T. Fiske, D. T. Gilbert, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (5th ed., Vol. 1, pp. 82–114). New York, NY: John Wiley.
Ritter, S., Anderson, J. R., Koedinger, K. R., & Corbett, A. (2007). Cognitive tutor:
Applied research in mathematics education. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14,
249–255.
Robinson, T. N. (in press). Stealth interventions for obesity prevention and control:
Motivating behavior change. In L. Dube, A. Bechara, A. Dagher, A. Drewnowski,
J. LeBel, P. James, D. Richard, R. Denis, R. Yada. (Eds.), Obesity prevention: The
role of brain and society on individual behavior. New York, NY: Elsevier.

298
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Social-Psychological Interventions in Education

Rodin, J., & Langer, E. J. (1977). Long-term effects of a control-relevant intervention
with the institutionalized aged. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35,
897–902.
Romero, C., Paunesku, D., & Dweck, C. (2011, April). Brainology in the classroom:
An online growth mindset intervention affects GPA, conduct, and implicit theories.
Poster presented at the biennial meeting for the Society for Research in Child
Development, Montreal, Canada.
Ross, L., & Nisbett, R. E. (1991). The person and the situation: Perspectives of social
psychology. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Rydell, R. J., Shiffrin, R. M., Boucher, K. L., Van Loo, K., & Rydell, M. T. (2010).
Stereotype threat prevents perceptual learning. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Science, 107, 14042–14047.
Schmader, T., Johns, M., & Forbes, C. (2008). An integrated process model of stereotype threat effects on performance. Psychological Review, 115, 336–356.
Schulz, R., & Hanusa, B. H. (1978). Long-term effects of control and predictabilityenhancing interventions: Findings and ethical issues. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 36, 1194–1201.
Schwarz, N., Bless, H., Strack, F., Klumpp, G., Rittenauer-Schatka, H., & Simmons,
A. (1991). Ease of retrieval as information: Another look at the availability heuristic.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 195–202.
Schwartz, D. L., & Martin, T. (2004). Inventing to prepare for learning: The hidden
efficiency of original student production in statistics instruction. Cognition &
Instruction, 22, 129–184.
Scott, J. C. (1998). Seeing like a state: How certain schemes to improve the human
condition have failed. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Sherman, D. K., & Cohen, G. L. (2006). The psychology of self-defense: Selfaffirmation theory. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 38, pp. 183–242). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Sherman, D. K., Cohen, G. L., Nelson, L. D., Nussbaum, A. D., Bunyan, D. P., & Garcia,
J. P. (2009). Affirmed yet unaware: Exploring the role of awareness in the process of
self-affirmation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 97, 745–764.
Sherman, D. K., & Hartson, K. A. (2011). Reconciling self-protection with selfimprovement: Self-affirmation theory. In M. Alicke & C. Sedikides (Eds.), The
Handbook of Self-Enhancement and Self-Protection. (pp. 128–151). New York, NY:
Guilford Press.
Sherman, D. K., Hartson, K. A., Binning, K. R., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J.,
Taborsky-Barba, S., Tomassetti, S., Nussbaum, A. D., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). Selfaffirmation, identity threat, and academic performance: Understanding the effects of
a social psychological intervention. Manuscript in preparation.
Somers, M.-A., Corrin, W., Sepanik, S., Salinger, T., Levin, J., & Zmach, C. (2010).
The Enhanced Reading Opportunities Study final report: The impact of supplemental literacy courses for struggling ninth-grade readers (NCEE 2010–4022).
Retrieved from http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/pubs/20104021/pdf/20104021.pdf
Steele, C. (2010). Whistling Vivaldi: And other clues how stereotypes affect us. New
York, NY: Norton.
Steele, C. M. (1988). The psychology of self-affirmation: Sustaining the integrity
of the self. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology
(pp. 261–302). New York, NY: Academic Press.
Steele, C. M. (1997). A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape intellectual identity and
performance. American Psychologist, 52, 613–629.

299
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Yeager & Walton

Steele, C. M., Spencer, S. J., & Aronson, J. (2002). Contending with group image: The
psychology of stereotype and social identity threat. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances
in experimental social psychology (Vol. 34, pp. 379–440). San Diego, CA: Academic
Press.
Storms, M. D., & Nisbett, R. E. (1970). Insomnia and the attribution process. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 16, 319–328.
Szalavitz, M. (2009, January 14). Study: A simple surgery checklist saves lives. Time.
Retrieved from http://www.time.com/time/health/article/0,8599,1871759,00.html
Taylor, V. J., & Walton, G. (in press). Stereotype threat undermines academic learning.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin.
Thibodeau, P. H., & Boroditsky, L. (2011). Metaphors we think with: The role of
metaphor in reasoning. PLoS ONE, 6(2), e16782. Retrieved from http://www
.plosone.com
Thomaes, S., Bushman, B. J., Orobio de Castro, B., Cohen, G., & Denissen, J. A.
(2009). Reducing narcissistic aggression by buttressing self-esteem: An experimental field study. Psychological Science, 20, 1536–1542.
Tyack, D. B., & Cuban, L. (1995). Tinkering toward utopia: A century of public school
reform. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Vansteenkiste, M., Simons, J., Lens, W., Sheldon, K. M., & Deci, E. L. (2004).
Motivating learning, performance, and persistence: The synergistic role of intrinsic
goals and autonomy-support. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87,
246–260.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2007). A question of belonging: Race, social fit, and
achievement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 82–96.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A brief social-belonging intervention improves
academic and health outcomes among minority students. Science, 331, 1447–1451.
Walton, G. M., Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., & Master, A. (2011). A brief intervention to buttress middle school students’ sense of social-belonging: Effects by race
and gender. Unpublished manuscript, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
Walton, G. M., & Dweck, C. S. (2009). Solving social problems like a psychologist.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 4, 101–102.
Walton, G. M., Logel, C., Peach, J., & Spencer, S. (2011). Two interventions to boost
women’s achievement in engineering: Social-belonging and self-affirmationtraining. Unpublished manuscript, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
Walton, G. M., & Spencer, S. J. (2009). Latent ability: Grades and test scores systematically underestimate the intellectual ability of negatively stereotyped students.
Psychological Science, 20, 1132–1139.
Weiner, B. (1986). An attributional theory of emotion and motivation, New York, NY:
Springer-Verlag.
Wilson, T. D. (2006). The power of social psychological interventions. Science, 313,
1251–1252.
Wilson, T. D., Damiani, M., & Shelton, N. (2002). Improving the academic performance of college students with brief attributional interventions. In J. Aronson (Ed.),
Improving academic achievement: Impact of psychological factors on education
(pp. 88–108). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. (1982). Improving the academic performance of college freshmen: Attribution therapy revisited. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 42, 367–376.

300
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

Social-Psychological Interventions in Education

Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. (1985). Improving the performance of college freshmen with attributional techniques. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
49, 287–293.
Wineburg, S. S. (1987). The self-fulfillment of the self-fulfilling prophecy. Educational
Researcher, 16, 28–37.
Yeager, D. S., Trzesniewski, K., & Dweck, C. S. (2011). An implicit theories intervention
changes aggressive and prosocial responses to peer exclusion and victimization
among high school students. Unpublished manuscript, Stanford University, Stanford,
CA.

Authors
DAVID S. YEAGER is a Ph.D. candidate in the Stanford University School of Education,
Developmental and Psychological Sciences, 271 Jordan Hall, Stanford, CA 94107;
e-mail: dyeager@stanford.edu. He is supported by a dissertation writing fellowship from
the Spencer Foundation. His research focuses on social cognitive development, motivation, adolescence, research methodology, and psychological interventions.
GREGORY M. WALTON is an assistant professor in the Social Psychology area of the
Stanford University Department of Psychology; e-mail: gwalton@stanford.edu. His
research focuses on self and identity, stereotypes, motivation and achievement, and social
cognition.

301
Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at University of Texas Libraries on February 4, 2016

