Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

ANNUAL
REVIEWS

Further

Click here for quick links to
Annual Reviews content online,
including:
• Other articles in this volume
• Top cited articles
• Top downloaded articles
• Our comprehensive search

Stereotype Threat in
Organizations: Implications
for Equity and Performance
Gregory M. Walton,1, Mary C. Murphy,2, and
Ann Marie Ryan3,
1

Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305;
email: gwalton@stanford.edu

2

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, Bloomington,
Indiana 47405

3

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.
2:523–50
First published online as a Review in Advance on
January 30, 2015
The Annual Review of Organizational Psychology
and Organizational Behavior is online at
orgpsych.annualreviews.org
This article’s doi:
10.1146/annurev-orgpsych-032414-111322
Copyright © 2015 by Annual Reviews.
All rights reserved


All three authors contributed equally to this work.

Department of Psychology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824

Keywords
stereotype threat, gender, race, performance

Abstract
Over the past 20 years, a large body of laboratory and field research
has shown that, when people perform in settings in which their group
is negatively stereotyped, they may experience a phenomenon called
stereotype threat that can undermine motivation and trust and cause
underperformance. This review describes that research and places it
into an organizational context. First, we describe the processes by
which stereotype threat can impair outcomes among people in the
workplace. Next, we delineate the situational cues in organizational
settings that can exacerbate stereotype threat, and explain how and
why these cues affect stereotyped individuals. Finally, we discuss relatively simple empirically based strategies that organizations can implement to reduce stereotype threat and create conditions in which
employees and applicants from all groups can succeed.

523

INTRODUCTION

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Stereotype threat is a situational phenomenon that arises when people face the prospect of being
viewed or evaluated in light of a negative stereotype about a group they belong to (Steele &
Aronson 1995). When a woman performs in a technology setting, for instance, she may know that,
if she performs poorly, other people could view her performance as confirming a negative stereotype about women and technology. This prospect is psychologically threatening. A significant
body of research demonstrates that, under certain boundary conditions—especially when the
person believes that his or her ability is being evaluated and when he or she is “identified with”
(i.e., cares about) the domain of evaluation (Steele 1997, 2010)—stereotype threat can cause
people to perform less well than they are capable of performing (Inzlicht & Schmader 2012,
Walton & Spencer 2009).
The situational nature of stereotype threat means that anyone can experience stereotype threat
if a group they belong to faces a negative stereotype in the situation at hand. It is not an experience
restricted to members of minority or chronically low-status groups. In the workplace, stereotype
threat can occur in the context of (a) preemployment assessments of constructs associated with
group differences in performance, such as women taking math, science, or technology tests; ethnic
minorities taking cognitive ability tests; older workers applying for jobs in innovative, fast-paced
organizations (e.g., technology); and White men in math contexts where Asians are stereotyped as
superior; (b) performance evaluations for promotion, salary raises, and other decisions, such as when
women are considered for senior leadership positions in male-dominated fields; and (c) everyday
workplace exchanges, such as when minority-group members share ideas at a team meeting. Because
evaluative contexts are ubiquitous in the workplace and because individuals’ livelihoods and often
their self-concepts are inextricably affected by being valued and respected in the workplace (Kray &
Shirako 2012), the potential for stereotype threat effects in work contexts is great.
Before reviewing evidence about stereotype threat in the workplace and potential remedies for
it, we review the basic tenets of stereotype threat theory and key findings in other contexts. Our
review focuses on stereotype threat as well as social identity threat more broadly. The former refers
to the worry that one could confirm or be seen as confirming a negative stereotype about his or her
group (Steele 1997, 2010). The latter refers to broader situational cues that signal that one’s
identity may be devalued in a setting (Murphy & Taylor 2012, Purdie-Vaughns et al. 2008,
Steele et al. 2002).

What Affects Whether and When Stereotype Threat Will Occur?
In general, stereotype threat occurs when a negative stereotype about a group one belongs to exists
in a context or setting and when cues elicit or fail to remove this threat. Basic theory put forth by
Steele (1997, 2010) highlights the conditions that create the risk of stereotype threat: (a) A
consistent stereotype exists that group members are aware of (e.g., that alleges that women are bad
at math), (b) a task one is engaged in is viewed as diagnostic or evaluative of the skill or ability that
is negatively stereotyped (e.g., of math ability), (c) the task is difficult (“at the frontier of one’s
skills,” p. 108; Steele 2010), and (d) the individual cares about performing well and identifies with
the stereotyped group to some extent. These factors, which may vary in degrees of magnitude, help
determine whether stereotype threat arises in a given context.
In workplace contexts, these conditions are often, although not always, present, as many work
tasks and interactions contain some level of evaluation and individuals in general care about being
seen as competent and effective workers (Roberson & Kulik 2007, Ryan & Sackett 2013). Perhaps
the one boundary condition that sometimes goes unmet in the workplace is that of task difficulty. If

524

Walton



Murphy



Ryan

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

individuals perform familiar and routine work or are placed in jobs that contain little challenge,
stereotype threat may be less likely to affect their performance. However, many jobs in today’s
workplace not only involve challenging tasks but have demands related to the rapidly changing
environment, which makes work less likely to be routine or easy (Roberson & Kulik 2007).
When people enter settings in which a group to which they belong faces a negative stereotype,
they tend to be vigilant for cues indicating that others may view them through the lens of a negative
stereotype (see Garcia & Cohen 2012). This vigilance does not necessarily translate into stereotype
threat. It rather sensitizes people to cues about whether their identity is at risk. If cues effectively
take the stereotype off the table, conveying a sense of identity safety, people may not experience
threat (Steele & Cohn-Vargas 2013). But as we describe below, many common cues in workplace
contexts can signal to people that they could be evaluated negatively or marginalized because of
a group they belong to. Exposure to these identity contingency cues makes stereotype threat
more likely.

Who Experiences Stereotype Threat?
As noted above, stereotype threat is a general phenomenon; it is not simply a consequence of low
social status but rather an experience that can be felt by anyone in a circumstance in which a group
the person belongs to faces a negative stereotype. Thus, although past stereotype threat research
has focused primarily on women in math, science, and engineering settings and on African
American and Hispanic students in academics generally, researchers have also shown that stereotype threat can arise in other contexts. For example, it can undermine memory performance
among the elderly (Hess et al. 2003), verbal test performance among people from low social-class
backgrounds (Croizet & Claire 1998), the quality of gay men’s interactions with preschool-aged
children (Bosson et al. 2004), and the performance of White men on a math test said to assess why
Asians are so good at math (Aronson et al. 1999). It has even been shown to weaken the golf
performance of Whites on a putt-putt task said to assess “natural athletic ability” and that of
Blacks on the same task when it was said to assess “sports intelligence” (Stone et al. 1999).
In diverse work settings, then, employees with specific group identities, including racial-ethnic
and gender identities as well as other identities (e.g., nationality; language; work status, such as
expatriate, temporary work visa, or permanent resident; religion) may experience stereotype
threat if a particular identity of theirs is associated with a negative stereotype in that environment.
Further exploring how different groups experience stereotype threat in diverse work settings is an
important direction for future research.

What Processes Underlie Stereotype Threat?
Summarizing dozens of laboratory experiments conducted by researchers around the world,
Schmader & Beilock (2012; see also Schmader et al. 2008) describe a model by which stereotype
threat triggers a network of affective and cognitive processes to undermine performance on
challenging cognitive and social tasks. The model highlights both the physiological stress that
results from stereotype threat and a process by which people closely monitor their task performance. In this process, people experience a cycle—perhaps better termed a cyclone—of negative
thoughts, emotions, and appraisal processes (e.g., if I do poorly, will they think people like me can’t
do this; I’ll show them we can do it; am I doing well enough?). To focus on the task at hand, people
try to suppress this monitoring process and emotional response. This suppression itself, however,
takes up needed working-memory resources and undermines executive functioning, which ultimately weakens performance on challenging tasks.
www.annualreviews.org



Stereotype Threat in Organizations

525

What Are the Effects of Stereotype Threat?

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

The primary consequence of stereotype threat investigated in the literature is underperformance
on diverse challenging tasks, including on tests adapted from standardized tests (e.g., GRE,
GMAT, and SAT), intelligence tests, subject-specific tests (e.g., engineering tests), memory tests,
emotional-sensitivity tests, and physical (e.g., athletic) tasks (for reviews, see Steele 2010, Steele
et al. 2002). More than 400 studies have found that stereotype threat can cause people to
underperform relative to their ability; correspondingly, cues that remove stereotype threat can
cause members of stereotyped groups to perform better, often significantly so (e.g., Spencer et al.
1999, Steele & Aronson 1995). How large is the stereotype threat effect? Four meta-analyses
suggest that, on average, it is moderate in size. First, in the context of examining other questions
within portions of the literature, two meta-analyses estimated the stereotype threat effect as approximately one-half of a standard deviation (g ¼ 0.45 and 0.64 with 28 and 39 studies; Walton &
Cohen 2003 and Walton & Spencer 2009, respectively). A larger meta-analysis (116 studies)
found an effect size of d ¼ 0.26 (Nguyen & Ryan 2008). (Hedge’s g and Cohen’s d are different
effect-size indicators, but they are highly correlated.) A fourth meta-analysis of 259 experiments
again found a one-half-standard-deviation effect (g ¼ 0.54) (V.J. Taylor & G.M. Walton, unpublished manuscript). This effect is relatively robust across the wide range of populations and
contexts represented in the literature; however, the relative effect of stereotype threat as compared
to other factors will vary in different settings. Regardless of its specific magnitude, this range of
effect-size estimates suggests that stereotype threat can have a significant impact in the lives and
outcomes of individuals and the organizations in which they work.
In addition to task performance, stereotype threat can affect other outcomes of importance in
organizational contexts. When people attempt to learn in stereotype threat circumstances, they
tend to learn less effectively and efficiently (Grand 2012, Rydell et al. 2010, Taylor & Walton
2011). Other behaviors affected by stereotype threat include how people seek out and respond to
feedback (Cohen et al. 1999, Roberson et al. 2003), negotiate (e.g., Kray et al. 2001), and interact
with others (Goff et al. 2008, Richeson & Shelton 2012).
In the original theoretical description of stereotype threat, Steele (1997) hypothesized that, in
addition to task underperformance, repeated exposure to stereotype threat can lead to disidentification and disengagement over time (for related evidence, see Woodcock et al. 2012). In the
workplace, this could include outcomes such as job dissatisfaction, a lack of organizational
commitment, absenteeism, less engagement in organizational citizenship behaviors, counterproductive behavior, and turnover.

What Is the Evidence for Stereotype Threat Effects in the Workplace?
Although research on the effects of stereotype threat on performance are well established in the
laboratory and in educational contexts (Massey & Fischer 2005, Nguyen & Ryan 2008, Walton &
Spencer 2009), they have been investigated to a lesser extent in employment-testing contexts (see
Sackett & Ryan 2012 for a review). Given the sizeable body of research on group differences in
employment testing (Hough et al. 2001), the role of stereotype threat as a contributing factor to
such differences has been a subject of considerable speculation but relatively little direct empirical
investigation in actual hiring contexts (see Chung et al. 2010; Kirnan et al. 2009 for exceptions).
Interestingly, stereotype threat has also been relatively unexplored in actual employee performance
evaluation contexts, although evidence of ethnic-group differences in performance ratings provides a rationale for investigating stereotype threat as a possible contributor (see Roberson et al.
2007 for a review on bias in performance appraisal). As we describe below, there is a considerable

526

Walton



Murphy



Ryan

body of evidence regarding cues in the workplace that signal identity threat, so, despite a lack of
direct evidence testing the contribution of stereotype threat to underperformance in job contexts,
the likelihood of such effects is high.

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Antecedents of Threat in the Workplace: Identity Contingency Cues
Stereotype threat and social identity threat heighten vigilance to situational cues in the local environment as members of stereotyped groups seek information about whether their group is
valued and accepted there (Garcia & Cohen 2012, Murphy & Taylor 2012, Murphy et al. 2007,
Steele et al. 2002) (see Table 1). Some situational cues—like the numeric underrepresentation of
a negatively stereotyped group—evoke identity threat by suggesting that one’s group membership
may be a source of stigma or marginalization. Environments that contain cues like these are
considered identity threatening (Cohen & Garcia 2008, Murphy et al. 2007). Notably, such cues
can cause threat even in settings in which people are generally nonprejudiced and well intentioned
(Murphy & Walton 2013), as cues can have negative meanings even when such meanings are not
intended. Other cues, by contrast, signal identity safety by suggesting that group membership is not
a barrier to inclusion or success. These identity safety cues suggest to individuals that their social
group is welcomed and respected and not a barrier to advancement (Davies et al. 2005, Singh et al.
2013, Steele & Cohn-Vargas 2013). In the organizational literature, positive climates for diversity
or inclusive workplace climates (Herdman & McMillan-Capehart 2010, McKay et al. 2007)
would be considered identity safe. In these settings, people who face negative stereotypes may be
able to relax their psychological and physiological vigilance and perform without the impediment
of identity threat (Cohen & Garcia 2008, Murphy et al. 2007).
Research and theory on identity contingency cues draw directly on a basic lesson of social
psychology: the importance of subjective construal. As Ross & Nisbett (1991, p. 12) write, “The
impact of any ‘objective’ stimulus situation depends upon the personal and subjective meaning that
the actor attaches to that situation. To predict the behavior of a given person successfully, we must
be able to appreciate the actor’s construal of the situation—that is, the manner in which the person
understands the situation as a whole.” As with all social-information processing and all objects of
judgment, identity contingency cues gain meaning in part from the perspective from which they are
viewed. For members of stereotyped groups, this perspective includes the risk of devaluation in
a setting as a consequence of a widely known stereotype. Women know that in math contexts
people could judge their gender group negatively should they perform poorly; as a result, evaluative math tasks can be threatening for women. Men do not face this risk, so they do not experience the same threat (Spencer et al. 1999). When an African American person receives critical
feedback on his work, he faces the possibility that this feedback could result from bias or reflect
a stereotypical judgment; a White person does not face this possibility, so the event, even if
negative, does not have the same identity-threatening meaning for him (Cohen et al. 1999).
Because the meaning of cues depends on the vantage point of perceivers, cues that seem insignificant to a majority-group person can nonetheless have strong meanings and large effects if
they tap into the concerns of people who face the possibility of group-based devaluation (e.g.,
Cheryan et al. 2009, Walton & Cohen 2007). Consider a recent reflection from Michelle Obama
about her experience entering college:
When I first arrived at school as a first-generation college student, I didn’t know anyone on campus
except my brother. I didn’t know how to pick the right classes or find the right buildings. I didn’t even
bring the right size sheets for my dorm room bed. I didn’t realize those beds were so long. So I was
a little overwhelmed and a little isolated. (Obama & Obama 2014)

www.annualreviews.org



Stereotype Threat in Organizations

527

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Table 1 Identity contingency cues
Identity-threatening

Psychological concern

situational cue

engendered by the cue

Outcomes examined

Numeric
underrepresentation

Will I represent my group well?
Will I be able to disprove
negative stereotypes?

Motivation, executive
functioning,
physiological
responding, belonging,
performance

Cultivate critical mass throughout
the organization’s ranks; provide
same-group mentors and
sponsors.

Interpersonal cues,
including incivility and
negative nonverbal
behavior and treatment

Am I respected and valued in this
organization?

Motivation, belonging,
performance

Develop clear and consistent
policies and consequences of this
behavior.

Critical feedback

Is the supervisor biased and
applying stereotypes to me?

Motivation, belonging,
performance

Explicitly convey that critical
feedback reflects the
organization’s high standards
coupled with a statement
expressing confidence that, with
revision, the employee can meet
this standard.

Color-blind diversity
statements and policies

Does the organization value me
and my group’s cultural
background and respect ways
we may be different?

Belonging, performance

Value diversity; use all-inclusive
multicultural statements and
policies.

Fixed-ability beliefs and
messages

Does the organization believe I
(and my group) have (has) what
it takes to be successful?

Motivation, belonging,
performance

Encourage growth-mindset beliefs
and messages.

Ambient cues, including
stereotypical objects and
depictions in the physical
environment

Do I (and my group) belong here?
Am I (are we) valued by the
organization?

Motivation, belonging,
performance

Incorporate diverse, inclusive
images and nonstereotypical
objects in the physical
environment.

Ambiguous hiring and
promotion practices and
procedures

Will this company discriminate
against me? Will my group
membership impede my
progress in the organization?

Interest, motivation,
belonging

Provide clear, unambiguous
guidelines for hiring and
promotion.

Selection tests

Are these tests fair to me and my
group?

Motivation,
performance

Place identity questions (e.g., race,
gender) at the end of the test;
represent such tests in ways that
assure test takers that their
performance will not be viewed as
evidence for a negative group
stereotype; conduct itemsensitivity analysis and remove
problematic items.

Ways to mitigate threat

It is striking that three decades later, after enormous personal success, the First Lady still
remembers the feeling of isolation she experienced when she found that her sheets did not fit her
college dorm room bed. Would misfitting sheets have carried the same meaning to a continuing528

Walton



Murphy



Ryan

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

generation, majority group student? Presumably not. When people enter settings that feel foreign,
places where they might be judged or treated negatively or where they might not belong, they can be
highly attentive to even subtle cues relevant to these concerns. A primary goal of research on
stereotype and social identity threat is to map the subjective construals that common events in school
and work contexts hold for members of stereotyped groups. Understanding these construals informs
ways to structure environments so as to mitigate people’s experience of threat and improve outcomes.
When people feel threatened in a setting, a host of problematic psychological and performance
outcomes follow: They may conclude that they do not belong or fit there (e.g., Cheryan et al. 2009,
Walton & Cohen 2007) or feel less trust and motivation and greater anxiety (e.g., Bosson et al.
2004, Emerson & Murphy 2015, Johns et al. 2008), and their executive functioning—critical for
optimal performance—can be impaired (e.g., Beilock et al. 2007, Johns et al. 2008, Schmader &
Johns 2003). In the workplace, experiences of identity threat produce gender and racial disparities
in job and career aspirations (e.g., Cheryan et al. 2009, Correll 2004, Davies et al. 2005,
Greenhaus et al. 1990, Niemann & Dovidio 1998). Employees who report greater levels of identity
threat are perceived by supervisors as poor performers and as less suitable for promotion; they also
show higher levels of turnover and absenteeism (Avery et al. 2007, Browne 1999, Greenhaus et al.
1990, Ilgen & Youtz 1986, James 2000, Kanter 1979, Landau 1995).
Given the importance of these outcomes, it is essential to understand how cues give rise to
identity threat in workplace settings.

THREATENING CUES IN WORKPLACE SETTINGS
This section reviews the kinds of situational cues that can trigger identity threat. These include cues
in the physical environment, such as numeric underrepresentation; interpersonal cues, such as
incivility and critical feedback; and organizational policies and practices that signal the value the
organization places on diversity, such as in diversity messages, and how the organization views
intelligence and effort, such as in recruitment materials and hiring and promotion practices. The
vast majority of this research is experimental; it randomly exposes a group of students to either one
cue or another and assesses the causal effects.
As noted above, many identity contingency cues can be subtle—they need not overtly impugn
the competence of stereotyped-group members or reflect bias or animus. Suppose a White supervisor provides substantive critical feedback to a Black employee with the best of intentions—
say, to help the employee improve and become eligible for a promotion. Yet to the employee,
unvarnished criticism could seem threatening—it could seem an indication that the supervisor
views him or her as incapable of improvement. If, as a consequence, the employee responds poorly
to the feedback, this may surprise and disappoint the supervisor. In some cases, the very subtlety
and ambiguity of potentially threatening cues can make them especially taxing for people from
stereotyped groups. Because subtle cues are harder to decipher than overt expressions of animus or
bias, they require more cognitive labor to make sense of and can thus be more cognitively disruptive for recipients (Salvatore & Shelton 2007).

Cues in the Physical Environment
Both numerical underrepresentation and ambient cues in the physical environment signal to stereotyped individuals whether their identity is valued by an organization. Here, we describe research that demonstrates the effects of these cues on people’s experiences of identity threat,
motivation, physiology, and performance.

www.annualreviews.org



Stereotype Threat in Organizations

529

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Underrepresentation. A primary trigger of identity threat is when stereotyped-group members
lack critical mass in a setting. Critical mass refers to “the point at which there are enough minorities
in a setting, like a school or workplace, that individual minorities no longer feel uncomfortable
there because they are minorities” (Steele 2010, p. 135; see also Avery 2003, Cohen & Swim 1995,
Duguid 2011, Ely 1995, Inzlicht & Ben-Zeev 2000, Kanter 1979, Niemann & Dovidio 1998,
Roberson et al. 2003, Sekaquaptewa & Thompson 2002, Stoker et al. 2012). Underrepresentation
can cause a host of negative psychological, motivational, and physiological outcomes. In one
study, science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) college students watched one of two
videos for a summer science conference (Murphy et al. 2007). In one video, the gender representation of conference attendees reflected the ratio typically found in STEM disciplines—
approximately three men to every woman. In the other video, gender representation was balanced
(1:1). The results of the study revealed that women’s outcomes were significantly influenced by the
representation, whereas men’s were not. In response to the gender-unbalanced video, women
reported feeling as though they would belong less at the conference, expressed less interest in
attending the conference, and showed a physiological stress response characterized by increased
cardiovascular reactivity (Murphy et al. 2007). Other studies have further illuminated the harmful
effects of performing in settings in which one’s group is underrepresented. These include higher
blood pressure, anxiety, and depression (e.g., Blascovich et al. 2001, Jackson et al. 1995, Murphy
et al. 2007, Osborne 2006). Underrepresentation also leads stereotyped-group members to discount critical feedback (Roberson et al. 2003), to expect to perform worse (Stangor et al. 1998),
and to actually perform worse (e.g., Inzlicht & Ben-Zeev 2000). Finally, it undermines people’s
trust and commitment to their organizations (Purdie-Vaughns et al. 2008).
One of the main problems with underrepresentation in organizations—both at peer and supervisor levels—is that it creates ambiguity that risks negative interpretation and construal. Why
are there few employees like me here? Why are there few supervisors from my group? Does this
mean that people like me cannot advance? Another problem stemming from underrepresentation
is that it places undue, disproportionate pressure on individuals to disprove stereotypes and
positively “represent” their group (Saenz & Lord 1989, Sekaquaptewa & Thompson 2003). Although individuals may try to cope with identity threat by behaving counter-stereotypically, research
reveals that perceivers often attribute both stereotype-consistent and -inconsistent behaviors to
factors that ultimately confirm and maintain group-based stereotypes (Sekaquaptewa et al. 2003).
For example, a human resources officer may believe that a Black woman scored high on a cognitive
ability test because she took a test-prep course, not because she is competent. Such patterns of
attributions make stereotypes sticky. By contrast, nonstereotyped individuals are more often given
the benefit of the doubt; their behavior is attributed to them as individuals (Sekaquaptewa et al.
2003).
Ambient cues. Another set of cues that can engender identity threat involves the physical makeup
of the local environment. Walls lined with photos of senior executives that exclude women and
people of color may cause members of underrepresented groups to doubt their prospects in the
organization. Even more subtle ambient cues can evoke identity threat when they seem to confirm
stereotypes about the setting and the kinds of people who succeed in it. Several studies found that
when undergraduates completed questionnaires in a computer science room containing objects
associated with a masculine, geeky stereotype of the field (e.g., Star Trek posters, video games,
comics), women’s interest in computer science was lower than men’s. However, when these objects
were replaced with neutral objects (e.g., nature posters, art, general interest books), women’s
interest matched men’s (Cheryan et al. 2009). Women also expressed less interest in working at
a technology company that projected a stereotypical physical environment, preferring a company
530

Walton



Murphy



Ryan

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

without stereotypical objects. Why do such physical cues have a large effect on women’s professional motivations? Further studies showed that stereotypical objects signal to women that
technology companies value men and masculinity—so women inferred that they would not fit in.
Related research examined gender cues in job advertisements. This research found that online job
advertisements for male-dominated areas used more words associated with male stereotypes (e.g.,
leader, dominant); in turn, the use of such words led people to view men as predominant in these
work settings. This undermined women’s anticipated sense of belonging and motivation to pursue
these opportunities (Gaucher et al. 2011).
If organizations wish to attract and retain members of stereotyped groups, they should attend
to their physical environments and the subtle messages they send about who belongs, is valued,
and can succeed.

Interpersonal Cues
Many studies have found that stereotyped individuals are particularly attuned to the verbal and
nonverbal behavior of dominant-group members because these behaviors communicate how
stereotyped individuals are perceived (e.g., Dovidio et al. 2006, Hebl et al. 2002, Murphy et al.
2013). In modern society, the expression of prejudice has largely shifted from negative explicit
attitudes—such as endorsements of racial inferiority and de jure segregation—to negative implicit
attitudes and associations with stereotyped groups. These implicit attitudes predict relevant
preferences and behaviors, such as the preference to associate with in-group members more than
with out-group members (Dovidio & Gaertner 2004, Dovidio et al. 2002). Importantly, these
different types of attitudes are reflected in people’s verbal and nonverbal behaviors. For instance,
explicit attitudes—the kinds of attitudes people self-report on questionnaires—are reflected in
verbal behavior. Thus, people’s explicit, largely egalitarian attitudes predict what people say to
members of stereotyped groups. But their implicit attitudes and associations, which are often
negative, tend to predict how they behave toward members of stereotyped groups (Dovidio et al.
2002, Hebl et al. 2002, McConnell & Leibold 2001). Thus, from the perspective of stereotyped
individuals, modern prejudice is often communicated by a mismatch between positive verbal
behavior (“You did great!”) and negative nonverbal behavior (e.g., sitting far away in the
workplace cafeteria; leering at women). In the workplace, stereotyped individuals often attend to
interpersonal behavior—people’s verbal and nonverbal behaviors—to determine whether they
will be valued and respected.
Subtle harassment and sexist treatment. Overt harassment and sexist treatment are clear signals
that an environment is rife with prejudice and stereotyping—an unequivocal trigger of stereotype
threat. Research over several decades has shown that when these interpersonal behaviors are
present in the workplace, members of stereotyped groups suffer (e.g., Mueller et al. 2001,
Schneider et al. 1997). This is the case for many stereotyped groups, including women, racial and
ethnic minorities, and gay individuals (e.g., Bruce 2013, Kabat-Farr & Cortina 2014, Karsten
2006, Raeburn 2004, Schneider et al. 1997). However, harassment and sexist treatment in the
workplace is not always blatant—expressed by catcalls, lewd jokes, or offensive posters in
a cubical (e.g., Leskinen & Cortina 2014). It can also be expressed by more subtle nonverbal
behavior, which simply conveys to recipients that they are not fully respected as work partners. In
a series of studies, Logel and colleagues (2009b) found that male engineering students who scored
high on a subtle measure of sexism made no overtly sexist, demeaning, or stereotypical verbal
statements during a conversation with a female peer about engineering. However, their nonverbal
behavior exhibited dominance and sexual interest. They sat closer to the woman than less sexist
www.annualreviews.org



Stereotype Threat in Organizations

531

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

men did, displayed a more open body posture (shoulders back, knees apart), and gazed more at her
body. Women exposed to these behaviors performed worse on a subsequent engineering test than
did women who interacted with nonsexist men. This was despite the fact that women liked the
subtly sexist man more. He paid them more attention, after all, and this attention was not overtly
hostile. However, his behavior put women in a role that undermined their task performance.
Logel and colleagues’ (2009b) research was experimental and conducted in a laboratory.
However, field studies show that interpersonal interactions can be threatening for women in
professional environments, too. One experience-sampling study with STEM faculty members
found that talking with male colleagues about research predicted greater work engagement among
men; for women, by contrast, shoptalk with men predicted disengagement (Holleran et al. 2011).
Critical feedback. Workplaces thrive when people feel comfortable giving and receiving specific,
critical feedback about how to improve. Indeed, substantive critical feedback is one of the most
valuable resources for growth and improvement. However, the receipt of critical feedback is often
marked by defensiveness and a loss of motivation. How can supervisors and mentors provide
feedback in a way that sustains recipients’ motivation? This problem, known as “the mentor’s
dilemma” (Cohen et al. 1999, Cohen & Steele 2002), is especially acute when people from majority
groups give critical feedback to people from negatively stereotyped groups (e.g., men to women,
Whites to people of color). Majority-group members generally want to avoid appearing prejudiced; as a consequence, they may withhold criticism from stereotyped individuals (Harber 1998).
Stereotyped individuals are vigilant for potential instances of bias and may thus discount both
positive and negative feedback when their group membership is known and could thus bias any
feedback they receive (Crocker et al. 1991). Indeed, African American professionals are more likely
to discount feedback in contexts in which they report experiencing stereotype threat (Roberson
et al. 2003), and they may not seek out such feedback either, concerned that it may be taken as
a sign of low ability or insecurity (Roberson et al. 2003, Williams et al. 1999). The mentor’s
dilemma thus doubly disadvantages members of lower status groups: It denies them access to
potentially valuable critical feedback, and it creates an attributional context that leads them to
discount feedback they receive.

Organizational Policies and Practices
An organization communicates its views about diversity through its policies, practices, and
characterization of the skills and abilities required to do well and advance in the organization. An
organization’s diversity philosophy as well as the mindset about ability it conveys can signal to
members of negatively stereotyped groups whether they are included and respected and thus
influence people’s experience of identity threat or safety.
Diversity philosophies. One way that organizations signal their support of racial and ethnic
minorities in the workplace is through diversity philosophies included in company materials—on
websites, in recruiting brochures, and in mission statements (e.g., Avery et al. 2007). Two diversity
philosophies are among the most studied by social scientists: the color-blind philosophy and the
multicultural philosophy (e.g., Ely & Thomas 2001).
A colorblind philosophy is the dominant philosophy in American workplaces, rooted in
egalitarian norms and the protestant work ethic. It maintains that hard work and merit should be
the primary metric of success at work and that differences in social status or group membership
(e.g., race, gender, class, and sexuality differences) should not affect people’s success or failure
(Plaut et al. 2009). The goal of the color-blind philosophy is to unite people in an organization
532

Walton



Murphy



Ryan

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

regardless of their social group membership; it is therefore characterized by messages that emphasize commonalities and similarities between employees (Ely & Thomas 2001). Despite these
well-meaning goals, research suggests that Black and Latino individuals often experience colorblind messages as exclusionary attempts to conceal important group differences (Bonilla-Silva
2006, Markus et al. 2000, Ryan et al. 2007), especially when such messages seem insincere (e.g., if
promulgated by an organization that is not diverse; Avery et al. 2013, Purdie-Vaughns et al. 2008).
Thus, color-blind messages can reduce trust and task engagement and undermine cognitive
performance among stereotyped individuals (Holoien & Shelton 2012, Plaut et al. 2009).
A multicultural philosophy, by contrast, explicitly acknowledges that people from different social
groups bring with them social and cultural differences and, further, represents these differences as
a source of value and strength (Ely & Thomas 2001, Homan et al. 2007, Wolsko et al. 2000). Racial
and ethnic minorities generally perceive multicultural philosophies more favorably because they
welcome group differences (e.g., Bonilla-Silva 2006, Markus et al. 2000, Ryan et al. 2007). Yet, when
organizations endorse this approach, majority-group members can feel excluded if they see their
group left out of celebrations and events that value diversity (Brief et al. 2005, Kalev et al. 2006,
Mannix & Neale 2006, Thomas 2008).
Most recently, a new diversity philosophy has been gaining attention. Termed all-inclusive
multiculturalism (AIM), this philosophy explicitly stresses that diversity includes everyone—
majority and minority groups alike (Plaut et al. 2011, Stevens et al. 2008). Organizations signal
this message by including both majority and minority groups in images of company diversity and
by inviting cross-group dialogue that acknowledges and respects the perspectives of both groups
(Stevens et al. 2008). So far, research on AIM suggests that it reduces identity threat among
minority- and majority-group members and that majority-group members feel more included in
organizations that endorse this approach, relative to those that endorse the multicultural philosophy (Plaut et al. 2011).
Organizational mindsets about ability. Another identity-threatening message that organizations
may communicate to employees is the idea that ability and talent is fixed—you either have it or you
don’t—and, moreover, that ability is held by only a select few (Murphy & Dweck 2010). This fixed
organizational mindset can become part of an organization’s culture in which some groups or
divisions are thought to “have it,” whereas others do not. Fixed mindset companies emphasize
high performance over growth and learning, and employees feel they must constantly prove their
ability and worth. Alternatively, companies can endorse a mindset that emphasizes personal
growth and development through effort and hard work. This growth organizational mindset
suggests that all employees are capable of succeeding if they apply themselves, seek ways to
improve and develop, and receive appropriate training and support. Organizational mindsets can
be communicated through mission statements that profess companies’ values (e.g., smarts, intelligence, and innate talent versus growth, development, and motivation) and through evaluation
and promotion metrics that assess and reward talent and performance over development and
improvement. A prototypical example of a fixed organizational mindset is that of Enron. Enron was,
according to McLean & Elkind (2003, p. 36), a company that prized “sheer brainpower” above all
else, where the task of sorting out intellectual “stars” from the “merely superbright” was the top
priority when making hires and promotions. It was an environment in which one of the most
powerful executives was described as being “so sure that he was the smartest guy in the room that
anyone who disagreed with him was summarily dismissed as just not bright enough to ‘get it’” (p. 33).
Organizational mindsets are also conveyed by design elements of performance management
and compensation systems that convey to employees how behaviors and results are valued. For
example, forced-distribution performance evaluation systems clearly convey that not all can
www.annualreviews.org



Stereotype Threat in Organizations

533

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

succeed (i.e., some people are rated in the bottom 10%) and often set up an environment in which
people feel the need to continually prove their worth (Blume et al. 2009, Schleicher et al. 2009).
Similarly, performance management systems that are not well connected to employee development
processes may convey a fixed mindset (Frear & Paustian-Underdahl 2011). Indeed, simulation
research has shown that “rank and yank” systems such as forced distribution can be associated
with disproportionate numbers of minority-group members receiving lower evaluations under
certain conditions (Giumetti et al. 2014).
Although organizational mindsets do not explicitly reference social group differences, the
exclusionary message of the fixed mindset can trigger identity threat for people who belong to
groups whose ability is impugned by negative stereotypes. When only “some” people are thought
to have the smarts and talent to succeed in a professional setting, people who belong to negatively
stereotyped groups may well worry that others will view them as lacking. For example, in several
studies, Emerson & Murphy (2015) found that women showed worse outcomes in business
settings that endorsed a fixed rather than a growth organizational mindset. They reported less trust
and commitment to the organization, were more likely to worry that they would be negatively
stereotyped by company management, and, when attempting a performance task, disengaged
more and performed worse (Emerson & Murphy 2014; M.C. Murphy, J.A. Garcia & S. Zirkel,
unpublished manuscript). Similar performance effects have been found for Black and Latino
individuals when they expect to be evaluated by a fixed versus growth mindset organization
(K.T.U. Emerson & M.C. Murphy, unpublished manuscript).
Hiring, promotion, and referral policies. Lastly, some hiring, promotion, and referral policies and
procedures can foster stereotype and social identity threat in the workplace. For example, subjective and unstructured evaluations are often used to assess employee performance (e.g., Bommer
et al. 1995, Ford et al. 1986). Members of stereotyped groups might worry that such assessments
will be tainted by subtle and implicit biases or that they could be overlooked for promotion because
they do not fit the prototypical image of a leader or supervisor, especially if their group is underrepresented in management positions (e.g., Eagly & Karau 2002). These concerns are warranted, as research shows that subjective, unstructured evaluations are indeed more vulnerable to
bias and often disadvantage stigmatized individuals (Arvey & Faley 1988, Huffcutt & Roth 1998,
Madera & Hebl 2013).
Notably, “objective” criteria also raise problems. Simply treating a test as a valid indicator of
merit can cause test takers who face a negative stereotype in that context to view the test as unfair
for their group and to underperform (Autin et al. 2014). Indeed, simply representing cognitive
performance and intelligence (IQ) tests as evaluative, as is typical, evokes stereotype threat, causing
members of stereotyped groups to underperform (Steele & Aronson 1995; see also Brown & Day
2006). As we discuss below, evidence suggests that, as a result, such tests show a systematic predictive
bias: They underestimate the ability and potential of people from negatively stereotyped groups to
succeed in contexts in which stereotype threat has been reduced (Walton & Spencer 2009).
As a result, some organizations may wish to subject people from stereotyped groups to a lower
threshold score on important tests. However, such policies may themselves seem to confirm
a negative stereotype and can thus evoke identity threat (Autin et al. 2014; see also Brown et al.
2000; see Turner & Pratkanis 1994 for a review). However, the consideration of group identity
may not be threatening when this consideration challenges the stereotype. Autin and colleagues
(2014) showed that when women believed that gender would be taken into account in the interpretation of test scores to mitigate bias in the measurement of merit—the bias actually observed
(Walton & Spencer 2009)—women performed significantly better. This message, however, tended
to undermine men’s outcomes.
534

Walton



Murphy



Ryan

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Lastly, employee referral policies can exacerbate gender and racial gaps in hiring by drawing
from current employees’ friendship and social networks, which tend to be relatively homogenous
(DiTomaso 2012, McDonald 2011). Many organizations heavily rely on referrals to identify
potential employees (Breaugh 2013, Breaugh et al. 2003, Ioannides & Loury 2004, Marsden &
Gorman 2001, Topa 2011). However, in practice, these recommendations are largely for samegender and same-race/ethnicity candidates (e.g., 63.5% and 71.5%, respectively, in one large US
corporation; Brown et al. 2012) and thus reproduce the demographics of the current employee
pool while limiting access to underrepresented groups (Bielby 2008, Kasinitz & Rosenberg 1996,
Moss & Tilly 2001). From the perspective of underrepresented groups, referral policies may
suggest that organizations are uninterested in recruiting a diverse workforce, preferring to
maintain a status quo that disadvantages their group.

WAYS TO REDUCE STEREOTYPE AND SOCIAL IDENTITY THREAT IN
ORGANIZATIONAL CONTEXTS
High levels of stereotype and social identity threat can undermine people’s performance and thus
an organization’s success. Organizations may aim to reduce threat to ensure that all members can
perform their jobs well and learn and grow unhampered by threat. In addition, organizations may
wish to ensure that selection and promotion decisions are not biased by stereotype threat but
identify and advance the most promising candidates. This section reviews strategies to address
these goals.
In general, to reduce threat, organizations can pursue one or both of two complementary
strategies: They can either change cues present in the environment, removing and replacing cues
that reliably signal threat, or they can change how people interpret or construe such cues—that is,
the meaning they draw from them. The first strategy is often preferable but is not always possible;
for instance, a nondiverse organization may not be able to quickly become diverse. However, at
least in education contexts, even brief interventions that encourage people to construe important
aspects of the environment in nonthreatening ways can cause large and lasting improvements in
performance and achievement (for reviews, see Garcia & Cohen 2012, Walton et al. 2013, Yeager &
Walton 2011). For instance, the social-belonging intervention—a 30–60-min exercise to encourage students to view adversities in school as normal and temporary—raised African American
college students’ GPAs over the next three years, halving the achievement gap (Walton & Cohen
2011), and, in another trial, eliminated the gender gap in grades in engineering over an academic
year (Walton et al. 2014). How are such effects possible? In general, a change in how people
construe a setting can become self-reinforcing—people who see threat in a setting may avoid others
or interact with others in ways that do not build better relationships; people who feel comfortable
may be better positioned to learn and grow. Thus, brief interventions that target people’s construals of an environment, when implemented effectively and at an appropriate time, can set in
motion cycles that improve outcomes long into the future. Such interventions have generally not
yet been carried out in work contexts. However, the results from education contexts suggest that
significant gains may be possible.
In this section, we review how organizations can reduce stereotype threat in four key contexts:
recruiting, selecting and promoting, socializing and onboarding, and training employees.

Recruiting Employees
To signal to potential employees that they have an identity-safe environment, organizations can replace cues liable to signal threat with cues that allay such concerns. For instance, when possible,
www.annualreviews.org



Stereotype Threat in Organizations

535

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

organizations can become diverse and promote their diversity (Murphy et al. 2007); they can ensure
that their physical environments and job advertisements signal the inclusion and valuing of people
from diverse backgrounds (Cheryan et al. 2009, Gaucher et al. 2011); they can articulate their
commitment to diversity and valuing of diverse groups in mission statements, recruiting materials,
and elsewhere (Purdie-Vaughns et al. 2008); and they can promulgate and advertise a culture that
values growth and improvement, not the identification of who “has it” and who does not (Murphy &
Dweck 2010). These steps can lead ethnic minorities and women to anticipate greater belonging in
work settings, to trust companies more, to feel less identity threat, and to be more motivated to pursue
professional opportunities (Avery et al. 2013). Notably, it is essential that companies back up
words with deeds. For instance, African American professionals may express trust in companies that
articulate a goal to treat all people in similar ways regardless of background (a color-blind philosophy) but only insofar as the company employs people from diverse backgrounds (Purdie-Vaughns
et al. 2008; see also Shih et al. 2013). Similar to companies engaged in practices like greenwashing who
mislead consumers about environmental practices, companies that make disingenuous statements
about their values and practices regarding diversity are likely viewed with skepticism.

Selecting and Promoting Employees
In addition to creating and representing a positive climate, organizations may attend to specific
contexts in which threat is likely to arise and where relatively straightforward steps may improve
outcomes. One such context involves selection tests used to hire and promote employees. Tests are
generally viewed as evaluative of ability, a powerful cue of stereotype threat. In addition, the
salience of people’s group identity in a testing setting can cause threat (Steele & Aronson 1995)
Reducing threat on selection tests. How can organizations reduce stereotype threat on selection
tests? In some cases, it may be difficult or inappropriate (e.g., inaccurate) to represent such tests as
not evaluative of ability. However, it may be possible to reduce the salience of test takers’ group
identity. In this way, recruiting and evaluation contexts differ to some extent. In general, in
recruiting employees, organizations may wish to highlight their commitment to and valuing of
diversity (Avery & McKay 2006, Purdie-Vaughns et al. 2008). However, if group identity is salient
when people take tests, it may risk evoking the worry that group identity could be a basis for
negative evaluation or treatment. For instance, when test takers are asked to report their race/
ethnicity and gender before a test, this may trigger identity threat and undermine performance.
Indeed, research in laboratory (e.g., Steele & Aronson 1995), educational (Danaher & Crandall
2008), and work settings (Kirnan et al. 2009) shows that moving demographic queries to after
instead of before a test can improve performance, especially among people who face negative
stereotypes in the setting at hand. An important, ongoing question involves the effectiveness of this
approach in mitigating stereotype threat when other potent threat-inducing cues are present (e.g.,
when the test is seen as evaluative); however, insofar as this strategy is often relatively cost free and
can be effective even in such contexts, it is advisable. Although more research is needed, the use of
Internet assessments may provide a further opportunity to reduce the salience of group identity in
testing situations, as individuals can perform in relative privacy.
Research has explored the effectiveness of a variety of additional strategies to help people cope
with stereotype threat on evaluative tests. One strategy is to reduce people’s apprehension that
their group identity will be a source of negative judgment. For instance, threat is less likely when
people take tests among a critical mass of in-group members (Inzlicht & Ben-Zeev 2000), when
positive in-group role models are salient (e.g., Marx & Goff 2005, McIntyre et al. 2003),
when people are treated by majority-group members as partners in working on challenging
536

Walton



Murphy



Ryan

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

material (L.J. Aguilar, P.B. Carr & G.M. Walton, unpublished manuscript; see also Walton &
Carr 2012) rather than in disrespectful ways (Logel et al. 2009b), and when tests are represented in
ways that assure test takers that performance will not be viewed as evidence for a negative group
stereotype (e.g., Good et al. 2008). Another strategy is to help people manage negative thoughts
and feelings that can arise from threat and undermine performance. For instance, performance
improves when people learn about stereotype threat and thus that negative thoughts and feelings
may be due to threat, not a cue of poor performance (Johns et al. 2005); when people learn that
arousal and anxiety can promote not hinder success (Johns et al. 2008; see also Jamieson et al.
2010); when they learn to displace negative thoughts with neutral thoughts (Logel et al. 2009a);
and when they reflect on important personal values and other sources of identity unrelated to the
threat (Martens et al. 2006; see also Cohen et al. 2009). This past research has been conducted
primarily (but not exclusively) in laboratory settings and in education contexts. An important
direction for future research involves evaluating the potential of these techniques in field-settings
and in organizational contexts.
These approaches complement revisions to test materials themselves. Sensitivity reviews are
designed to remove items that are offensive or unfamiliar to people from a particular background
(Golubovich et al. 2014). Although a few studies have directly investigated the effects of cues
within prototypical items that might trigger identity threat (e.g., the use of gendered names in word
problems, Hmurovic et al. 2009; the use of gender-stereotyped activities or gendered occupational
references, Grand et al. 2011), there is surprisingly little empirical investigation of how item
content might increase the salience of group membership and/or stereotypes about one’s group.
Further, newer forms of tests (e.g., situational judgment tests employing avatars or videos) often
depict diverse individuals in scenarios; however, there is some evidence that the performance of
members of stereotyped groups might be affected by the demographic characteristics of those
depicted in such test items (Golubovich & Ryan 2012).
Interpreting and using test scores and other indicators of ability and potential: test bias. Even
when an organization takes steps to reduce stereotype threat on selection tests, the mere evaluative
nature of such tests can cause some threat to remain (Steele & Aronson 1995). More broadly, given
the ubiquity of evaluative cues that can cause stereotype threat, typical circumstances in which
standardized tests and other indicators of ability are administered may induce stereotype threat. As
a consequence, researchers have hypothesized that such indicators may, on average, underestimate
the ability of people from negatively stereotyped groups, as compared with people from nonstereotyped groups (Brown & Day 2006). This hypothesis is termed the latent-ability hypothesis
because it posits that a portion of stereotyped individuals’ ability is latent or hidden on standard
assessments (Walton & Spencer 2009). If this is the case, then using such measures in personnel
decisions may have detrimental effects on the outcomes (e.g., selection, promotion) of people from
stereotyped groups (Walton et al. 2013).
Evidence for this hypothesis comes from meta-analyses of experiments testing exercises to
reduce stereotype threat in laboratory and field settings. These analyses show that, when people
perform in contexts in which stereotype threat has been experimentally reduced, women in STEM
subjects and ethnic minorities, generally, outperform men and nonminorities with identical prior
test scores and grades (Walton & Spencer 2009). In typical circumstances, people subject to
stereotype threat perform facing a headwind. This headwind prevents them from scoring as well as
they are capable—some of their ability is latent. Accordingly, when the headwind is lifted—when
stereotype threat is removed—people from stereotyped groups outperform nonstereotyped peers
they equaled in the prior, typical context (Walton et al. 2013).

www.annualreviews.org



Stereotype Threat in Organizations

537

Notably, although there is a large body of evidence documenting test score differences between
groups, there is debate as to the extent to which those differences translate into differences in work
performance (i.e., do tests underpredict success on the job for some groups?) (e.g., Aguinis et al.
2010; Berry et al. 2011, 2014; Roth et al. 2014). The empirical literature that informs this debate
consists primarily of correlational and simulation studies. However, for the purpose of detecting
an effect of stereotype threat on test performance or validity, experimental data that vary the
experience of threat are preferable. As Brown & Day (2006, p. 983) write,

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

The extent to which stereotype threat influences predictive validity will depend on the degree
to which stereotype threat differentially influences predictor and criterion scores (see Cullen,
Hardison, & Sackett, 2004). Indeed, the possibility that predictor variables such as the SAT and
ACT are influenced by stereotype threat to similar degrees as criterion variables such as college GPA
(Aronson, Fried, & Good, 2002; Brown et al., 2000; Brown & Lee, 2005) might explain why
differential predictive validity for African Americans and Whites is not typically observed with
standardized cognitive ability tests.

The Walton & Spencer (2009) meta-analyses draw together the existing experimental evidence
and provide sufficient cause for concern that stereotype threat affects both test scores and grades
administered in typical (e.g., evaluative) environments. Using such scores as nonbiased indicators
of merit and potential may risk judgments that have disproportionately negative effects on the
hiring and promotion of women and ethnic minorities.
What should organizations do? These issues are complicated scientifically, legally, and for
policy. Here we suggest some options (for more comprehensive reviews, see Emerson & Murphy
2014, Erman & Walton 2015, Walton et al. 2013). For instance, the presence of group-based
biases on performance indices may lead some to advocate group-based score corrections (Sackett &
Wilk 1994). However, in the United States at least, mechanical race- and gender-based score
corrections are prohibited on employment-related tests by Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(as amended). Others have suggested using techniques such as banding or treating all those within
a certain score range as equivalent in standing, typically determined by the standard error of the
difference (Aguinis 2004). However, banding’s effectiveness in increasing the number of minorities
selected is limited in many contexts (i.e., if not testing or hiring large numbers of individuals) and
also may not increase representation if the organization does not also preferentially select minorities from within the band (Sackett & Roth 1991). Nonetheless, there are some simple steps
organizations can take. First, when schools and employers make sustained efforts to reduce
stereotype threat in their internal settings, they simultaneously (a) create positive environments
that allow all people to perform well and (b) help individuals establish nonbiased performance
track records as they seek to compete for subsequent positions. Second, organizations can
choose to give less weight to indicators likely to be susceptible to stereotype threat (e.g., using
Pareto-optimal methods, DeCorte et al. 2007; or criterion-based methods, Hattrup & Rock
2002) or consider using measures less impugned by negative group stereotypes (e.g., creative and
practical skills, Sternberg & Rainbow Proj. Collab. 2006; second-stratum cognitive abilities,
Wee et al. 2014; noncognitive skills like self-control or grit, Duckworth & Seligman 2005,
Duckworth et al. 2007). Third, schools and employers may “educate selection officers of the bias
in performance measures and allow them to weigh this information in making individualized
evaluations of candidates” (Walton et al. 2013, p. 27). This approach retains predictive performance measures while taking bias into account. It also raises novel legal questions (see
Erman & Walton 2015, Walton et al. 2013).

538

Walton



Murphy



Ryan

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Socializing and Onboarding Employees
When people enter new academic and professional settings in which their group is underrepresented and may be negatively stereotyped, they often experience high levels of threat and
worry about whether other people will include and value them in the setting. This can prevent
people from learning and growing in a new organization or role, from developing essential relationships there, and, ultimately, from performing at a high level.
One remedy for underrepresentation is simply to increase the representation of people from
stereotyped groups in a given setting. Indeed, organizations and settings with greater diversity
have workers who report higher workplace satisfaction and better performance, as members of
stereotyped groups report fewer concerns about identity threat (e.g., Allmendinger & Hackman
1995, Niemann & Dovidio 1998). However, as an organization strives to achieve critical mass, it
can also reduce the identity threat engendered by underrepresentation by supporting the underrepresented individuals it currently has. For example, organizations that endorse diversity as
a value can promote trust, even absent critical mass (Purdie-Vaughns et al. 2008). In addition,
helping women and minorities cultivate a broad network of relationships including with peers,
mentors, and sponsors as well as with role models can buffer their sense of fit within the organization
and help them advance. Positive relationships with majority-group peers and mentors can help
minority-group members feel integrated and included within an organization; this can also help
normalize struggles and adverse experiences that could otherwise be threatening for minority-group
members, and thus help them overcome challenges to succeed (Walton & Cohen 2011, Walton et al.
2014; see also Walton & Carr 2012; L.J. Aguilar, P.B. Carr & G.M. Walton, unpublished manuscript). Same-race mentors and role models can also reduce threat and provide strategies to help
mentees move up (Avery et al. 2008, Kirby & Jackson 1999, Marx & Goff 2005, McIntyre et al.
2003). Indeed, senior-level sponsors are often instrumental in advancing the careers of their mentees
by advocating for them over a sustained period of time and introducing them to opportunities and
individuals who can help them advance (Tapia & Kvasny 2004, Thomas & Kram 1988). This type of
support can alleviate feelings of anxiety and isolation and increase career satisfaction (Chao 1997,
Crosby 1999, Reskin et al. 1999). Thus, connecting stereotyped and underrepresented individuals
with peers, role models, mentors, and sponsors is one way organizations can enhance identity safety,
particularly when they lack critical mass.
In addition to these strategies, in education contexts two specific interventions—valueaffirmation and social-belonging interventions—have been shown to reduce threat in academic
transitions and improve performance among people from negatively stereotyped groups. Because
these interventions are typically delivered early in a setting, they can change the trajectory of
people’s experience over long periods of time (for reviews, see Garcia & Cohen 2012, Yeager &
Walton 2011). A small, well-timed push in a more favorable direction can have lasting effects if it
puts people on a more productive path.
Value-affirmation interventions. Value-affirmation interventions consist of a short series of
exercises that encourage people to reflect on valued aspects of their self-concept. In its most
common form, people view a list of values, identify those that are most important to them, and
then write for 15–20 min about why those values matter to them and times when such values were
especially important. This is thought to help people think about potential threats and stressors in
a broader psychological context; when adversities loom less large, people can thus respond more
effectively (Sherman & Cohen 2006, Sherman & Hartson 2011). When administered in school
settings—for instance, as several in-class writing exercises beginning early in the school year—valueaffirmation interventions have been shown to increase core-academic GPAs among African

www.annualreviews.org



Stereotype Threat in Organizations

539

American and Latino middle students up to three years later while reducing reports of stereotype
threat and helping sustain minority students’ sense of belonging (Cohen et al. 2009, Sherman et al.
2013). Value-affirmation interventions can also improve women’s achievement in STEM subjects in
college (Miyake et al. 2010, Walton et al. 2014). There is also evidence that similar exercises can
improve performance and retention in work contexts (Cable et al. 2013; see also Wiesenfeld et al.
1999).

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Social-belonging interventions. Whereas value-affirmation interventions are designed to help
people think about themselves in ways that make it easier to contend with threatening experiences,
social-belonging interventions give people a positive narrative for understanding a new social
context and the struggles that arise there (see Garcia & Cohen 2012, Walton & Cohen 2011, Walton
et al. 2014). In this type of intervention, people entering a new setting read stories from people who
have transitioned before them. These stories describe how people typically worry about their belonging at first in the new setting but come to feel at home with time as they reach out and build
relationships. This message is designed to give people a positive narrative for understanding the
inevitable challenges and worries about belonging they encounter in a new setting (e.g., feelings of
loneliness, struggle, disrespect, criticism). People who face negative stereotypes may risk seeing such
experiences as evidence they do not belong in general (Walton & Cohen 2007); the intervention
provides a more hopeful interpretation. After reading these stories, people write about how their
personal experiences so far or their anticipated experiences reflect the same process of change. Some
of these materials, people are told, will be shared with future people ostensibly to help them in their
transition. This “saying-is-believing” exercise helps drive home the key idea, encourages people to
connect this idea to their own lives, and forestalls stigmatization—it treats people as benefactors, not
beneficiaries. In total, the intervention lasts an hour or less. As noted above, this intervention has
raised GPAs among African American first-year college students over three years, halving the
achievement gap with European American students (Walton & Cohen 2011). It has also eliminated
gender differences in first-year GPA among women enrolled in male-dominated engineering majors
and, simultaneously, helped women form more friendships with male peers (Walton et al. 2014). In
three more trials, online versions of social-belonging interventions delivered to full cohorts of incoming college students (total N > 9,500) increased the percentage of ethnic minority and firstgeneration students who successfully completed the first year of college full-time enrolled, and raised
GPA over the first year among such students, reducing group inequalities by 35–50%. The
interventions also helped such students integrate more effectively in college, for instance by joining
student groups, developing mentors, and making close friends on campus (D.S. Yeager, G.M. Walton,
S.T. Brady, E.N. Akcinar, D. Paunesku, unpublished manuscript). This type of intervention is not
unlike some socialization activities (e.g., hearing employee testimonials) designed to help organizational newcomers, which are considered best practices in onboarding programs (Klein & Polin
2012). However, social-belonging interventions are precise in their emphasis on people’s beliefs
about belonging and on how challenges that arise in transitions can be overcome. An important
question for future research involves the effectiveness of this approach in organizational contexts and
how best to embed it in organizational entry programs.

Training Employees
People under stereotype threat learn less effectively than they otherwise would (Grand 2012,
Rydell et al. 2010, Taylor & Walton 2011); thus mitigating stereotype threat can promote learning
in complex environments. For instance, experimental research shows that value-affirmations,
which also improve test performance among people under stereotype threat in laboratory settings
540

Walton



Murphy



Ryan

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

(Martens et al. 2006) and achievement in field settings (Cohen et al. 2009), enhance learning in
otherwise threatening (e.g., evaluative) contexts (Taylor & Walton 2011).
Growth-mindset interventions. Another strategy that can help people learn more under threat is to
convey the malleability of human intelligence (see Dweck 2006). Such messages, called growthmindset interventions, disabuse people of the misperception that intelligence is fixed and thus
something that some people (or some kinds of people) have and others do not. That view can lead
people to view mistakes and setbacks as evidence that they cannot succeed. Instead, growth-mindset
interventions convey that, with hard work and effective learning strategies, anyone can become
smarter. This message can improve learning and achievement (for a review, see Yeager et al. 2013),
for instance among adolescents (Blackwell et al. 2007), especially those who are struggling (Paunesku
et al. in press) and, in math, girls (Good et al. 2003), and among diverse college students (Aronson
et al. 2002). In addition, as noted earlier, promulgating a culture that values growth and learning
rather than the identification of who “has it” reduces stereotype threat and improves trust, commitment, and performance among women in business settings (Emerson & Murphy 2015). This
work reflects the broader literature on the important role of training transfer and continuous learning
climates in enabling individuals to develop and utilize new skills (Tracey et al. 1995).
Wise feedback. As discussed above, supervisors face a dilemma in providing critical feedback to
subordinates: How can substantive critical feedback be given in a way that helps recipients learn
without undermining motivation? This dilemma is most acute when feedback is provided across
group lines, a situation in which criticism can be interpreted as evidence of the application of
a negative stereotype.
Several studies have illuminated a strategy, termed wise feedback, to reduce threat in such
exchanges (Cohen et al. 1999, Cohen & Steele 2002, Yeager et al. 2013). The goal of this strategy is
to disambiguate the meaning of critical feedback for members of stereotyped groups. In wise
feedback, the feedback giver explicitly conveys, first, that he or she holds high standards for the
task (e.g., the report, product, service) and, second, that he or she believes the recipient can meet
that standard. This clarifies why the giver provides critical feedback—to help the recipient reach
the higher standard. This strategy is similar to standard advice for providing effective feedback in
the organizational literature (London 1997), but it is especially important in the context of
stereotype threat. Laboratory and field-experimental research show that wise feedback increases
motivation among members of minority groups to improve their work, including among African
American college students (Cohen et al. 1999), women in science (Cohen & Steele 2002), and
adolescents. In one field experiment, wise feedback notes (“I have high standards but I believe
you have the potential to meet them. . .I am providing this critical feedback to help you meet
those standards”) appended by researchers to a teacher-graded essay (to keep teachers unaware
of students’ condition assignment) increased the percentage of ethnic-minority middle school
students who chose to revise a class essay from 17% to 72% (Yeager et al. 2013). In another
study, teaching students to view critical feedback in general as emanating from the high
standards of the task and teachers’ motivation to help students improve raised semester grades
among ethnic-minority high school students (Yeager et al. 2013). Further, the benefits of wise
feedback were strongest among students who mistrusted the school more to begin with.

CONCLUSION
An extensive body of research on stereotype threat has accumulated over the past two decades.
However, the implications of this research for work contexts have received much less attention than
www.annualreviews.org



Stereotype Threat in Organizations

541

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

deserved, especially given the strong desire of many people in organizations to create inclusive
workplace climates and just human resource decision-making processes and policies. This lack of
attention may be due in part to a lack of understanding of the phenomenon: A recent issue of Industrial
and Organizational Psychology: Perspectives on Science and Practice contained numerous commentaries focused on clarifying exactly what stereotype threat is and what the theory behind the
phenomenon’s effects actually proposes (e.g., Czukor & Bayazit 2014, Kalokerinos et al. 2014, Voyles
et al. 2014). Our aim in this review has been to provide this clarity and to conduct a comprehensive
analysis of how research on stereotype and social identity threat applies to the workplace. We have also
provided concrete suggestions as to interventions and changes to practices that may lessen or prevent
stereotype threat effects. We are hopeful that this information will spur further research on stereotype
and social identity threat in organizational contexts (see below) and, more broadly, the creation of
workplace conditions that provide identity safety and support the success of all individuals.

FUTURE ISSUES
1. Assess the relationship between experiences of stereotype threat and disidentification
and disengagement outcomes in the workplace (e.g., job dissatisfaction, lack of organizational commitment, absenteeism, counterproductive behaviors, turnover).
2. Assess stereotype threat effects in operational hiring contexts.
3. Evaluate stereotype threat effects in operational performance evaluation contexts.
4. Map how members of stereotyped groups construe local work contexts including
ambient cues, promotional materials, and diversity and mission statements; investigate
ways to structure environments so as to mitigate experiences of threat.
5. Investigate the usefulness of wise feedback in organizational contexts as a means to
overcome the “mentor’s dilemma”—that is, how to define wise feedback, how to train
supervisors in giving wise feedback, effects on employee attitudes and performance.
6. Examine how organizational mindsets influence experiences of identity threat and the
evaluation of employees.
7. Evaluate the generalizability of social-belonging, value-affirmation, and growth-mindset
interventions in educational contexts for workplace contexts.
8. Evaluate whether and how the use of Internet assessments may reduce identity threat.
9. Evaluate strategies to help individuals manage negative thoughts and feelings stemming
from threat in operational workplace evaluative contexts.

DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that
might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

LITERATURE CITED
Aguinis H, ed. 2004. Test Score Banding in Human Resource Selection: Legal, Technical and Societal Issues.
Westport, CT: Praeger
Aguinis H, Culpepper SA, Pierce CA. 2010. Revival of test bias research in preemployment testing. J. Appl.
Psychol. 95(4):648–80

542

Walton



Murphy



Ryan

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Allmendinger J, Hackman JR. 1995. The more, the better? A four-nation study of the inclusion of women in
symphony orchestras. Soc. Forces 74:423–60
Aronson J, Fried CB, Good C. 2002. Reducing the effect of stereotype threat on African American college
students by shaping theories of intelligence. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 38:113–25
Aronson J, Lustina MJ, Good C, Keough K, Steele CM, Brown J. 1999. When white men can’t do math:
necessary and sufficient factors in stereotype threat. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 35:29–46
Arvey RD, Faley RH. 1988. Fairness in Selecting Employees. Reading, MA:Addison-Wesley. 2nd ed.
Autin F, Branscombe NR, Croizet J-C. 2014. Creating, closing, and reversing the gender gap in test performance: how selection policies trigger social identity threat or safety among women and men. Psychol.
Women Q. 38:327–39
Avery DR. 2003. Reactions to diversity in recruitment advertising—Are differences black and white? J. Appl.
Psychol. 88(4):672–79
Avery DR, McKay PF. 2006. Target practice: an organizational impression management approach to
attracting minority and female job applicants. Pers. Psychol. 59(1):157–87
Avery DR, McKay PF, Wilson DC. 2008. What are the odds? How demographic similarity affects the
prevalence of perceived employment discrimination. J. Appl. Psychol. 93(2):235–49
Avery DR, McKay PF, Wilson DC, Tonidandel S. 2007. Unequal attendance: the relationships between race,
organizational diversity cues, and absenteeism. Pers. Psychol. 60(4):875–902
Avery DR, Volpone SD, Stewart RW, Luksyte A, Hernandez M, et al. 2013. Examining the draw of diversity:
how diversity climate perceptions affect job-pursuit intentions. Hum. Resour. Manag. 52:175–93
Beilock SL, Rydell RJ, McConnell AR. 2007. Stereotype threat and working memory: mechanisms, alleviation,
and spillover. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 136(2):256–76
Berry CM, Clark MA, McClure TK. 2011. Racial/ethnic differences in the criterion-related validity of cognitive
ability tests: a qualitative and quantitative review. J. Appl. Psychol. 96(5):881–906
Berry CM, Cullen MJ, Meyer JM. 2014. Racial/ethnic subgroup differences in cognitive ability test range
restriction: implications for differential validity. J. Appl. Psychol. 99(1):21–37
Bielby WT. 2008. Promoting racial diversity at work: challenges and solutions. In Diversity at Work, ed.
AP Brief, pp. 53–88. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press
Blackwell LA, Trzesniewski KH, Dweck CS. 2007. Theories of intelligence and achievement across the junior
high school transition: a longitudinal study and an intervention. Child Dev. 78:246–63
Blascovich J, Spencer SJ, Quinn D, Steele C. 2001. African Americans and high blood pressure: the role of
stereotype threat. Psychol. Sci. 12(3):225–29
Blume BD, Baldwin TT, Rubin RS. 2009. Reactions to different types of forced distribution performance
evaluation systems. J. Bus. Psychol. 24(1):77–91
Bommer WH, Johnson J, Rich GA, Podsakoff PM, MacKenzie SB. 1995. On the interchangeability of objective
and subjective measures of employee performance: a meta-analysis. Pers. Psychol. 48(3):587–605
Bonilla-Silva E. 2006. Racism Without Racists: Color-Blind Racism and the Persistence of Racial Inequality in
the United States. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield
Bosson JK, Haymovitz EL, Pinel EC. 2004. When saying and doing diverge: the effects of stereotype threat on
self-reported versus non-verbal anxiety. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 40:247–55
Breaugh JA. 2013. Employee recruitment. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 64:388–416
Breaugh JA, Greising LA, Taggart JW, Chen H. 2003. The relationship of recruiting sources and pre-hire
outcomes: examination of yield ratios and applicant quality. J. Appl. Soc. Psychol. 33:2267–87
Brief AP, Umphress EE, Dietz J, Burrows JW, Butz RM, Scholten L. 2005. Community matters: realistic group
conflict theory and the impact of diversity. Acad. Manag. J. 48:830–44
Brown M, Setren E, Topa G. 2012. Do informal referrals lead to better matches? Evidence from a firm’s
employee referral system. Staff Rep. No. 568, Fed. Reserv. Bank N.Y. http://www.newyorkfed.org/
research/staff_reports/sr568.pdf
Brown RP, Charnsangavej T, Keough KA, Newman ML, Rentfrow PJ. 2000. Putting the “affirm” into affirmative action: preferential selection and academic performance. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 79:736–37
Brown RP, Day EA. 2006. The difference isn’t black and white: stereotype threat and the race gap on Raven’s
advanced progressive matrices. J. Appl. Psychol. 91:979–85

www.annualreviews.org



Stereotype Threat in Organizations

543

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Brown RP, Lee MN. 2005. Stigma consciousness and the race gap in college academic achievement. Self
Identity 4(2):149–57
Browne I, ed. 1999. Latinas and African American Women at Work: Race, Gender, and Economic Inequality.
New York: Russell Sage Found.
Bruce TA. 2013. Sexual orientation harassment in the workplace: the development of a measure. Master’s
Thesis, Mich. State Univ., East Lansing
Cable DM, Gino F, Staats BR. 2013. Breaking them in or eliciting their best? Reframing socialization around
newcomers’ authentic self-expression. Adm. Sci. Q. 58(1):1–36
Chao GT. 1997. Mentoring phases and outcomes. J. Vocat. Behav. 51:15–28
Cheryan S, Plaut VC, Davies P, Steele CM. 2009. Ambient belonging: how stereotypical environments impact
gender participation in computer science. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 97:1045–60
Chung BG, Ehrhart MG, Ehrhart KH, Hattrup K, Solamon J. 2010. Stereotype threat, state anxiety, and
specific self-efficacy as predictors of promotion exam performance. Group Organ. Manag. 35(1):77–107
Cohen GL, Garcia J. 2008. Identity, belonging, and achievement: a model, interventions, implications. Curr.
Dir. Psychol. Sci. 17:365–69
Cohen GL, Garcia J, Purdie-Vaughns V, Apfel N, Brzustoski P. 2009. Recursive processes in self-affirmation:
intervening to close the minority achievement gap. Science 324:400–3
Cohen GL, Steele CM. 2002. A barrier of mistrust: how stereotypes affect cross-race mentoring. In Improving
Academic Achievement: Impact of Psychological Factors on Education, ed. J Aronson, pp. 305–31.
Oxford, UK: Academic
Cohen GL, Steele CM, Ross LD. 1999. The mentor’s dilemma: providing critical feedback across the racial
divide. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 25:1302–18
Cohen LL, Swim JK. 1995. The differential impact of gender ratios on women and men: tokenism, selfconfidence, and expectations. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 21:876–84
Correll SJ. 2004. Constraints into preferences: gender, status, and emerging career aspirations. Am. Sociol.
Rev. 69:93–113
Crocker J, Voelkl K, Testa M, Major B. 1991. Social stigma: the affective consequences of attributional
ambiguity. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 60(2):218–28
Croizet JC, Claire T. 1998. Extending the concept of stereotype threat to social class: the intellectual
underperformance of students from low socioeconomic backgrounds. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull.
24:588–94
Crosby FJ. 1999. The developing literature on developmental relationship. In Mentoring Dilemmas:
Developmental Relationship Within Multicultural Organizations, ed. AJ Murrell, FJ Crosby, RJ Ely,
pp. 1–18. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum
Cullen MJ, Hardison CM, Sackett PR. 2004. Using SAT-grade and ability-job performance relationships to test
predictions derived from stereotype threat theory. J. Appl. Psychol. 89:220–30
Czukor G, Bayazit M. 2014. Casting a wide net? Performance deficit, priming, and subjective performance
evaluation in organizational stereotype threat research. Ind. Organ. Psychol. 7:409–13
Danaher K, Crandall CS. 2008. Stereotype threat in applied settings re-examined. J. Appl. Soc. Psychol.
38:1639–55
Davies PG, Spencer SJ, Steele CM. 2005. Clearing the air: Identity safety moderates the effects of stereotype
threat on women’s leadership aspirations. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 88:276–87
De Corte W, Lievens F, Sackett PR. 2007. Combining predictors to achieve optimal trade-offs between selection quality and adverse impact. J. Appl. Psychol. 92(5):1380–93
DiTomaso N. 2012. The American Non-Dilemma: Racial Inequality Without Racism. New York: Russell Sage
Found.
Dovidio JF, Gaertner SL. 2004. Aversive racism. Adv. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 36:1–52
Dovidio JF, Hebl MR, Richeson JA, Shelton JN. 2006. Nonverbal communication, race, and intergroup
interaction. In The Sage Handbook of Nonverbal Communication, ed. V Manusov, ML Patterson,
pp. 481–500. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Dovidio JF, Kawakami K, Gaertner SL. 2002. Implicit and explicit prejudice and interracial interaction.
J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 82(1):62–68

544

Walton



Murphy



Ryan

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Duckworth AL, Peterson C, Matthews MD, Kelly DR. 2007. Grit: perseverance and passion for long-term
goals. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 92:1087–101
Duckworth AL, Seligman ME. 2005. Self-discipline outdoes IQ in predicting academic performance of
adolescents. Psychol. Sci. 16(12):939–44
Duguid M. 2011. Female tokens in high-prestige work groups: catalysts or inhibitors of group diversification?
Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 116(1):104–15
Dweck CS. 2006. Mindset: The New Psychology of Success. New York: Random House
Eagly AH, Karau SJ. 2002. Role congruity theory of prejudice toward female leaders. Psychol. Rev. 109:573–98
Ely RJ. 1995. The power of demography: women’s social constructions of gender identity at work. Acad.
Manag. J. 38:589–634
Ely RJ, Thomas DA. 2001. Cultural diversity at work: the effects of diversity perspectives on work group
processes and outcomes. Adm. Sci. Q. 46:229–73
Emerson KTU, Murphy MC. 2014. Identity threat at work: how social identity threat and situational cues
contribute to racial and ethnic disparities in the workplace. Cult. Divers. Ethnic Minor. Psychol.
20(4):508–20
Emerson KTU, Murphy MC. 2015. A company I can trust? Organizational lay theories moderate stereotype
threat for women. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 41(2):295–307
Erman S, Walton GM. 2015. Stereotype threat and anti-discrimination law: Affirmative steps to promote
meritocracy and racial equality in education. South. Calif. Law Rev. 88(2). In press
Ford JK, Kraiger K, Schechtman SL. 1986. Study of race effects in objective indices and subjective evaluations of
performance: a meta-analysis of performance criteria. Psychol. Bull. 99(3):330–37
Frear KA, Paustian-Underdahl S. 2011. From elusive to obvious: improving performance management through
specificity. Ind. Organ. Psychol. 4(2):198–200
Garcia J, Cohen GL. 2012. A social psychological approach to educational intervention. In Behavioral
Foundations of Public Policy, ed. E Shafir, pp. 329–47. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press
Gaucher D, Friesen J, Kay AC. 2011. Evidence that gendered wording in job advertisements exists and sustains
gender inequality. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 101:109–28
Giumetti GW, Schroeder AN, Switzer FS, 2014. Forced distribution rating systems: When does “rank and
yank” lead to adverse impact? J. Appl. Psychol. 100(1):180–93
Goff PA, Steele CM, Davies PG. 2008. The space between us: stereotype threat and distance in interracial
contexts. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 94:91–107
Golubovich J, Grand J, Ryan AM, Schmitt N. 2014. An examination of common sensitivity review practices in
test development. Int. J. Sel. Assess. 22:1–11
Golubovich J, Ryan AM. 2012. Demographic cues in video-based situational judgment items. Presented at
Annu. Conf. Soc. Ind. Organ. Psych. Conference, 27th, Apr. 26–28, San Diego
Good C, Aronson J, Harder JA. 2008. Problems in the pipeline: stereotype threat and women’s achievement in
high-level math courses. J. Appl. Dev. Psychol. 29:17–28
Good C, Aronson J, Inzlicht M. 2003. Improving adolescents’ standardized test performance: an intervention
to reduce the effects of stereotype threat. J. Appl. Dev. Psychol. 24:645–62
Grand J. 2012. An examination of stereotype threat effects on knowledge acquisition in an exploratory
learning paradigm. PhD Thesis, Mich. State Univ., East Lansing
Grand JA, Ryan AM, Schmitt N, Hmurovic J. 2011. How far does stereotype threat reach? The potential
detriment of face validity in cognitive ability testing. Hum. Perform. 24:1–28
Greenhaus JH, Parasuraman S, Wormley WM. 1990. Effects of race on organizational experiences, job
performance evaluations, and career outcomes. Acad. Manag. J. 33:64–86
Harber KD. 1998. Feedback to minorities: evidence of a positive bias. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 74(3):622–28
Hattrup K, Rock J. 2002. A comparison of predictor-based and criterion-based methods for weighing predictors to reduce adverse impact. Appl. HRM Res. 7(1/2):22–38
Hebl MR, Foster JB, Mannix LM, Dovidio JF. 2002. Formal and interpersonal discrimination: a field study of
bias toward homosexual applicants. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 28(6):815–25
Herdman AO, McMillan-Capehart A. 2010. Establishing a diversity program is not enough: exploring the
determinants of diversity climate. J. Bus. Psychol. 25:39–53

www.annualreviews.org



Stereotype Threat in Organizations

545

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Hess TM, Auman C, Colcombe S, Rahhal T. 2003. The impact of stereotype threat on age differences in
memory performance. J. Gerontol. B Psychol. Sci. Soc. Sci. 58:3–11
Hmurovic J, Ryan AM, Schmitt N, Grand J 2009. Sensitivity or stereotype threat? Effects of gendered test
content. Presented at Annu. Conf. Soc. Ind. Organ. Psychol., 24th, Apr. 2–4, New Orleans, LA
Holleran SE, Whitehead J, Schmader T, Mehl MR. 2011. Talking shop and shooting the breeze: a study of
workplace conversation and job disengagement among STEM faculty. Soc. Psychol. Personal. Sci.
2(1):65–71
Holoien DS, Shelton JN. 2012. You deplete me: the cognitive costs of colorblindness on ethnic minorities.
J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 48(2):562–65
Homan AC, Van Knippenberg D, Van Kleef GA, De Dreu CKW. 2007. Interacting dimensions of diversity:
cross-categorization and the functioning of diverse work groups. Group Dyn. 11(2):79–94
Hough LM, Oswald FL, Ployhart RE. 2001. Determinants, detection and amelioration of adverse impact in
personnel selection procedures: issues, evidence and lessons learned. Int. J. Sel. Assess. 9(1/2):152–94
Huffcutt AI, Roth PL. 1998. Racial group differences in employment interview evaluations. J. Appl. Psychol.
83(2):179–89
Ilgen DR, Youtz MA. 1986. Factors affecting the evaluation and development of minorities in organizations. In
Research in Personnel and Human Resource Management: A Research Annual, ed. K Rowland, G Ferris,
pp. 307–37. Greenwich, CT: JAI
Inzlicht M, Ben-Zeev T. 2000. A threatening intellectual environment: why females are susceptible to experiencing problem-solving deficits in the presence of males. Psychol. Sci. 11:365–71
Inzlicht M, Schmader T, eds. 2012. Stereotype Threat: Theory, Process, and Application. New York: Oxford
Univ. Press
Ioannides YM, Loury LD. 2004. Job information networks, neighborhood effects, and inequality. J. Econ. Lit.
42:1056–93
Jackson PB, Thoits PA, Taylor HF. 1995. Composition of the workplace and psychological well-being: the
effects of tokenism on America’s Black elite. Soc. Forces 74(2):543–57
James EH. 2000. Race-related differences in promotions and support: underlying effects of human and social
capital. Organ. Sci. 11:493–508
Jamieson JP, Mendes WB, Blackstock E, Schmader T. 2010. Turning the knots in your stomach into bows:
Reappraising arousal improves performance on the GRE. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 46(1):208–12
Johns J, Inzlicht M, Schmader T. 2008. Stereotype threat and executive resource depletion: examining the
influence of emotion regulation. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 137:691–705
Johns M, Schmader T, Martens A. 2005. Knowing is half the battle: teaching stereotype threat as a means of
improving women’s math performance. Psychol. Sci. 16:175–79
Kabat-Farr D, Cortina LM. 2014. Sex-based harassment in employment: new insights into gender and context.
Law Hum. Behav. 38(1):58–72
Kalev A, Dobbin F, Kelly E. 2006. Best practices or best guesses? Assessing the efficacy of corporate affirmative
action and diversity policies. Am. Sociol. Rev. 71:589–617
Kalokerinos EK, Von Hippel C, Zacher H. 2014. Is stereotype threat a useful construct for organizational
psychology research and practice? Ind. Organ. Psychol. 7:381–402
Kanter RM. 1979. Differential access to opportunity and power. In Discrimination in Organizations, ed.
R Alvarez, pp. 52–68. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass
Karsten MF, ed. 2006. Gender, Race, and Ethnicity in the Workplace: Management, Gender, and Ethnicity in
the United States, Vol. 1. Westport, CT: Praeger
Kasinitz P, Rosenberg J. 1996. Missing the connection: social isolation and employment on the Brooklyn
waterfront. Soc. Probl. 43:180–96
Kirby D, Jackson JS. 1999. Mitigating perceptions of racism: the importance of work group composition and
supervisor’s race. In Mentoring Dilemmas: Developmental Relationship Within Multicultural Organizations, ed. AJ Murrell, FJ Crosby, RJ Ely, pp. 143–55. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum
Kirnan JP, Alfieri JA, Bragger JD, Harris RS. 2009. An investigation of stereotype threat in employment tests.
J. Appl. Soc. Psychol. 39:359–88

546

Walton



Murphy



Ryan

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Klein HJ, Polin B. 2012. Are organizations on board with best practices onboarding? In The Oxford Handbook
of Organizational Socialization, ed. CR Wanberg, pp. 267–87. New York: Oxford Univ. Press
Kray LJ, Shirako A. 2012. Stereotype threat in organizations: an examination of its scope, triggers and possible
interventions. See Inzlicht & Schmader 2012, pp. 173–87
Kray LJ, Thompson L, Galinsky A. 2001. Battle of the sexes: gender stereotype confirmation and reactance in
negotiations. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 80:942–58
Landau J. 1995. The relationship of race and gender to managers’ ratings of promotion potential. J. Organ.
Behav. 16:391–400
Leskinen EA, Cortina LM. 2014. Dimensions of disrespect: mapping and measuring gender harassment in
organizations. Psychol. Women Q. 38(1):107–23
Logel C, Iserman EC, Davies PG, Quinn DM, Spencer SJ. 2009a. The perils of double consciousness: the role of
thought suppression in stereotype threat. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 45:299–312
Logel C, Walton GM, Spencer SJ, Iserman EC, Von Hippel W, Bell A. 2009b. Interacting with sexist men
triggers social identity threat among female engineers. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 96:1089–103
London M. 1997. Job Feedback: Giving, Seeking, and Using Feedback for Performance Improvement.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum
Madera JM, Hebl MR. 2013. “Don’t stigmatize”: the ironic effects of equal opportunity guidelines in
interviews. Basic Appl. Soc. Psych. 35:123–30
Mannix E, Neale MA. 2006. What differences make a difference? The promise and reality of diverse teams in
organizations. Psychol. Sci. Public Interest 6:31–55
Markus HR, Steele CM, Steele DM. 2000. Color blindness as a barrier to inclusion: assimilation and nonimmigrant minorities. In Engaging Cultural Differences: The Multicultural Challenge in Liberal Democracies, ed. RA Shweder, Minow M, pp. 453–72. New York: Russell Sage Found.
Marsden PV, Gorman EH. 2001. Social networks, job changes, and recruitment. In Sourcebook of Labor
Markets: Evolving Structures and Processes, Vol. 4, ed. I Berg, AL Kalleberg, pp. 467–502. New York:
Kluwer Academic/Plenum
Martens A, Johns M, Greenberg J, Schimel J. 2006. Combating stereotype threat: the effect of self-affirmation
on women’s intellectual performance. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 42:236–43
Marx DM, Goff PA. 2005. Clearing the air: the effect of experimenter race on target’s test performance and
subjective experience. Br. J. Soc. Psychol. 44:645–57
Massey DS, Fischer MJ. 2005. Stereotype threat and academic performance: new findings from a racially
diverse sample of college freshmen. Du Bois Rev. 2:45–67
McConnell AR, Leibold JM. 2001. Relations among the Implicit Association Test, discriminatory behavior,
and explicit measures of racial attitudes. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 37:435–42
McDonald S. 2011. What’s in the “old boys” network? Accessing social capital in gendered and racialized
networks. Soc. Netw. 33(4):317–30
McIntyre RB, Paulson RM, Lord CG. 2003. Alleviating women’s mathematics stereotype threat through
salience of group achievements. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 39:83–90
McKay PF, Avery DR, Tonidandel S, Morris MA, Hernandez M, Hebl MR. 2007. Racial differences in
employee retention: Are diversity climate perceptions the key? Pers. Psychol. 60:35–62
McLean B, Elkind P. 2003. Smartest Guys in the Room: The Amazing Rise and Scandalous Fall of Enron. New
York: Penguin
Miyake A, Smith-Kost LE, Finkelstein ND, Pollock SJ, Cohen GL, Ito TA. 2010. Reducing the gender
achievement gap in college science: a classroom study of values affirmation. Science 330:1234–37
Moss P, Tilly C. 2001. Stories Employers Tell: Race, Skill, and Hiring in America. New York: Russell Sage
Found.
Mueller CW, De Coster S, Estes SB. 2001. Sexual harassment in the workplace: unanticipated consequences of
modern social control in organizations. Work Occup. 28(4):411–46
Murphy MC, Dweck CS. 2010. A culture of genius: how an organization’s lay theory shapes people’s
cognition, affect, and behavior. Personal. Psychol. Bull. 36:283–96
Murphy MC, Richeson JA, Shelton JN, Rheinschmidt ML, Bergsieker HB. 2013. Cognitive costs of contemporary prejudice. Group Process. Intergroup Relat. 16:560–71

www.annualreviews.org



Stereotype Threat in Organizations

547

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Murphy MC, Steele CM, Gross JJ. 2007. Signaling threat: how situational cues affect women in math, science,
and engineering settings. Psychol. Sci. 18:879–85
Murphy MC, Taylor VJ. 2012. The role of situational cues in signaling and maintaining stereotype threat. See
Inzlicht & Schmader 2012, pp. 17–33
Murphy MC, Walton GM. 2013. From prejudiced people to prejudiced places. In Stereotyping and Prejudice,
ed. C Stangor, CS Crandall, pp. 181–203. New York: Psychol. Press
Nguyen HD, Ryan AM. 2008. Does stereotype threat affect test performance of minorities and women? A
meta-analysis of experimental evidence. J. Appl. Psychol. 93:1314–34
Niemann YF, Dovidio JF. 1998. Relationship of solo status, academic rank, and perceived distinctiveness to job
satisfaction of racial/ethnic minorities. J. Appl. Psychol. 83:55–71
Obama M, Obama B. 2014. Remarks by the President and First Lady. Presented at Coll. Oppor. Summit, Jan.
16, Washington, DC. http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/01/16/remarks-president-andfirst-lady-college-opportunity-summit
Osborne JW. 2006. Gender, stereotype threat, and anxiety: psychophysiological and cognitive evidence.
Electron. J. Res. Educ. Psychol. 4(1):109–38
Paunesku D, Walton GM, Romero CL, Smith EN, Yeager DS, Dweck CS. In press. Mindset interventions are
a scalable treatment for academic underperformance. Psychol. Sci.
Plaut VC, Garnett FG, Buffardi L, Sanchez-Burks J. 2011. What about me? Perceptions of exclusion and
Whites’ reactions to multiculturalism. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 101:337–53
Plaut VC, Thomas KM, Goren MJ. 2009. Is multiculturalism or color blindness better for minorities? Psychol.
Sci. 20:444–46
Purdie-Vaughns V, Steele CM, Davies PG, Ditlmann R, Crosby JR. 2008. Social identity contingencies: how
diversity cues signal threat or safety for African Americans in mainstream institutions. J. Personal. Soc.
Psychol. 94(4):615–30
Raeburn N. 2004. Lesbian and Gay Workplace Rights: Changing Corporate America from Inside Out.
Minneapolis: Univ. Minn. Press
Reskin BF, McBrier DB, Kmec JA. 1999. The determinants and consequences of workplace sex and race
composition. Annu. Rev. Sociol. 25:335–61
Richeson JA, Shelton JN. 2012. Stereotype threat in interracial interactions. See Inzlicht & Schmader 2012,
pp. 231–48
Roberson L, Deitch EA, Brief AP, Block CJ. 2003. Stereotype threat and feedback seeking in the workplace.
J. Vocat. Behav. 62(1):176–88
Roberson L, Galvin BM, Charles AC. 2007. When group identities matter: bias in performance appraisal.
Acad. Manag. Ann. 1:617–50
Roberson L, Kulik CT. 2007. Stereotype threat at work. Acad. Manag. Perspect. 21(2):24–40
Ross L, Nisbett RE. 1991. The Person and the Situation: Perspectives of Social Psychology. New York:
McGraw-Hill
Roth PL, Le H, Oh I, Van Iddekinge CH, Buster MA, et al. 2014. Differential validity for cognitive ability
tests in employment and educational settings: not much more than range restriction? J. Appl. Psychol.
99(1):1–20
Ryan AM, Sackett PR. 2013. Stereotype threat in assessments. In APA Handbook of Testing and Assessment in
Psychology, Vol. 1: Test Theory and Testing and Assessment in Industrial and Organizational Psychology, ed. KF Geisinger, BA Bracken, JF Carlson, JC Hansen, NR Kuncel, pp. 661–73. Washington,
DC: Am. Psychol. Assoc.
Ryan CS, Hunt JS, Weible JA, Peterson CR, Casas JF. 2007. Multicultural and colorblind ideology, stereotypes, and ethnocentrism among Black and White Americans. Group Process. Intergroup Relat.
10:617–37
Rydell RJ, Shiffrin RM, Boucher KL, Van Loo K, Rydell MT. 2010. Stereotype threat prevents perceptual
learning. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107:14042–47
Sackett PR, Roth L. 1991. A Monte Carlo examination of banding and rank order methods of test score use in
personnel selection. Hum. Perform. 4:279–95

548

Walton



Murphy



Ryan

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Sackett PR, Ryan AM. 2012. Concerns about generalizing stereotype threat research findings to operational
high-stakes testing. See Inzlicht & Schmader 2012, pp. 249–63
Sackett PR, Wilk SL. 1994. Within-group norming and other forms of score adjustment in preemployment
testing. Am. Psychol. 49:929–54
Saenz DS, Lord CG. 1989. Reversing roles: a cognitive strategy for undoing memory deficits associated with
token status. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 56:698–708
Salvatore J, Shelton JN. 2007. Cognitive costs of exposure to racial prejudice. Psychol. Sci. 18:810–15
Schleicher DJ, Bull RA, Green SG. 2009. Rater reactions to forced distribution rating systems. J. Manag.
35(4):899–927
Schmader T, Beilock S. 2012. An integration of processes that underlie stereotype threat. See Inzlicht &
Schmader 2012, pp. 34–50
Schmader T, Johns M. 2003. Converging evidence that stereotype threat reduces working memory capacity.
J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 85:440–52
Schmader T, Johns M, Forbes C. 2008. An integrated process model of stereotype threat effects on performance. Psychol. Rev. 115(2):336–56
Schneider KT, Swan S, Fitzgerald LF. 1997. Job-related and psychological effects of sexual harassment in the
workplace: empirical evidence from two organizations. J. Appl. Psychol. 82:401–15
Sekaquaptewa D, Espinoza P, Thompson M, Vargas P, Von Hippel W. 2003. Stereotypic explanatory bias:
implicit stereotyping as a predictor of discrimination. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 39(1):75–82
Sekaquaptewa D, Thompson M. 2002. The differential effects of solo status on members of high- and lowstatus groups. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 28(5):694–707
Sekaquaptewa D, Thompson M. 2003. Solo status, stereotype threat, and performance expectancies: their
effects on women’s performance. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 39(1):68–74
Sherman DK, Cohen GL. 2006. The psychology of self-defense: self-affirmation theory. In Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology, Vol. 38, ed. MP Zanna, pp. 183–242. San Diego: Academic
Sherman DK, Hartson KA. 2011. Reconciling self-defense with self-criticism: self-affirmation theory. In
Handbook of Self-Enhancement and Self-Protection, ed. MD Alicke, C Sedikides, pp. 128–51. New York:
Guilford
Sherman DK, Hartson KA, Binning KR, Purdie-Vaughns V, Garcia J, et al. 2013. Deflecting the trajectory and
changing the narrative: how self-affirmation affects academic performance and motivation under identity
threat. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 104:591–618
Shih M, Young MJ, Bucher A. 2013. Working to reduce the effects of discrimination: identity management
strategies in organizations. Am. Psychol. 68(3):145–57
Singh B, Winkel DE, Selvarajan TT. 2013. Managing diversity at work: Does psychological safety hold the key
to racial differences in employee performance? J. Occup. Organ. Psychol. 86:242–63
Spencer SJ, Steele CM, Quinn DM. 1999. Stereotype threat and women’s math performance. J. Exp. Soc.
Psychol. 35:4–28
Stangor C, Carr C, Kiang L. 1998. Activating stereotypes undermines task performance expectations.
J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 75(5):1191–97
Steele CM. 1997. A threat in the air: how stereotypes shape intellectual identity and performance. Am. Psychol.
52:613–29
Steele CM. 2010. Whistling Vivaldi: And Other Clues to How Stereotypes Affect Us. New York: Norton
Steele CM, Aronson J. 1995. Stereotype threat and the intellectual test performance of African Americans.
J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 69:797–811
Steele CM, Spencer SJ, Aronson J. 2002. Contending with group image: the psychology of stereotype and social
identity threat. In Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, Vol. 34, ed. MP Zanna, pp. 379–440. San
Diego: Academic
Steele DM, Cohn-Vargas B. 2013. Identity Safe Classrooms: Places to Belong and Learn. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Corwin
Sternberg RJ, Rainbow Proj. Collab. 2006. The Rainbow Project: enhancing the SAT through assessments of
analytical, practical, and creative skills. Intelligence 34:321–50

www.annualreviews.org



Stereotype Threat in Organizations

549

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Stevens FG, Plaut VC, Sanchez-Burks J. 2008. Unlocking the benefits of diversity: all-inclusive multiculturalism
and positive organizational change. J. Appl. Behav. Sci. 44:116–33
Stoker JI, Van der Velde M, Lammers J. 2012. Factors relating to managerial stereotypes: the role of gender of
the employee and the manager and management gender ratio. J. Bus. Psychol. 27:31–42
Stone J, Lynch CI, Sjomeling M, Darley JM. 1999. Stereotype threat effects on Black and White athletic
performance. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 77:1213–27
Tapia AH, Kvasny L. 2004. Recruitment is never enough: retention of women and minorities in the IT
workplace. Proc. 2004 SIGMIS Conf. Comput. Pers. Res.: Careers Cult. Ethics Netw. Environ., Tucson,
AZ, pp. 84–91. New York: Assoc. Comput. Mach.
Taylor VJ, Walton GM. 2011. Stereotype threat undermines academic learning. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull.
37:1055–67
Thomas DA, Kram KE. 1988. Promoting career-enhancing relationships in organizations: the role of the
human resource professional. In The Human Resource Professional and Employee Career Development,
ed. M London, E Mone, pp. 49–66. New York: Greenwood
Thomas KM. 2008. Diversity Resistance in Organizations. New York: Erlbaum-Taylor Francis
Topa G. 2011. Labor markets and referrals. In Handbook of Social Economics, ed. J Benhabib, A Bisin,
MO Jackson, pp. 1193–221. Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland
Tracey JB, Tannenbaum SI, Kavanagh MJ. 1995. Applying trained skills on the job: the importance of the work
environment. J. Appl. Psychol. 80(2):239–52
Turner ME, Pratkanis AR. 1994. Social identity maintenance prescriptions for preventing groupthink: reducing identity protection and enhancing intellectual conflict. Int. J. Conflict Manag. 5(3):254–70
Voyles E, Finkelstein L, King E. 2014. A tale of two theories: stereotype threat and metastereotypes. Ind.
Organ. Psychol. 7:419–22
Walton GM, Carr PB. 2012. Social belonging and the motivation and intellectual achievement of negatively
stereotyped students. See Inzlicht & Schmader 2012, pp. 89–106
Walton GM, Cohen GL. 2003. Stereotype lift. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 39:456–67
Walton GM, Cohen GL. 2007. A question of belonging: race, social fit, and achievement. J. Personal. Soc.
Psychol. 92:82–96
Walton GM, Cohen GL. 2011. A brief social-belonging intervention improves academic and health outcomes
of minority students. Science 331:1447–51
Walton GM, Logel C, Peach J, Spencer S, Zanna MP. 2014. Two brief interventions to mitigate a “chilly
climate” transform women’s experience, relationships, and achievement in engineering. J. Educ. Psychol.
In press
Walton GM, Spencer SJ. 2009. Latent ability: grades and test scores systematically underestimate the intellectual ability of negatively stereotyped students. Psychol. Sci. 20:1132–39
Walton GM, Spencer SJ, Erman S. 2013. Affirmative meritocracy. Soc. Issues Policy Rev. 7:1–35
Wee S, Newman DA, Joseph DL. 2014. More than g: selection quality and adverse impact implications of
considering second-stratum cognitive abilities. J. Appl. Psychol. 99(4):547–63
Wiesenfeld BM, Brockner J, Martin C. 1999. A self-affirmation analysis of survivors’ reactions to unfair
organizational downsizings. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 35(5):441–60
Williams JR, Miller CE, Steelman LA, Levy PE. 1999. Increasing feedback seeking in public contexts: It takes
two (or more) to tango. J. Appl. Psychol. 84(6):969–76
Wolsko C, Park B, Judd CM, Wittenbrink B. 2000. Framing interethnic ideology: effects of multicultural and
color-blind perspectives on judgments of groups and individuals. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 78:635–54
Woodcock A, Hernandez PR, Estrada M, Schultz PW. 2012. The consequences of chronic stereotype threat:
domain disidentification and abandonment. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 103(4):635–46
Yeager DS, Paunesku D, Walton GM, Dweck CS. 2013. How can we instill productive mindsets at scale? A
review of the evidence and an initial R&D agenda. Prepared for White House Meet. Excell. Educ.:
Importance Acad. Mindsets, May 10, Washington, DC
Yeager DS, Walton GM. 2011. Social-psychological interventions in education: They’re not magic. Rev. Educ.
Res. 81:267–301

550

Walton



Murphy



Ryan

Annual Review of
Organizational
Psychology and

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Organizational Behavior

Volume 2, 2015

Contents
Organizational Psychology Then and Now: Some Observations
Edgar H. Schein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Group Affect
Sigal G. Barsade and Andrew P. Knight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
The Modeling and Assessment of Work Performance
John P. Campbell and Brenton M. Wiernik . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Justice, Fairness, and Employee Reactions
Jason A. Colquitt and Kate P. Zipay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Methodological and Substantive Issues in Conducting Multinational and
Cross-Cultural Research
Paul E. Spector, Cong Liu, and Juan I. Sanchez . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
Leadership Development: An Outcome-Oriented Review Based on Time and
Levels of Analyses
David V. Day and Lisa Dragoni . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
Beyond Lewin: Toward a Temporal Approximation of Organization
Development and Change
Jean M. Bartunek and Richard W. Woodman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157
Beyond the Big Five: New Directions for Personality Research and Practice in
Organizations
Leaetta M. Hough, Frederick L. Oswald, and Jisoo Ock . . . . . . . . . . . . . 183
Corporate Social Responsibility: Psychological, Person-Centric, and
Progressing
Deborah E. Rupp and Drew B. Mallory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 211
Time in Individual-Level Organizational Studies: What Is It, How Is It Used,
and Why Isn’t It Exploited More Often?
Abbie J. Shipp and Michael S. Cole . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 237

vi

Dynamics of Well-Being
Sabine Sonnentag . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 261
Low-Fidelity Simulations
Jeff A. Weekley, Ben Hawkes, Nigel Guenole, and Robert E. Ployhart . . . 295

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

Emotional Labor at a Crossroads: Where Do We Go from Here?
Alicia A. Grandey and Allison S. Gabriel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 323
Supporting the Aging Workforce: A Review and Recommendations for
Workplace Intervention Research
Donald M. Truxillo, David M. Cadiz, and Leslie B. Hammer . . . . . . . . . 351
ESM 2.0: State of the Art and Future Potential of Experience Sampling
Methods in Organizational Research
Daniel J. Beal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 383
Ethical Leadership
Deanne N. Den Hartog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 409
Differential Validity and Differential Prediction of Cognitive Ability Tests:
Understanding Test Bias in the Employment Context
Christopher M. Berry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 435
Organizational Routines as Patterns of Action: Implications for Organizational
Behavior
Brian T. Pentland and Thorvald Hærem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 465
Pay, Intrinsic Motivation, Extrinsic Motivation, Performance, and Creativity
in the Workplace: Revisiting Long-Held Beliefs
Barry Gerhart and Meiyu Fang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 489
Stereotype Threat in Organizations: Implications for Equity and Performance
Gregory M. Walton, Mary C. Murphy, and Ann Marie Ryan . . . . . . . . . . 523
Technology and Assessment in Selection
Nancy T. Tippins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 551
Workplace Stress Management Interventions and Health Promotion
Lois E. Tetrick and Carolyn J. Winslow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 583
Errata
An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and
Organizational Behavior articles may be found at http://www.annualreviews.org/
errata/orgpsych.

Contents

vii

Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 2015.2:523-550. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
Access provided by Stanford University - Main Campus - Lane Medical Library on 04/14/15. For personal use only.

