Journal of Educational Psychology
2015, Vol. 107, No. 2, 468 – 485

© 2014 American Psychological Association
0022-0663/15/$12.00 http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0037461

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Two Brief Interventions to Mitigate a “Chilly Climate” Transform
Women’s Experience, Relationships, and Achievement in Engineering
Gregory M. Walton

Christine Logel

Stanford University

University of Waterloo

Jennifer M. Peach

Steven J. Spencer and Mark P. Zanna

Department of National Defence, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada

University of Waterloo

In a randomized-controlled trial, we tested 2 brief interventions designed to mitigate the effects of a “chilly
climate” women may experience in engineering, especially in male-dominated fields. Participants were
students entering a selective university engineering program. The social-belonging intervention aimed to
protect students’ sense of belonging in engineering by providing a nonthreatening narrative with which to
interpret instances of adversity. The affirmation-training intervention aimed to help students manage stress
that can arise from social marginalization by incorporating diverse aspects of their self-identity in their daily
academic lives. As expected, gender differences and intervention effects were concentrated in male-dominated
majors (⬍20% women). In these majors, compared with control conditions, both interventions raised
women’s school-reported engineering grade-point-average (GPA) over the full academic year, eliminating
gender differences. Both also led women to view daily adversities as more manageable and improved
women’s academic attitudes. However, the 2 interventions had divergent effects on women’s social experiences. The social-belonging intervention helped women integrate into engineering, for instance, increasing
friendships with male engineers. Affirmation-training helped women develop external resources, deepening
their identification with their gender group. The results highlight how social marginalization contributes to
gender inequality in quantitative fields and 2 potential remedies.
Keywords: gender, engineering, STEM, achievement, stereotype threat
Supplemental materials: http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0037461.supp

Even as women have entered historically male-dominated fields
such as law and medicine in increasing numbers, they remain
underrepresented in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), sometimes extremely so. For instance, women
make up just 18.4% of undergraduate engineering students and
12.9% of professional engineers (National Science Foundation,
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, 2013).
Women also perform worse than men in quantitative fields (The
College Board, 2013), especially in settings characterized by gender biases (Hyde & Mertz, 2009; Logel et al., 2009; Steele,
Spencer, & Aronson, 2002). Low levels of participation and
achievement in STEM restrict women’s career opportunities and

slow national economic growth (National Academy of Sciences,
National Academy of Engineering, and Institute of Medicine of the
National Academies, 2007).
Although many factors contribute to gender inequality in STEM
(Shapiro & Sax, 2011), the present research focused on social marginalization. When women enter male-dominated STEM fields, they
may experience a “chilly climate” in which they feel unwelcome
(Flam, 1991). This chilliness arises from explicit and implicit messages that convey to women that their gender could be a liability in
STEM settings. Indeed, women may encounter ambient cues that
represent STEM fields as masculine (Cheryan, Plaut, & Davies, &
Steele, 2009), stereotypes that allege that women lack ability (Appel

This article was published Online First August 4, 2014.
Gregory M. Walton, Department of Psychology, Stanford University;
Christine Logel, Department of Social Development Studies, Renison
University College, University of Waterloo; Jennifer M. Peach, Military
Personnel Research and Analysis, Department of National Defence, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada; Steven J. Spencer and Mark P. Zanna, Department
of Psychology, University of Waterloo.
This research was supported by grants from the Society for the
Psychological Study of Social Issues and the Spencer Foundation to the
first author, from the University of Waterloo Centre for the Advancement of Co-operative Education to the second author, and from the

Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada to the
fourth and fifth authors. We thank participating students, the Faculty of
Engineering at the University of Waterloo, and M. Walker for their
involvement; G. Cohen, C. Dweck, C. Kaiser, D. Paunesku, and D.
Yeager for input; and J. Clark, J. Gebhardt, V. Gronowski, W. Hall, A.
Hoff, J. Hughes, A. Litt, S. Reeves, J. Hillerby, C. Zhan, and S. Zhang
for assistance.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Gregory
M. Walton, Department of Psychology, Jordan Hall, Building 420, Stanford University, 450 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305. E-mail: gwalton@
stanford.edu
468

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

INTERVENTIONS FOR WOMEN’S EXPERIENCE IN ENGINEERING

& Kronberger, 2012; Steele et al., 2002; Thoman, Smith, Brown,
Chase & Lee, 2013) and men in STEM settings who treat women in
subtly sexist ways (Logel et al., 2009). One focus-group participant in
the present research relayed that a female professor, “told [classmates]
not to present themselves as women first if they wanted to be taken
seriously as engineers.” In this climate, even highly skilled and
motivated women may wonder if they will be fully included, valued,
and respected in STEM (Cheryan et al., 2009; Flam, 1991; Good,
Rattan, & Dweck, 2012; Murphy, Steele, & Gross, 2007; Shapiro &
Sax, 2011; Steele et al., 2002; Yoshida, Peach, Zanna, & Spencer,
2012).
Although gender bias can undermine women’s outcomes in
STEM directly, for instance, through social exclusion, disrespectful behavior, or biased decision making (e.g., Logel et al., 2009;
Moss-Racusin, Dovidio, Brescoll, Graham, & Handelsman, 2012),
people’s psychological reactions to threatening settings also matter
and can change the trajectory of their experience over time. Uncertainty about social belonging can lead students to monitor
school for evidence of nonbelonging; this perspective can color
interpretations of ambiguous events, leading students to view even
commonplace adversities like difficulty making friends or receiving critical feedback as evidence they do not belong in general,
further eroding feelings of belonging (Walton & Cohen, 2007). In
addition, feeling marginalized can cause high levels of stress and
threat with which students may struggle to cope. If left unaddressed, social marginalization may thus feed on itself and worsen
students’ outcomes over time (Cohen et al., 2009).
If these psychological dynamics partially mediate the effects of
a chilly climate on gender inequality, addressing them may improve women’s outcomes in STEM over time (Aguilar, Walton, &
Wieman, 2014). Building on recent research with ethnic-minority
and first-generation students (e.g., Cohen, Garcia, PurdieVaughns, Apfel, & Brzustoski, 2009; Harackiewicz et al., 2014;
Sherman et al., 2013; Walton & Cohen, 2011), we developed two
brief interventions designed to help women cope with the chilly
climate of STEM and tested their effectiveness in reducing inequality in STEM achievement. We also explored effects on women’s daily experiences in STEM, academic attitudes, developing
friendship groups, and self-identity.
Our theoretical analysis suggests two potential intervention
strategies (see Garcia & Cohen, 2012). An intervention could
forestall inferences of nonbelonging, which undermine students’
outcomes over time. Or it could help students cope with stress and
threat that arise from social marginalization. We developed and
tested both interventions with a group of selective first-year engineering students. The first, a social-belonging intervention, gave
students a nonthreatening narrative for interpreting negative social
events like feelings of exclusion or not being taken seriously in
engineering. It conveyed that adversities and worries about belonging are normal at first in engineering and dissipate with time.
This message encourages students to ascribe difficulties to the
academic transition, not to a permanent lack of belonging on their
part or the part of their group. One past variant of this intervention,
delivered in an hour-long session toward the end of students’ first
year of college, halved the gap in GPA between African American
and European American students over 3 years (Walton & Cohen,
2011). In the present research, using extensive interviews and
focus groups with female engineering students, we identified aspects of belonging of special relevance to women in STEM and

469

adapted the intervention accordingly. We tested its effects on
women’s achievement. In addition, we examined students’ underlying social experiences. By forestalling perceptions of threat in
daily social encounters (Walton & Cohen, 2011), we hypothesized
that the social-belonging intervention could facilitate better interactions with other people in engineering, especially with men with
whom interactions may otherwise be most fraught, and thus facilitate women’s social integration in the field.
The second intervention aimed to help students cope with stress
and threat by encouraging them to incorporate important selfidentities and personal values in their daily lives. One effect of
threat is to narrow people psychologically; in the face of threat, it
can seem that all that is relevant is the threat, which must be
counteracted (Sherman & Hartson, 2011; Walton, Paunesku, &
Dweck, 2012). One way to reduce stress and help people function
more effectively in threatening settings is to administer specific
“value-affirmation” writing exercises that remind people of selfdefining values unrelated to the source of threat (e.g., close relationships). Reflecting on alternative sources of self-identity broadens the self, makes specific threats and stressors loom less large,
and helps people cope (Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Sherman &
Cohen, 2006; Sherman & Hartson, 2011; Walton et al., 2012). In
school settings, when given several times over an academic year,
value-affirmation exercises can raise achievement among ethnicminority adolescents (Bowen, Wegmann, & Webber, 2013; Cohen
et al., 2009; Sherman et al., 2013; see also Harackiewicz et al.,
2014; Miyake et al., 2010). Inspired by this past research, we
developed a new intervention called affirmation training. Students
did not complete an affirmation. Instead, we encouraged students
to incorporate personally important self-identities and values in
their daily lives as an explicit strategy to manage stress and threat,
for instance, to help students avoid “tunnel vision” and find “balance.” We anticipated that this might yield more robust benefits
than a simple value affirmation because it encourages students to
express broader aspects of their self-identity within their daily
lives in ways and at times that are optimal for them. It empowers
students to maintain their own well-being. Notably, this intervention provides the first test of whether students can be taught to
incorporate a sophisticated social–psychological strategy to remedy psychological threat in their own lives. Moreover, whereas
past value-affirmation interventions are typically delivered multiple times over an academic term or school year (Cohen et al.,
2009; Harackiewcz et al., 2014; Miyake et al., 2010; Sherman et
al., 2013), affirmation training allowed us to intervene with students just once.
The aim of both interventions was to mitigate a chilly climate in
engineering. To do so, both conveyed at a general level that
difficulties are common at first in engineering and that students
learn to cope with these difficulties. This encourages students to
reappraise difficulties as manageable, a powerful psychological
ingredient (Jamieson, Mendes, Blackstock, & Schmader, 2010;
Johns, Inzlicht, & Schmader, 2008; Wilson, Damiani, & Shelton,
2002). However, the content of the two interventions differed. The
social-belonging intervention focused on the meaning of adversities in the transition to engineering. It invited students to view
adversities as due to the challenges all students face. By contrast,
affirmation training focused students on themselves— on ways to
broaden their self-identity to manage stress and function well.

470

WALTON, LOGEL, PEACH, SPENCER, AND ZANNA

This distinction draws on Garcia and Cohen’s (2012) identity
engagement model, which distinguishes vigilance and appraisal
processes people experience in psychologically threatening settings. First, as Garcia and Cohen wrote,

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

[People] tend to become vigilant in environments where their identity
is engaged . . . They monitor such situations for cues related to
whether their identity is relevant to their outcomes, for instance,
whether it affects how they are treated by important figures in their
social environment . . . As in any hypothesis-testing process, people
may be more sensitive to bias-confirming evidence than to biasdisconfirming evidence. (p. 334).

The worry that “people like me” might not belong in a school
setting sensitizes students to indicators of nonbelonging (e.g.,
Cheryan et al., 2009; Murphy et al., 2007; Walton & Cohen, 2007).
It leads students to interpret events through the lens of questions
like “Maybe I don’t belong?” and “Maybe my group doesn’t
belong?” The social-belonging intervention offers students a more
hopeful lens with which to interpret adversity—it invites students
to see adversity as normal for all students as they enter a new
school and as lessening with time.
Second, Garcia and Cohen argued that, if people perceive
threats, a “threat appraisal” process ensues in which people “assess
whether they have the ability to deal with the threat . . . Students
might see the degree of bias in a classroom as surpassing their
ability or desire to overcome it” (p. 334). Value-affirmation interventions, they wrote, “[increase] people’s psychological resources” (p. 336) to cope with such threats in part by broadening
the self-concept. Rather than focusing on the nature of the social
environment, the intervention focuses students on themselves and
thereby helps them cope (Cohen & Sherman, 2014).
This theorizing implies that the two interventions may cause
both convergent and divergent effects. Given the marginalization
of women in STEM fields (Cheryan et al., 2009; Logel et al., 2009;
Steele et al., 2002), both interventions were predicted to benefit
women more than men; moreover, by improving the trajectory of
women’s experience in engineering over time, both were predicted
to cause lasting gains. The primary outcome— on which we expected benefits from both interventions—was students’ end-ofyear GPA in engineering.
We also predicted that both interventions would lead students to
view daily adversities as manageable, not overwhelming. This
could occur if adversities are seen either as normal and temporary
(social belonging) or as within their capacity to manage (affirmation training; Sherman et al., 2013; Walton & Cohen, 2011). We
assessed construals of adversity directly in two daily-diary measures in the 1–2 weeks after the intervention. The first assessed
how “important” students saw daily negative and positive events.
If students view daily adversities as manageable, we reasoned
negative events would loom less large in importance. The second
assessed how “confident” students were that they could handle
daily stressors in engineering.
Finally, we examined STEM attitudes. These often decline in
college and predict exit from STEM fields (Good et al., 2012;
Shapiro & Sax, 2011; Stout, Dasgupta, Hunsinger, & McManus,
2011). If women construe daily adversities as manageable, they
may report better experiences in engineering and, perhaps with
time, greater confidence that they can succeed in the field.

Beyond these convergent benefits, we predicted divergent effects on students’ underlying social experiences. If the socialbelonging intervention leads women to perceive less threat in daily
social encounters in engineering, these interactions may go better
and women may form more friendships, especially with male
engineers, reinforcing their social integration in the field. We thus
examined women’s friendships with male engineers, a potentially
valuable source of belonging and identity in STEM (Shook &
Clay, 2012; Walton & Carr, 2012). We also examined implicit
normative evaluations about female engineers—the extent to
which students associated the constructs “most people like” and
“female engineers” on an automatic level (Yoshida et al., 2012).
Implicit norms are thought to “arise from repeated exposure to
how objects are treated and depicted by groups. For example, if
people repeatedly hear negative jokes about female engineers and
repeatedly see female engineers treated in a sexist manner, then
they will be likely to associate that most people dislike female
engineers” (Yoshida et al., 2012, p. 695). Implicit norms thus
provide an indicator of women’s social experiences in engineering
and whether the social-belonging intervention improved these experiences over time. Notably, implicit norms about female engineers tend to become more negative over time in engineering
among both men and women and predict women’s intentions to
leave the field (Yoshida et al., 2012); we tested whether the
social-belonging intervention remedied this risk factor.
By contrast, affirmation training encouraged students to incorporate valued aspects of their self-identity in their daily lives to
cope with stress and threat; it does not target the meaning of
adversities per se but resources students can develop within themselves to cope with and function well despite adversity. Although
the intervention does not reference gender, it is women’s gender
identity that can seem incompatible with pursuing STEM fields
(Cheryan et al., 2009; Nosek, Banaji, & Greenwald, 2002; Stout et
al., 2011); indeed, women invested in STEM may selectively
suppress aspects of their gender identity that seem incompatible
with pursuing these fields (Pronin, Steele, & Ross, 2004). We thus
predicted that encouraging students to incorporate broader aspects
of their self-identity in their daily lives would help women “restore” their gender identity to their self-concept. We examined the
subjective importance of women’s gender identity to women—
their ingroup identification, which can buffer students in threatening settings (Cohen & Garcia, 2005; Oyserman, Brickman, Bybee,
& Celious, 2006). We also examined the development of women’s
friendships with women outside engineering.
This study extends current understanding of brief social–
psychological interventions in education in four primary ways.
First, it provides the first test of whether such interventions can
reduce gender inequality in STEM broadly, a significant problem.
Past interventions have examined racial/ethnic disparities (e.g.,
Bowen et al., 2013; Cohen et al., 2009; Sherman et al., 2013;
Walton & Cohen, 2011) or women’s or girls’ performance on a
single test (Good, Aronson, & Inzlict, 2003; Smeding, Dumas,
Loose, & Régner, 2013) or in a single class (Miyake et al., 2010;
see also Harackiewicz, Rozek, Hulleman, & Hyde, 2012; Hulleman & Harackiewicz, 2009). We examined women’s achievement
in multiple classes over a full academic year. Second, by assessing
diverse indices of students’ psychology and social experience, this
study provides deeper understanding of how brief social–
psychological interventions transform at-risk students’ school ex-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

INTERVENTIONS FOR WOMEN’S EXPERIENCE IN ENGINEERING

perience broadly beyond achievement. Third, we developed the
novel affirmation-training intervention and tested its effects. Moreover, by directly comparing it with the social-belonging intervention, we tested the hypothesis that the latter helps women integrate
into engineering, whereas the former helps women cultivate resources in their lives and identity.
Finally, this study directly tested the hypothesis that socialbelonging and value-affirmation interventions allay concerns that
arise from a specific social context—from being a member of an
at-risk and underrepresented group in a setting—not from some
inherent property of ethnic minorities or of women. To do so, we
compared students enrolled in gender-diverse and in maledominated engineering majors. Following past laboratory (Inzlicht
& Ben-Zeev, 2000; Murphy et al., 2007; Steele et al., 2002) and
field (Hanselman, Bruch, Gamoran, & Borman, 2014; Stout et al.,
2011; Yoshida et al., 2012) research, we expected that the underrepresentation of women would create a “chilly climate” that
intensifies women’s social marginalization. If this is the experience remedied by the interventions, then gender disparities and
intervention effects should both be concentrated in maledominated majors.

Method
Overview
Students in the first year of a demanding university engineering
program took part. Early in the academic year, students completed a
brief preintervention survey. Intervention or control materials were
delivered in sessions in engineering classrooms soon after. To assess
construals of daily adversities, students completed surveys every other
evening over the next 12 days. To assess change in academic attitudes
and social experiences, we asked them to complete one or two
second-semester surveys (⬇4 months postintervention). Official academic records were obtained for students’ first year.

Participants and Recruitment
Participants were first-year engineering students in three successive
cohorts at the University of Waterloo (UW), one of the highest ranked
engineering schools in Canada (Times Higher Education, 2013). A
total of 228 first-year students participated and were randomly assigned to condition (92 women and 136 men). Research staff solicited
students with appeals and handouts in engineering classes. The study
was called the “Skills for Transitions to Engineering Project” (STEP)
and represented as an opportunity for students to learn about other
students’ experiences entering engineering and to share their experiences with future students to help improve their transition. The study
was thus described as of potential benefit to students; it was not,
however, referred to as an “intervention” or represented as remedial.
As compensation, students received small gift certificates to a local
business.
Interested students were invited to complete an online preintervention survey. All women who completed this survey were recruited to take part in the rest of the study; men who matched
women based on their major and ethnicity were randomly selected
to be recruited for the rest of the study. Male and female participants did not differ in demographic characteristics: engineering
major, ␹2(10, N ⫽ 228) ⫽ 13.86, p ⫽ .18; ethnicity, ␹2(3, N ⫽

471

220) ⫽ 1.10, p ⫽ .78. Reflecting the university’s student body,
most students self-identified as White (38.16%), East Asian
(33.77%), or South Asian/Middle Eastern (20.18%; other or unknown: 7.90%). However, insofar as students chose to participate,
the sample was not necessarily representative of the student body.
Cohort 1 included 64 students (34 women). Cohort 2 included 68
students (30 women). Cohort 3 included 96 students (28 women).

Classification of Engineering Majors
Students enter the Faculty of Engineering enrolled in one of 12
undergraduate programs (i.e., “majors”). These majors organize
students’ experience, including what classes they take and with
whom and represent important sources of self-identity (e.g., students might identify as “electrical engineers,” not as engineers).
We classified majors as “gender-diverse” if more than 20% of
students enrolled in the major in the first year of the study were
women (across cohorts, 32.57% of students enrolled in these
majors were women; N ⫽ 121) and as “male-dominated” otherwise (10.01% women, N ⫽ 107). See Table 1. This classification
assigned half of the majors to each category, is consistent with past
research, which defines a “critical mass” of women in STEM fields
at approximately 20% (Carrigan, Quinn, & Riskin, 2011; Lott,
Gardner, & Powers, 2009 –2010), and tracked social stereotypes—
interviews and focus groups with upper year engineering majors
confirmed that “male-dominated” majors were seen as more masculine than “gender-diverse” majors (e.g., one focus-group participant reported that chemical engineering [with 38.62% women in
the first year of the study] was known as “fem eng.”) See the
online supplemental material for more information.

Preintervention Survey (First Semester)
The preintervention survey, completed online in the first few
months of school, assessed five key constructs. First, three measures assessed students’ evaluation of their current experience in
engineering: (a) their sense of belonging in engineering (10 items,
e.g., “I belong in engineering at UW”; ⬀ ⫽ 0.87), (b) enjoyment
of engineering (three items, e.g., “How much do you enjoy academic work in engineering?” ⬀ ⫽ 0.87), and (c) self-efficacy in
engineering (two items, e.g., “I feel confident that I have the ability
to do well in engineering”; r ⫽ .53, p ⬍ .001; Walton & Cohen,
2011). All items were completed on 7-point scales. These measures formed a reliable scale (⬀ ⫽ 0.64) and showed a similar

Table 1
Classification of Engineering Majors as Gender-Diverse (⬎20%
Female Students) or Male-Dominated (⬍20% Female Students)
Gender-diverse majors
(⬎20% women)

Male-dominated majors
(⬍20% women)

Chemical engineering
Civil engineering
Environmental engineering
Geological engineering
Management engineering
Systems design engineering

Computer engineering
Electrical engineering
Mechanical engineering
Mechatronics engineering
Nanotechnology engineering
Software engineering

Note. Overall, women represented 32.57% of students enrolled in genderdiverse majors and 10.01% of students-enrolled in male-dominated majors.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

472

WALTON, LOGEL, PEACH, SPENCER, AND ZANNA

pattern of results (see Table S1 in the online supplemental material). Therefore, we combined them to form a composite measure.
Second, two measures assessed students’ evaluation of their prospects of succeeding in engineering: (a) possible selves in engineering
(four items, e.g., “I could see myself being a professional engineer”;
7-point scale; ⬀ ⫽ 0.66; Markus & Nurius, 1987) and (b) perceived
potential “to succeed in engineering” relative to classmates (a oneitem 100-point percentile scale; Walton & Cohen, 2007). The two
measures correlated (r ⫽ .26, p ⬍ .001) and showed a similar pattern
of results (Table S1), so we combined them. To place them on the
same scale, the former measure was transformed into a 100-point
scale and then averaged with the latter.
Third, we assessed students’ identification with their gender
group (four items, e.g., “My gender is an important reflection of
who I am”; 7-point scale; Cohen & Garcia, 2005). One item that
did not load was dropped (⬀ ⫽ 0.60).
Fourth, we examined students’ friendship groups. Students provided the initials of up to five friends they had made in university
at that point and, subsequently, indicated the gender and major of
each friend. We calculated the percentage of friends students listed
who were male engineers, female engineers, male nonengineers,
and female nonengineers.
Finally, we assessed implicit normative evaluations of female
engineers (Yoshida et al., 2012), an automatic measure of the
degree to which participants saw women as valued in engineering.
The measure was a modified version of the Implicit Association
Test (IAT), a well-validated computerized measure for assessing
implicit attitudes (Peach, Yoshida, Spencer, Zanna, & Steele,
2011; Yoshida et al., 2012). The task assessed the ease with which
participants associated the construct “most people like” (vs. “most
people don’t like,” with the term most people defined as “most
undergraduates at your university”) with the construct female
engineers (vs. objects) on a reaction-time basis. Higher values
represent more positive implicit norms (i.e., “most people like” ⫽
“female engineers”). For details, see the online supplemental material.
This measure allowed us to go beyond self-reports,and thus to
assess whether intervention effects would extend to a psychological measure less sensitive to demand processes. It also complements past research, which has primarily emphasized implicit
gender stereotypes and attitudes in STEM (e.g., Nosek & Smyth,
2011; Smeding, 2012; Stout et al., 2011). Finally, the implicitnorm measure circumvents two debates about traditional IATs:
whether they measure personal attitudes or awareness of cultural
stereotypes (Arkes & Tetlock, 2004; Yoshida et al., 2012) and
whether they predict behavior (Greenwald, Poehlman, Uhlmann,
& Banaji, 2009). By using the category labels “most people like”
and “most people don’t like” (rather than “pleasant”/“unpleasant”),
the implicit-norm measure is designed specifically to assess perceived cultural associations, not personal attitudes (Yoshida et al.,
2012). Further, although implicit norms have been less researched
than traditional IATs, they have been found to predict women’s
intentions to leave engineering (Yoshida et al., 2012).

Intervention Session (First Semester)
After completing the preintervention survey, students were invited to take part in sessions in an engineering classroom in which

intervention or control materials were delivered. Each session was
randomly assigned to condition.1
Students were told that the study had two purposes: (a) “to better
understand your personal experiences and attitudes here in engineering at Waterloo” and (b) “to help us provide incoming UW
engineering students next year and in the years to come with more
accurate expectations about what university is like.” Students in
each condition were told that the researchers had previously conducted a survey of upper year students’ experiences entering the
engineering program and that they would be asked for their help in
interpreting the results of this survey. The results, students were
told, “were consistent across students’ program [i.e., major], gender, and ethnicity.” In each condition, students were then given a
one-page “summary of results” to review. Students then listened to
nine audio recordings of senior engineering students said to have
taken part in the survey (four women and five men in seven
engineering majors), which were described as “illustrative” of
students’ experiences in the ‘transition to engineering at UW.’” As
they listened to these recordings, students viewed a presentation
that displayed each student’s quotation, name (which, participants
were told, had been changed to protect students’ confidentiality),
year, and major along with photographs of campus engineering
buildings.
Social-belonging intervention. In the social-belonging intervention, the materials emphasized that both men and women
worried about their social belonging at first in engineering but that
these concerns dissipated with time and eventually most students
came to feel at home. These materials were drawn from past
research (Walton & Cohen, 2011) but revised to incorporate two
key themes that emerged in pilot interviews and focus groups with
female engineering students: worries about (a) being taken seriously or treated with respect and (b) fitting into a male peer
culture. The materials emphasized that both men and women
worry about being treated with respect at first in engineering, but
this improves with time; and that even when women do not share
some interests with men, they share common interests in engineering.
For instance, the “summary of results” indicated that “almost
all” upper year students had worried during their first year about
“whether other students would accept them” and had felt “intimidated by professors” but that, over time, most students came to
feel “comfortable in the academic environment,” made “good
friends within the Faculty of Engineering,” and felt “confident that
other engineering students and professors viewed their abilities
positively.”
The nine quotations, drawn from pilot research, reinforced this
theme. One upper year student said, “When I first got to Waterloo,
I worried that I was different from the other students . . . Now it
seems ironic— everybody feels different first year, when really
1
Most sessions included just one participant, but when convenient,
several students took part in a session. For instance, of the 41 sessions in
Cohort 1, 22 had one participant, 16 had two participants, two had three
participants, and one had four participants. Multilevel modeling was not
required. Students did not interact with one another in sessions, either
listening to the experimenter or completing individual activities, and session accounted for no variance in the primary outcome, first-year GPA (at
least in Cohort 1).

INTERVENTIONS FOR WOMEN’S EXPERIENCE IN ENGINEERING

we’re all going through the same things.” Another, a male student,
said,
Honestly, when I got here, I thought professors were scary . . . I
worried about whether other students would respect me . . . After
some time, I began to feel more comfortable . . . I saw that even when
professors are critical . . . it didn’t mean they looked down on me. It
was just their way of pushing us . . . I’m glad I have been challenged.
It’s made me a better engineer.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

A woman said
[M]y first term . . . some other civil engineers . . . spent 90% of the
time talking about hockey, about which I know next to nothing . . . It
was discouraging. But over time I got to know my classmates better
. . . Once I remember talking about the TV show Monster Machines,
which I have to admit I love. We had a great time sharing stories about
the different episodes. Even though I don’t share their love of hockey,
I realized that we do have a lot in common.

For more information, see Appendix S1 in the online supplemental
materials.
Affirmation-training intervention. In the affirmationtraining condition, the materials were similar, but instead of concerns about belonging, they emphasized that upper year students,
both men and women, learned to incorporate broader aspects of
their self-identity in their daily lives to manage stress and find
“balance” in engineering. The materials highlighted six values
identified in pilot testing as most relevant in this population:
relationships with friends and family, leading a healthy lifestyle,
learning for the sake of learning, religious or spiritual values,
achieving financial security, and making a difference in the world.
For instance, the “summary of results” indicated that during their
first year, “almost all” upper year students had “felt overwhelmed
by the workload” but that, over time, most students “found ways to
manage stress and find balance” by “spending time with friends,”
“putting their workload in perspective,” “going to the gym,” and
“taking mental ‘time-outs.’”
The nine quotations, again drawn from pilot research, reinforced
this theme. One upper year student said, “[F]irst year, I sometimes
felt like I had tunnel vision . . . I was just so completely caught up
with life at Waterloo . . . It was hard at first, and it was stressful.
But then I realized that, well there are things outside of engineering
that I do care about . . . I decided to get involved with an
environmental group here on campus. And even though, objectively, I had less time . . . I found I felt really refreshed, and I could
concentrate a lot better . . . the longer I spend in Waterloo, the
more I find things to do that are just broadening my life . . . I guess
the one thing I had to learn was that it isn’t the best thing for me
to just study nonstop.”
For more information, see Appendix S1 in the online supplemental
materials.
“Saying-is-believing” exercises. In the intervention conditions and in the study-skills control condition (described later),
after reading the survey, students completed two writing activities
designed to facilitate internalization of the intervention message
(Walton & Cohen, 2011). These “saying-is-believing” exercises
encouraged students to describe the process they had read about in
their own words, to view their own personal experiences in light of
it, and to advocate for this process to a receptive audience. This is
a powerful and noncontrolling persuasive technique. Further, it

473

encourages students to see themselves as helping others, not as
beneficiaries or as recipients of a persuasive appeal, which could
undermine effects.
First, students were asked, “to write about why you think
people’s experience in university develops in the way the senior
students described”—for instance, why students worry at first
about whether they belong in engineering but come to feel at home
with time (social-belonging) or how students learn to incorporate
broader aspects of their self-identity in their daily lives to manage
stress in engineering (affirmation-training). Students were encouraged to illustrate their essay “with examples from your own
experience” and invited to look back on the survey results as they
worked. In addition, students were told
[W]e hope to share selections of what students write in this study with
first-year students next year. We hope it will help them in the
transition to university . . . I am sure that the students who read about
your experiences next year will appreciate the effort you put in.

Students were given 15–20 min to write.
Next, students were asked to rewrite their essay into a personal
letter to a future student. Students were told
[W]e have learned . . . that students really appreciate hearing directly
from older students who already have some experience making the
transition to engineering at UW. To give next year’s . . . students a
chance to hear directly from an older student, we would like . . . you
to write a letter to an incoming engineering student next year . . . about
your transition . . . [and] what you’ve learned [including how students]
may feel unsure at first of their belonging in engineering but ultimately come to feel they belong [in the social-belonging condition]/
learn ways to manage stress by thinking about things they value
outside school [in the affirmation-training condition].

Students were then told
We will give these letters to a student of the same program and gender
as yourself, so you can imagine it is a student like you. We know that
it can be difficult . . . to write a personal letter to a stranger, but . . .
[we] believe it will be particularly meaningful for incoming students
if they feel as though an older student is speaking directly to them
about their experiences.

All students agreed to write the letter. The next year we delivered
some of these letters to new first-year students not participating in
the study.
Two raters, blind to participants’ condition, gender, and major,
coded the essays and letters students in the first cohort wrote.
Results confirmed that students were sensitive to the divergent
content of the two interventions and the study-skills control condition (described later). Their writings did not differ by gender or
major. For details, see the online supplemental material.
Control conditions. Two randomized control conditions were
used. In Cohort 1, the procedure was the same but the materials
addressed an unrelated topic, study skills. Students read information indicating that many students lack adequate study skills at first
in engineering but learn better study skills with time. For instance,
the “summary of results” indicated that during their first year,
“almost all” upper year students had felt “overwhelmed by the
workload” and “had difficulty keeping track of due dates and
deadlines” but that, over time, most students learned “proper study
techniques,” including “attending class regularly” and “recording

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

474

WALTON, LOGEL, PEACH, SPENCER, AND ZANNA

exams and assignment due dates in a day planner.” The nine
quotations reinforced this theme. Although this controls for the
representation that difficulties are common at first in engineering
and improve with time, the content is tangential to the key psychological issues targeted by the interventions (and, past research
suggests, is generally ineffective; Conway & Ross, 1984).
For Cohorts 2 and 3, we used a different control condition.
Students again took part in sessions in engineering classrooms,
equating for their effort and attention received, but they simply
completed outcome measures. The use of multiple control conditions follows procedures used in past research (e.g., Cohen et al.,
2009; Walton & Cohen, 2011). It ensures that observed condition
differences reflect the influence of the intervention conditions, not
an unanticipated ironic effect of any given control condition.
Key chain. After completing the writing exercises, students
completed initial measures assessing attitudes toward engineering
(described later). Finally, students received a key chain designed to
remind them of the intervention message. Past research has shown
that physical cues can facilitate intervention effects (Dal Cin,
MacDonald, Fong, Zanna, & Elton-Marshall, 2006). In the socialbelonging condition, the key chain depicted the Waterloo Engineering insignia. In the affirmation-training condition, it was an
opaque piece of plastic containing a slip of paper. Students were
given a list of the six aforementioned values (e.g., “relationships
with friends and family”) and asked to select the value that “is
most important to you” and to “write a word or phrase that will
remind you of this value” on the slip and return it to the key chain.
Control-condition students were offered both types of key chains
and given their choice (students who chose the opaque key chain
were not asked to write on the slip). In each condition, students
were then asked “Shall we put it on your keys now?” and then
helped in attaching the keychain to their keys.
The various aspects of the procedure were all designed to
convey the specific psychological message in each condition (see
Table S2 in the online supplemental materials). In total, the intervention session lasted 45– 60 min.

Dependent Measures
First-year engineering GPA. The primary outcome was students’ GPA in engineering classes over the first year calculated
from official school records. GPA is on a scale from 0 to 100.
Sixty is needed to remain in engineering; scores above 80 qualify
for the Dean’s honor list. We did not examine retention in engineering as an outcome because drop-out rates were low (8.38%) in
all conditions during the time period examined in this study (the
first year of engineering).
Intervention session: Attitudes toward engineering.
Immediately after completing intervention or control materials,
students reported their attitudes toward engineering. We assessed
the same two constructs assessed in the preintervention survey:
students’ (a) evaluation of their current experience in engineering
(sense of belonging in, self-efficacy in, and enjoyment of engineering) and (b) perception of their prospects of succeeding in
engineering (possible selves and self-perceived potential in engineering).
Daily diaries: Construal of daily adversities and daily
functioning. Beginning a few days after the intervention session,
students completed a brief (5-min) online survey every other

evening for 12 days (up to six assessments). Each survey assessed
students’ construals of daily adversities and stressors as well as
daily functioning (i.e., daily self-esteem).
First, we assessed the degree to which daily negative events
loomed large in importance to students. Students reported each
evening on events they had experienced that day that made them
“feel positively or negatively about engineering at UW or your
experience here” (Walton & Cohen, 2011). Students briefly described each event, categorized it as positive or negative, rated
“how positive” or “how negative” (1 ⫽ neutral, 5 ⫽ very positive/
negative), and then rated “how important” it was (1 ⫽ not at all,
5 ⫽ very). Our chief interest was the perceived importance of
negative events: the average daily sum total of the perceived
importance of negative events.
Second, we assessed students’ confidence they could handle
stress in school. Each evening, students considered 10 potential
sources of stress (Stinson et al., 2008): “family members,” “close
friends,” “other students,” “romantic partners,” “professors, TAs,
or work supervisors,” “person you are interested in dating but are
not dating,” “living independently,” “workload for classes,”
“workload for job,” and “any other sources of stress or negative
feelings.” We assessed how much stress students reported experiencing from each source each day (0 ⫽ not a source of stress, 1 ⫽
mild, 2 ⫽ moderate, 3 ⫽ severe) and how well students believed
they could handle stress from that source (“I can handle this source
of stress”; 1 ⫽ strongly disagree, 7 ⫽ strongly agree). We were
most interested in students’ confidence in their ability to handle
school-related stress: “other students,” “professors, TAs, or work
supervisors,” “workload for classes,” and “workload for jobs”
(many students held engineering-related jobs as students through a
co-op program). The primary outcome was the average daily
confidence students expressed in their ability to handle school
stressors.
Third, we examined the level and stability of students’ selfesteem across days, as both index daily functioning (Kernis, 2005;
Stinson et al., 2008). Each evening, we asked students to choose
between 20 pairs of adjectives to describe “your true feelings about
yourself right now” (e.g., “bad/good,” “ashamed/proud,” “adequate/inadequate”) on a 7-point scale (from ⫺3 to 3) (HoshinoBrowne et al., 2005; McFarland & Ross, 1982). We scored each
item such that higher values represented more positive self-views
and, each day, averaged across the 20 items. To provide an overall
measure, we calculated the mean and standard deviation of daily
self-esteem scores across days, reverse-scored the latter, and standardized and averaged the two measures. Secondary analyses
examine the two separately (see the online supplemental material).
Second-semester survey(s): Attitudes toward engineering,
friendship groups, implicit norms, and gender identification. In
their second semester on campus, students completed one or two
surveys. These assessed the same measures assessed in the preintervention survey: (a) attitudes toward engineering, (b) gender
identification, (c) friendship groups, and (d) implicit norms about
female engineers.
The timing and delivery of the second-semester surveys differed
slightly by cohort. For Cohort 1, there was one second-semester
survey completed about 4 months postintervention (primarily in
April). For Cohorts 2 and 3, there were two second-semester
surveys. Their content was identical, and among students who
completed both, responses were averaged across assessments.

INTERVENTIONS FOR WOMEN’S EXPERIENCE IN ENGINEERING

These surveys were completed about 3½ and 6 months postintervention (primarily in January and February and in May and June,
respectively).

Results

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Preliminary Data Analytic Issues
Retention rates. Retention rates were adequate, similar to
those in past research, and did not vary by gender, major, or
condition (see the online supplemental material). Degrees of freedom vary because of missing data on some postintervention measures.
Combination of cohorts. Few analyses were moderated by
student cohort (fewer than would be expected by chance alone), so
the three cohorts were combined.
Outliers. The results were not driven by outliers. We examined the critical three experimental conditions among women in
male-dominated majors. On all primary outcomes, all scores fell
within 2.30 standard deviations of the within-condition mean.
Race/ethnicity. No analysis was moderated by student race/
ethnicity (White vs. other), Fs ⬍ 2.75, ps ⬎ .10.

Preintervention Measures
Check on random assignment. Confirming the success of
random assignment, there was no difference by condition on any
preintervention measure, Fs ⬍ 1 (see Table S3 in the online
supplemental materials).
Baseline differences. First, we examined whether, at baseline,
women held more negative explicit attitudes toward engineering
than men. They did, both in terms of their evaluation of their
current experience in engineering and their perceived prospects of
succeeding in the field, main effects of gender, Fs ⬎ 5.00, ps ⬍
.028. Interestingly, there was no moderation by type of major,
Fs ⬍ 2.60, ps ⬎ .10 (see online supplemental material, Tables S4
and S5). Second, we examined gender differences in implicit
norms. Past research has shown that women tend to exhibit more
positive implicit norms (Yoshida et al., 2012) and gender stereotypes (Nosek & Smyth, 2011; Smeding, 2012) than men in STEM.
We replicated this pattern (Mwomen ⫽ 0.61; Mmen ⫽ 0.48), F(1,
206) ⫽ 8.75, p ⫽ .003, with no moderation by major type, F ⬍ 1.

Analytic Approach
Overview. Data were analyzed using multiple regression including appropriate dummy codes for student gender, major type
(gender-diverse vs. male-dominated), condition, and all two- and
three-way interaction terms. Separate analyses tested the combined
and separate effects of the two interventions (for specific dummy
variables, see the online supplemental material).
Covariates were included as follows: First, where available, the
preintervention assessment of each outcome was included in analyses, that is, in analyses of engineering attitudes, friendship
groups, implicit norms, and gender identification. This increases
statistical power by reducing error variance and ensures that condition differences are not the product of baseline variability. Second, the analysis of engineering GPA controlled for the mean GPA
earned in students’ major, as this varied widely, F(10, 181) ⫽

475

503.25, p ⬍ .001. This reduces error variance and ensures that
condition differences were not due to any tendency for students to
have enrolled in easier majors in one condition than in other
conditions. Third, analysis of the perceived importance of daily
negative events controlled for the perceived importance of daily
positive events, which ensures that effects reflect change in the
perception of negative events relative to positive events not change
in the perception of all events. In general, covariates were highly
significant (see Table S6 in the online supplemental materials).
This study was not designed primarily to explore questions of
statistical mediation; issues of sample size and statistical power limit
the value of these tests in this study (Mackinnon, Lockwood, Hoffman, West, & Sheets, 2002). However, several exploratory analyses
are reported in the online supplemental material.
Robustness of results in alternative analyses. In general,
the results were robust to alternative ways of analyzing the data.
First, in some cases, participants with intact postintervention
scores had missing data on the baseline assessment of that
measure, which as noted, was included as a covariate in analysis. To retain as many participants as possible, in primary
analyses we replaced missing preintervention values with the
Gender ⫻ Major mean (Cohen et al., 2009). In general, dropping participants with missing preintervention scores produces
similar results. In only one case did this procedure meaningfully
affect the results. The effect of affirmation training on the
representation of female nonengineers in students’ friendship
groups was somewhat stronger without replacing missing preintervention values (see the following section).
Second, dropping the two nonbaseline covariates—namely, the
mean GPA earned in students’ major in analyses of first-year GPA
and the perceived importance of daily positive events in analysis of
the perceived importance of daily negative events—produced similar
results (see the online supplemental material).
Third, analyses of implicit norms were robust to different ways of
handling a few participants with high error rates on either the pre- or
the postintervention assessment (see the online supplemental material).

Statistical Summary
Figure 1 shows the means and standard errors for first-year GPA by
gender, major, and condition. Figures 2– 4 show the means and
standard errors for the other primary outcomes among students in
male-dominated majors; in the online supplemental material, Figures
S1–S3 show parallel results among students in gender-diverse majors.
Tables 2–5 summarize the primary statistical results: Intervention
effects among women in male-dominated majors (Tables 2, 4, and 5)
and gender differences by condition among students in maledominated majors (Table 3). In the online supplemental material,
Tables S7–S11 summarize parallel comparisons among men in maledominated majors and among men and women in gender-diverse
majors. Effect sizes (Cohen’s ds, calculated using the raw pooled
standard deviation) are included for all contrasts at p ⱕ .15.

First-Year Engineering GPA
The primary outcome was students’ cumulative GPA in engineering over the full academic year as reported by the university.
We used multiple regressions to test the effects of student gender,

476

WALTON, LOGEL, PEACH, SPENCER, AND ZANNA

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Construal of Daily Adversities and Daily Functioning

Figure 1. First-year engineering grade point average (GPA), which is
calculated on a scale from 0 to 100. Sixty is the average needed to remain
in engineering; scores above 80 qualify students for the dean’s honor list.
Means are adjusted for average within-major GPA. Error bars represent ⫹1
standard error. The y axis represents approximately 2.30 standard deviations. Sample sizes: Nmen ⫽ 118; Nwomen ⫽ 73.

major, and condition, with the mean GPA earned in different
majors controlled.
We first combined the two interventions and compared this
group with the control condition. The analysis yielded a three-way
interaction, B ⫽ 15.13, t(182) ⫽ 2.30, p ⫽ .022. Examining
male-dominated majors, in the control condition, there was a
gender gap; women received lower GPAs than men, B ⫽ ⫺8.39,
t(182) ⫽ ⫺1.96, p ⫽ .051, d ⫽ ⫺0.77. But the interventions
significantly raised women’s GPAs, B ⫽ 11.40, t(182) ⫽ 2.69, p ⫽
.008, d ⫽ 1.04, eliminating the gender gap, t ⬍ 1. There was no
effect for men, t ⬍ 1.20. In contrast, in gender-diverse majors,
there was no gender difference in either condition, ts ⬍ 1.40, ps ⬎
.15, and no intervention effect for either men or women, ts ⬍ 1.65,
ps ⬎ .10.
Next, we tested the separate effect of each intervention by
creating a dummy variable for each. Both interventions raised
GPAs among women in male-dominated majors relative to the
control condition—social-belonging intervention: B ⫽ 11.66,
t(178) ⫽ 2.41, p ⫽ .017, d ⫽ 1.07; affirmation-training intervention: B ⫽ 11.13, t(178) ⫽ 2.30, p ⫽ .023, d ⫽ 1.02. The two
interventions did not differ, t ⬍ 1. See Figure 1 and Tables 2, 3,
and S7–S9.
There was only one other condition effect. In gender-diverse
majors, women earned lower GPAs in the affirmation-training
condition than in the control condition, B ⫽ ⫺7.56,
t(178) ⫽ ⫺2.03, p ⫽ .043, d ⫽ ⫺0.69. Although notable, this
pattern was not predicted and was not evident on any other
outcome, ts ⬍ 1.10, ps ⬎ .25, and Table S8. Thus, we interpret it
cautiously. Future research should investigate its reliability and, if
reliable, its nature.

The three daily-diary measures—(a) how “important” students
saw daily negative relative to positive events, (b) how confident
students were they could handle daily school stress, and (c) the
level and day-to-day stability of students’ self-esteem—yielded
parallel results, so we report them together.
Combining the interventions, multiple-regression analysis of
each daily-diary measure yielded a Gender ⫻ Major ⫻ Condition
interaction, ts ⬎ 2.30, ps ⬍ .025. In male-dominated majors, in the
control condition, women exhibited worse outcomes than men on
each measure, ts ⬎ 2.30, ps ⬍ .025, ⫺1.30 ⱕ dsⱕ⫺0.86. But on
all three measures, the interventions improved women’s outcomes relative to the control condition. The interventions led
women to view daily adversities as less “important,” B ⫽
⫺3.55, t(182) ⫽ ⫺2.77, p ⫽ .006, d ⫽ ⫺0.99; to express greater
confidence they could handle school stress, B ⫽ 0.93, t(197) ⫽
2.21, p ⫽ .028, d ⫽ 0.94; and to report higher and more stable
self-esteem, B ⫽ 0.71, t(196) ⫽ 2.16, p ⫽ .032, d ⫽ 0.90. The
intervention effects eliminated all three gender differences, ts ⬍
1.45, ps ⬎ .15. There were no effects for men, ts ⬍ 1. In contrast,
in gender-diverse majors, there was no consistent gender difference in either condition and no consistent intervention effect for
either men or women. When tested separately, both interventions
generated all three benefits for women in male-dominated majors,
ts ⬎ 1.80, ps ⬍ .070. The two interventions did not differ on these
outcomes, ts ⬍ 1. See Figures 2 and S1 and Tables 2, 3, and
S7–S9.
Secondary analyses examined the levels of adversity—the degree of negative relative to positive events and how much school
stress—students reported encountering each day. These analyses
did not yield consistent effects (see the online supplemental material). The interventions did not consistently reduce the daily
challenges women encountered. Instead, they helped women construe challenges as manageable.

Attitudes Toward Engineering
Did the interventions improve women’s experience in engineering and, with time, their confidence in their prospects of succeeding in the field? They did. Each analysis controlled for the same
measure assessed at baseline.
With the interventions combined, students’ felt experience in
engineering both immediately after the intervention and in the
second semester yielded the predicted Gender ⫻ Major ⫻ Condition interaction, t(218) ⫽ 2.54, p ⫽ .012, and t(144) ⫽ 1.65, p ⫽
.10, respectively. Students’ confidence in their prospects of succeeding in engineering showed no interaction effect in the intervention session, t ⬍ 1, but did by the second semester, t(144) ⫽
2.43, p ⫽ .016. In each case, in the control condition in maledominated majors, women expressed more negative attitudes than
men, ts ⬎ 1.65, ps ⬍ .10, ⫺1.02 ⱕ ds ⱕ ⫺0.62. However, the
interventions improved women’s felt experience in engineering
relative to the control condition in the intervention session, B ⫽
0.58 t(218) ⫽ 2.76, p ⫽ .006, d ⫽ 0.67, and in the second
semester, B ⫽ 0.61, t(144) ⫽ 1.90, p ⫽ .060, d ⫽ 0.67, and
improved women’s confidence in their prospects of succeeding in
engineering in the second semester, B ⫽ 13.35, t(144) ⫽ 2.61, p ⫽
.010, d ⫽ 0.87. These effects eliminated all three gender differences, ts ⬍ 1. There was no effect for men, ts ⬍ 1. By contrast, in

INTERVENTIONS FOR WOMEN’S EXPERIENCE IN ENGINEERING
A
10

Perceived Importance
of Daily Negative
Events

B
7

Confidence in Ability
to Handle Daily
School Stressors

C
0.8

477

Average Daily Level
and Stability of SelfEsteem

9
6

8
7

0.4

5
0

6
4

5

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

4

-0.4
3

3
2

-0.8

2

1
0

1
Men

Women

Male Dominated Majors (<20%
Women)

Control Condition

-1.2
Men

Men

Women

Male Dominated Majors (<20%
Women)

Social-BelongingRasdgasg
Intervention

Women

Male Dominated Majors (<20%
Women)

Affirmation-Training Intervention

Figure 2. Daily functioning over 12 days after the intervention among students in male-dominated majors
(⬍20% women). Error bars represent ⫹1 standard error. (A) Perceived importance of negative events each day
(adjusted for the perceived importance of positive events). (B) Confidence in ability to handle daily school
stressors. (C) Level and stability (reverse-scored standard deviation) of self-esteem. The two measures were
standardized and then averaged. The y axes in Panels A and C represent approximately 3.50 and 2.50 standard
deviations, respectively. The y axis in Panel B represents the full range of the scale. Sample sizes (including
students in gender-diverse majors, Figure S1): Nmen ⫽ 110 –121; Nwomen ⫽ 81-– 84.

gender-diverse majors, there was no gender difference in either
condition, ts ⱕ 1.40, ps ⬎ .15, and no intervention effect for men
or women, ts ⬍ 1.55, ps ⬎ .10. When tested separately, both
interventions generated all three benefits for women in maledominated majors, ts ⬎ 1.45, ps ⱕ 0.14, 0.59 ⱕ ds ⱕ 1.05. On no
measure did the two interventions differ, ts ⬍ 1. See Figures 3 and
S2 and Tables 2, 3, and S7–S9.

Social Experiences in Engineering
Next, we examined students’ social experience in engineering
through the second semester. In contrast to the prior measures,
here we found divergent effects of the two interventions. In each
analysis, we controlled for the same measure assessed at baseline.
Unique effects of social-belonging intervention: Friendships
with male engineers and implicit normative evaluations of
female engineers. The social-belonging intervention aimed to
facilitate women’s social integration in engineering. To explore
this integration, we first examined the representation of male
engineers among the five closest friends students reported having
on campus in the second semester with the baseline assessment
controlled. The social-belonging intervention increased these
friendships among women in male-dominated majors relative to
the affirmation-training and control conditions combined, B ⫽
0.34, t(137) ⫽ 3.17, p ⫽ .002, d ⫽ 1.10, and relative to each
separately, ts ⬎ 2.60, ps ⱕ .010, 1.09 ⱕ ds ⱕ 1.12. See Figures 4
and S3 and Tables 4 and S10. Notably, the representation of male

engineers in women’s friendship groups in the social-belonging
condition (75%) more closely resembles the percentage of men
among women’s classmates (90%).
Second, we examined implicit normative evaluations of female
engineers. As noted, negative implicit norms predict women’s
intentions to leave the field (Yoshida et al., 2012). In maledominated majors, the social-belonging intervention buffered
women against this risk factor. With the baseline assessment
controlled, social-belonging-condition women exhibited more positive implicit norms about female engineers in the second semester
than affirmation-training and control-condition women combined,
B ⫽ 0.34, t(143) ⫽ 2.39, p ⫽ .018, d ⫽ 1.03, and relative to each
group tested separately, ts ⱖ 1.99, ps ⬍ .050, 1.02 ⱕ ds ⱕ 1.04.
On both measures, no other group showed consistent effects of the
social-belonging intervention. See Figures 4 and S3 and Tables 4
and S10.
Yoshida and colleagues (2012) found that, absent intervention,
implicit norms about female engineers become more negative over
time. To examine whether our results replicated this pattern and
how it varied by condition, we conducted a repeated-measures
analysis of variance involving time (preintervention vs. second
semester) as a within-subject factor and gender, major type, and
condition (social-belonging intervention vs. affirmation-training
intervention and control condition) as between-subjects factors.
The analysis yielded a marginal four-way interaction, F(1, 144) ⫽
3.10, p ⫽ .080. Replicating Yoshida and colleagues, in the control

WALTON, LOGEL, PEACH, SPENCER, AND ZANNA

478
A
7

Evaluation of Current
Experience in Engineering

B

Perceived Prospects of
Future Success in
Engineering

100
90

6

80
70

5
60
50

4

40

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

3

30
20

2

10

1

0
Intervention
Session

Second
Semester

Men

Intervention
Session

Second
Semester

Intervention
Session

Women

Men

Male Dominated Majors (<20% Women)

Control Condition

Second
Semester

Intervention
Session

Second
Semester

Women

Male Dominated Majors (<20% Women)

Social-BelongingRasdgasg
Intervention

Affirmation-Training Intervention

Figure 3. Attitudes toward engineering in the intervention session and in the second semester among students
in male-dominated majors (⬍20% women). Means are adjusted for preintervention reports. The y axes represent
the full range of each scale. Error bars represent ⫹1 standard error. (A) Students’ evaluation of their current
experience in engineering. (B) Students’ perceived prospects of succeeding in engineering. Sample sizes
(including students in gender-diverse majors, see Figure S2): Men: Nimmediate postintervention ⫽ 135,
Nsecond semester ⫽ 88; Women: Nimmediate postintervention ⫽ 92, Nsecond semester ⫽ 65).

and affirmation-training conditions, both men and women exhibited more negative implicit norms about female engineers over
time (i.e., irrespective of major; Mpreintervention ⫽ 0.57;
Msecond semester ⫽ 0.42), F(1, 144) ⫽ 12.88, p ⬍ .001. However, the
social-belonging intervention reversed this normative decline among
women in male-dominated majors (Mpreintervention ⫽ 0.68;
Msecond-semester ⫽ 0.78), t ⬍ 1 (see online supplemental material).2
Unique effects of affirmation-training intervention: Gender
identification and friendships with female nonengineers. In
contrast, the affirmation-training intervention led women to value
their gender identity more, aspects of which they might otherwise
suppress in STEM fields (Pronin et al., 2004). In male-dominated
majors, affirmation-trained women expressed greater gender identification in the second semester than social-belonging- and
control-condition women, B ⫽ 0.98, t(141) ⫽ 2.48, p ⫽ .014, d ⫽
1.06; the effect was also significant relative to each comparison
group tested separately, ts ⬎ 2.00, ps ⬍ .050, 1.04 ⱕ ds ⱕ 1.08.
In male-dominated majors, affirmation-trained women also reported having marginally more female nonengineering friends in
the second semester than social-belonging- and control-condition
women, B ⫽ 0.12, t(136) ⫽ 1.73, p ⫽ .086, d ⫽ 0.71.3 No other
group showed either effect, ts ⬍ 1.45, ps ⬎ .15. See Figures 4 and
S3 and Tables 5 and S11.4

Discussion
The women who gained admission to the selective engineering
programs studied in the present research were among the best
prepared in the world. Those who entered programs with a mod-

erate representation of women (on average women accounting for
about one third of the students) exhibited relatively positive experiences and performed relatively well. Yet the women who entered
male-dominated fields—like computer, electrical, and mechanical
2
Our theory implies that the social-belonging intervention should facilitate women’s friendships with male engineers and improve implicit norms
by reducing their experience of identity-based threat in daily social encounters. We did not assess this directly (e.g., daily perceived sexism),
however, because we did not want to prime sexism repeatedly for ethical
reasons and because we feared that doing so would interfere with intervention effects. However, preintervention and in the second semester, we
asked students how often they had heard sexist jokes about female engineers on campus (two items rated on a scale ranging from 1 ⫽ never to 7 ⫽
frequently; cf. Yoshida et al., 2012). Analysis of change scores showed
that, in male-dominated majors, control- and affirmation-training condition
women reported hearing more sexist jokes over time—Mdiffadj⫽ 0.95);
effect of time: t(142) ⫽ 2.88, p ⫽ .005—while belonging-condition women
showed no increase—Mdiffadj ⫽ ⫺0.04; effect of time: t ⬍ 1), a marginal
condition difference, t(142) ⫽ 1.77, p ⫽ .079, d ⫽ 0.71. See Figure S4 in
the online supplemental materials. This pattern could reflect a change in
women’s social experience (more respectful relationships with men), a
change in social perception (perhaps jokes did not seem threatening enough
to encode as sexist), or both. This is an important distinction; however, in
either case, the results suggest that the belonging intervention uniquely
reduced women’s experience of identity threat.
3
This analysis retains 12 participants with missing preintervention
scores by replacing these scores with the Gender ⫻ Major mean. Not
retaining those participants somewhat strengthens the results. See Table 5.
4
Notably, neither intervention increased the representation of female
engineers in women’s friendship groups; instead, they led to a marginal
reduction in this representation, B ⫽ ⫺0.16, t(136) ⫽ ⫺1.80, p ⫽ .074. For
discussion, see the online supplemental material.

INTERVENTIONS FOR WOMEN’S EXPERIENCE IN ENGINEERING

A

479

Composition of Student Friend Groups

100%
90%

8%
5%

80%
70%

9%

12%

12%

9%
3%

16%

9%

10%

13%

Female
Non22% Engs.
Male

8% Non-

29%

60%

Engs.

22%

21%

34%

Female

27% Engs.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

50%
40%
30%

75%
58%

57%

54%

Male

44%

20%

43% Engs.

10%
0%
Control

Social Affirmation Control
Belonging Training

Male Particiapnts

Social Affirmation
Belonging Training

Female Participants

Male Dominated Majors (<20% Women)

B
1.2
1

Implicit Norms About
Female Engineers
Control Condition
Social-Belonging Intervention
Affirmation-Training Intervention

0.8

C
7
6

Gender
Identification
Control Condition
Social-Belonging Intervention
Affirmation-Training Intervention

5

0.6
4
0.4
3
0.2
2

0

1

-0.2
Men

Women

Male Dominated Majors (<20%
Women)

Men

Women

Male Dominated Majors (<20%
Women)

Figure 4. Friendship groups, implicit norms, and gender identification in the second semester among students in
male-dominated majors (⬍20% women). Means are adjusted for preintervention reports. Error bars represent ⫹1
standard error. (A) Representation in students’ friendship groups of male and female engineers (Engs.) and nonengineers. (B) Implicit normative evaluations of female engineers. Higher values represent more positive implicit norms
about female engineers (i.e., “most people like” ⫽ “female engineers”). The y axis represents approximately 3.50
standard deviations. (C) Self-reported gender identification. The y axis represents the full range of the scale. Sample
sizes (including students in gender-diverse majors; see Figure S3): Nmen ⫽ 81– 87; Nwomen ⫽ 64 – 65.

engineering, which had on average 10% women in their programs—struggled. Compared with men, they reported feeling
more overwhelmed by daily adversities, anticipated less success,
and performed worse in class.

However, these struggles were not fixed. Instead, each of two
45- to 60-min interventions designed to help women navigate
“chilly” STEM settings catalyzed broad improvement in women’s
lives and achievement. Both interventions raised women’s grades

B ⫽ 0.54, t(140) ⫽ 1.47,
p ⫽ .14, d ⫽ 0.60
B ⫽ 10.64, t(140) ⫽ 1.81,
p ⫽ .072, d ⫽ 0.69

B ⫽ 0.61, t(144) ⫽ 1.90,
p ⫽ .060, d ⫽ 0.67

B ⫽ 13.35, t(144) ⫽ 2.61,
p ⫽ .010, d ⫽ 0.87

t⬍1

B ⫽ 0.65, t(214) ⫽ 2.76,
p ⫽ .006, d ⫽ 0.75

B ⫽ 0.58, t(218) ⫽ 2.76,
p ⫽ .006, d ⫽ 0.67
t⬍1

B ⫽ ⫺3.32, t(178) ⫽ ⫺2.25,
p ⫽ .026, d ⫽ ⫺0.93
B ⫽ 0.93, t(193) ⫽ 1.91,
p ⫽ .057, d ⫽ 0.93
B ⫽ 0.68, t(192) ⫽ 1.83,
p ⫽ .069, d ⫽ 0.87

B ⫽ 11.66, t(178) ⫽ 2.41,
p ⫽ .017, d ⫽ 1.07

B ⫽ ⫺3.55, t(182) ⫽ ⫺2.77,
p ⫽ .006, d ⫽ ⫺0.99
B ⫽ 0.93, t(197) ⫽ 2.21,
p ⫽ .028, d ⫽ 0.94
B ⫽ 0.71, t(196) ⫽ 2.16,
p ⫽ .032, d ⫽ 0.90

B ⫽ 11.40, t(182) ⫽ 2.69,
p ⫽ .008, d ⫽ 1.04

Social belonging
(1) vs. control (0)

B ⫽ 16.13, t(140) ⫽ 2.73,
p ⫽ .007, d ⫽ 1.05

B ⫽ 0.69, t(140) ⫽ 1.90,
p ⫽ .060, d ⫽ 0.77

t⬍1

B ⫽ 0.51, t(214) ⫽ 2.18,
p ⫽ .031, d ⫽ 0.59

B ⫽ ⫺3.73, t(178) ⫽ ⫺2.67,
p ⫽ .008, d ⫽ ⫺0.94
B ⫽ 0.94, t(193) ⫽ 2.01,
p ⫽ .046, d ⫽ 0.94
B ⫽ 0.73, t(192) ⫽ 2.02,
p ⫽ .045, d ⫽ 0.92

B ⫽ 11.13, t(178) ⫽ 2.30,
p ⫽ .023, d ⫽ 1.02

Affirmation training
(1) vs. control (0)

B ⫽ ⫺13.36,
t(144) ⫽ ⫺2.13, p ⫽ .035

B ⫽ ⫺0.49, t(144) ⫽ ⫺1.24,
p ⫽ .22

t⬍1
t⬍1

B ⫽ ⫺3.92, t(218) ⫽ ⫺1.14,
p ⫽ .26

B ⫽ ⫺0.60, t(218) ⫽ ⫺2.48,
p ⫽ .014

B ⫽ 3.34, t(182) ⫽ 2.21,
p ⫽ .028
B ⫽ ⫺0.89, t(197) ⫽ ⫺1.80,
p ⫽ .073
B ⫽ ⫺0.74, t(196) ⫽ ⫺1.94,
p ⫽ .054

B ⫽ ⫺8.09, t(182) ⫽ ⫺1.59,
p ⫽ .11

Gender ⫻ Condition in
male-dominated majors

t⬍1

t⬍1

t⬍1

t⬍1

t⬍1

t⬍1

Social belonging
(1) vs. affirmation
training (0)

B ⫽ 19.62, t(144) ⫽ 2.43,
p ⫽ .016

B ⫽ 0.83, t(144) ⫽ 1.65,
p ⫽ .10

t⬍1

B ⫽ 0.79, t(218) ⫽ 2.54,
p ⫽ .012

B ⫽ ⫺4.33, t(182) ⫽ ⫺2.32,
p ⫽ .022
B ⫽ 1.63, t(197) ⫽ 2.63,
p ⫽ .009
B ⫽ 1.55, t(196) ⫽ 3.21,
p ⫽ .002

B ⫽ 15.13, t(182) ⫽ 2.30,
p ⫽ .022

Gender ⫻ Major ⫻
Condition

Interactions (interventions combined)

Note. Contrasts were derived from multiple regression analyses. For intervention effects among men in male-dominated majors, see Table S7. For intervention effects among students in gender-diverse
majors, see Table S8. GPA ⫽ grade point average.

Daily diaries
Perceived importance of
daily negative events
Confidence handling
daily school stress
Day-to-day level and
stability of selfesteem
Intervention session:
Evaluation of current
experience in
engineering
Perceived prospects of
succeeding in
engineering
Second semester
Evaluation of current
experience in
engineering
Perceived prospects of
succeeding in
engineering

First-year engineering GPA

Variable

Combined intervention
(1) vs. control (0)

Contrasts among women in male-dominated majors

Table 2
Intervention Effects on Primary Outcomes Among Women in Male-Dominated Majors

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

480
WALTON, LOGEL, PEACH, SPENCER, AND ZANNA

INTERVENTIONS FOR WOMEN’S EXPERIENCE IN ENGINEERING

481

Table 3
Gender Differences on Primary Outcomes by Condition Within Male-Dominated Majors
Male-dominated majors

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Variable
First-year engineering grade point average
Daily diaries:
Perceived importance of daily negative events
Confidence handling daily school stress
Day-to-day level and stability of self-esteem
Intervention session:
Evaluation of current experience in engineering
Perceived prospects of succeeding in engineering
Second session:
Evaluation of current experience in engineering
Perceived prospects of succeeding in engineering

Control conditions

Intervention conditions

B ⫽ ⫺8.39, t(182) ⫽ ⫺1.96, p ⫽ .051, d ⫽ ⫺0.77

t⬍1

B ⫽ 3.06, t(182) ⫽ 2.34, p ⫽ .020, d ⫽ 0.86
B ⫽ ⫺1.22, t(197) ⫽ ⫺2.89, p ⫽ .004, d ⫽ ⫺1.22
B ⫽ ⫺1.03, t(196) ⫽ ⫺3.12, p ⫽ .002, d ⫽ ⫺1.30

t⬍1
B ⫽ ⫺0.33, t(197) ⫽ ⫺1.29, p ⫽ .20
B ⫽ ⫺0.28, t(196) ⫽ ⫺1.42, p ⫽ .16

B ⫽ ⫺0.55, t(218) ⫽ ⫺2.66, p ⫽ .008, d ⫽ ⫺0.64
t⬍1

t⬍1
B ⫽ 1.94, t(218) ⫽ 1.07, p ⫽ .29

B ⫽ ⫺0.56, t(143) ⫽ ⫺1.69, p ⫽ .093, d ⫽ ⫺0.62
B ⫽ ⫺15.67, t(144) ⫽ ⫺2.96, p ⫽ .004, d ⫽ ⫺1.02

t⬍1
t⬍1

Note. Men coded as 0; women coded as 1. For analyses, intervention conditions were combined. Contrasts derived from multiple regression analyses. For
gender differences within gender-diverse majors, see Table S9.

in male-dominated majors over the full academic year, eliminating
gender differences. Moreover, both helped women view daily
adversities and stressors as challenges they could manage,
strengthening their resilience. They also led women to report more
positive experiences in engineering immediately and, by the second semester, greater confidence they could succeed in the field.
The results highlight two high-level implications. First, they
suggest the power of social marginalization to cause gender inequality in STEM settings. This inequality arises in settings in
which women are grossly underrepresented (see also Inzlicht &
Ben-Zeev, 2000; Murphy et al., 2007; Stout et al., 2011; Yoshida
et al., 2012); it is mitigated by interventions that help women cope
with marginalization. At least among selective samples, this marginalization may be a primary cause of gender inequality in STEM
fields (Walton & Spencer, 2009; Walton, Spencer, & Erman,
2013). Second, the results suggest the importance of students’
reactions to social marginalization in determining its impact on
their achievement over time. In the present context, women’s
underperformance was not due simply to a lack of opportunities or
to high levels of sexism; the interventions addressed neither factor.
Rather, when students enter settings in which their group is underrepresented and negatively stereotyped, they contend with psychological challenges that other students do not face. They must
make sense of daily adversities, which could seem to signal a
global lack of belonging, and they contend with high levels of
stress and threat. By helping students meet these challenges, the
two interventions helped women succeed in male-dominated
STEM environments over time.
In addition, the results carry implications for brief psychological
interventions. First, in replicating and extending the basic effects
of past social-belonging and value-affirmation interventions on
achievement among women in STEM (Cohen et al., 2009; Harackiewicz et al., 2014; Miyake et al., 2010; Walton & Cohen,
2011), the results increase confidence in this general approach and
invite us to consider the broader array of students who may benefit
from it in specific school contexts, for instance, where their group
is underrepresented or socially marginalized (e.g., men in some
settings).
Second, even as the two interventions caused similar improvements in women’s outcomes, they encouraged different responses

to social marginalization and set students on divergent paths. By
providing a more positive narrative for interpreting daily adversities, the social-belonging intervention helped women integrate in
engineering. It led women to feel, on an automatic level, that
women were more valued in engineering, and it facilitated friendships with male engineers. The latter finding is especially striking:
It suggests that a brief intervention aimed narrowly at the meaning
of adversities can change students’ social circumstance over time.
By the second semester, social-belonging-condition women were
embedded in social networks with male engineers— one potential
route to success for women in STEM (cf. Shook & Clay, 2012;
Walton & Carr, 2012). By contrast, even as affirmation training
produced the same improvement in women’s grades, it did not
promote this social integration. It had no effect on women’s
implicit norms or friendships with male engineers. Instead, in
encouraging women to express broader aspects of their selfidentity in engineering, affirmation training led women to place
greater value on their gender identity, which they might otherwise
selectively suppress in STEM, and to form marginally more friendships with women outside engineering. An important question for
future research concerns how these divergent strategies affect
women’s well-being and retention in STEM over a longer period
of time, for instance, as they enter the profession. In addition, this
analysis raises questions about how these interventions would
interact. Although it is natural to assume that two interventions,
both of which improve women’s experience in STEM, would be
more effective together, it is possible that, insofar as they set in
motion divergent strategies for navigating a chilly environment, a
combination may produce less optimal results.
Third, a significant ongoing question in the field involves how
and when brief psychological interventions can cause lasting gains
in achievement (Cohen et al., 2009; Garcia & Cohen, 2012; Sherman et al., 2013; Walton & Cohen, 2011; Yeager & Walton, 2011).
In demonstrating change in students’ friendship groups, the present
results suggest that, at least in some cases, an interplay between
psychological processes and the development of positive social
relationships may contribute to lasting benefits. Perhaps less
threatening construals of daily social interactions inspired by the
social-belonging intervention “locked in” to improve women’s
downstream outcomes by facilitating positive cross-sex friend-

B ⫽ 0.34, t(139) ⫽ 1.99,
p ⫽ .049, d ⫽ 1.02

B ⫽ 0.35, t(139) ⫽ 2.16,
p ⫽ .033, d ⫽ 1.04

B ⫽ 0.34, t(143) ⫽ 2.39,
p ⫽ .018, d ⫽ 1.03

t⬍1

t⬍1

Contrasts derived from multiple regression analyses. For contrasts for the other three Gender ⫻ Major groups, see Table S10.

B ⫽ 0.34, t(133) ⫽ 2.62,
p ⫽ .010, d ⫽ 1.09

B ⫽ 0.35, t(133) ⫽ 2.80,
p ⫽ .006, d ⫽ 1.12

B ⫽ 0.34, t(137) ⫽ 3.17,
p ⫽ .002, d ⫽ 1.10

Control (0)

Affirmation training (0)

Affirmation-training
intervention (1) vs.
control (0)

B ⫽ ⫺0.35, t(143) ⫽ ⫺2.04,
p ⫽ .043

B ⫽ ⫺0.37, t(137) ⫽ ⫺2.77,
p ⫽ .006

Gender ⫻ Condition in
male-dominated majors

Note.

B ⫽ 0.12, t(136) ⫽ 1.73,
p ⫽ .086, d ⫽ 0.71
B ⫽ 0.20, t(124) ⫽ 2.62,
p ⫽ .010, d ⫽ 1.19
B ⫽ 0.98, t(141) ⫽ 2.48,
p ⫽ .014, d ⫽ 1.06

B ⫽ 0.13, t(132) ⫽ 1.66,
p ⫽ .099, d ⫽ 0.79
B ⫽ 0.20, t(120) ⫽ 2.38,
p ⫽ .019, d ⫽ 1.21
B ⫽ 1.00, t(137) ⫽ 2.20,
p ⫽ .029, d ⫽ 1.08

Social belonging (0)

Control (0)

B ⫽ 0.10, t(132) ⫽ 1.28,
p ⫽ .20, d ⫽ 0.63
B ⫽ 0.19, t(120) ⫽ 2.16,
p ⫽ .033, d ⫽ 1.17
B ⫽ 0.96, t(137) ⫽ 2.05,
p ⫽ .042, d ⫽ 1.04

Affirmation-training intervention (1) vs.

t⬍1

t⬍1

t⬍1

Social-belonging
intervention (1) vs.
control (0)

Contrasts derived from multiple regression analyses. For contrasts for the other three Gender ⫻ Major groups, see Table S11.

Percentage of female nonengineers in
students’ friendship group
Retaining participants with missing
preintervention data
Dropping participants with missing
preintervention data
Gender identification

Second semester

Social belonging and
control (0)

Contrasts among women in male-dominated majors

B ⫽ ⫺0.09, t(136) ⫽ ⫺1.14,
p ⫽ .26
B ⫽ 0.20, t(124) ⫽ ⫺2.22,
p ⫽ .028
B ⫽ ⫺1.03, t(141) ⫽ ⫺2.12,
p ⫽ .035

Gender ⫻ Condition in maledominated majors

B ⫽ 0.18, t(124) ⫽ 1.48,
p ⫽ .14
B ⫽ 1.70, t(141) ⫽ 2.59,
p ⫽ .011

B ⫽ 0.05, t ⬍ 1

Gender ⫻ Major ⫻
Condition

Interactions (social-belonging intervention and control
condition combined)

B ⫽ 0.52, t(143) ⫽ 2.25,
p ⫽ .026

B ⫽ 0.26, t(137) ⫽ 1.46,
p ⫽ .15

Gender ⫻ Major ⫻
Condition

Interactions (affirmation-training intervention and control
condition combined)

Table 5
Effects of Affirmation-Training Intervention on Outcomes Predicted to Yield Effects Only for This Intervention Among Women in Male-Dominated Majors

Note.

Percentage of male engineers
in students’ friendship
groups
Implicit normative
evaluations of female
engineers

Second semester

Affirmation training and
control (0)

Social-belonging intervention (1) vs.

Contrasts among women in male-dominated majors

Table 4
Effects of the Social-Belonging Intervention on Outcomes Predicted to Yield Effects Only for This Intervention Among Women in Male-Dominated Majors

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

482
WALTON, LOGEL, PEACH, SPENCER, AND ZANNA

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

INTERVENTIONS FOR WOMEN’S EXPERIENCE IN ENGINEERING

ships. The present study is limited in its ability to test specific
meditational processes. However, it points to the kinds of psychological and social-relational measures that future studies could
track with larger samples, including perceptions of threat in daily
events and peer and mentor relationships, for instance using sociometric measures. In so doing, it will be exciting to assess both
how changes in the construal of daily events affect developing
relationships and potential recursive processes, such as how a
change in friendship groups or the acquisition of a mentor feeds
back to promote resilience in the face of adversity.
Fourth, an important contribution of the present research was to
demonstrate the moderating role of the school context. Only
women in male-dominated majors had worse outcomes than men,
and only they benefited from the interventions (see also Inzlicht &
Ben-Zeev, 2000; Murphy et al., 2007; Stout et al., 2011; Yoshida
et al., 2012). Although psychological interventions can be brief,
their effects depend on the context (Walton, 2014). If the process
that an intervention targets does not serve as a barrier to achievement for a given group or in a given setting, the intervention will
not affect behavior (Hanselman et al., 2014). In addition, in contexts in which other conditions for learning are not met—such as
when instruction or students’ academic preparation is poor—
interventions that open students up to learning opportunities may
be insufficient. Contexts may also differ in the extent to which they
propagate the benefits of psychological interventions or undermine
their effects. For instance, if the effectiveness of the socialbelonging intervention depends on the potential for students to
become more integrated in a school setting, long-term effects may
depend on the willingness of peers and instructors to develop
positive working relationships with target students. Further exploring these questions will shed light on pressing theoretical questions
and applied issues, including where psychological interventions
will be most effective, where they may be unnecessary, and where
they may need to be paired with other reforms.
The present study also has its limitations; addressing these
points to exciting directions for future research. One is that participating students chose to take part in the study; they were thus
not representative, either of the university they attended or of
STEM students in general. What benefits would we see in broader
and more representative samples? A second limitation involves the
small sample. Can we develop effective ways to deliver socialpsychological interventions to larger samples, for instance, in
collaboration with STEM educators (Aguilar et al., 2014; Yeager
& Walton, 2011) or online (Paunesku et al., 2014; Yeager et al.,
2014)? Larger samples would further test intervention effects and
address important questions of moderation and mediation. It would
also test whether these interventions can be a practical solution for
education reform—that is, when delivered in ways that would be
practical en masse.
At a time when it is essential to promote women’s achievement
in STEM, the results highlight the importance of addressing feelings of social marginalization. Yet in a very real sense, the interventions tested here are “second-choice” interventions. They help
women navigate a difficult environment— one in which their
group is grossly underrepresented and subject to stigma and negative stereotypes. Although these interventions were successful, it
would be far better, if possible, to improve STEM settings themselves—to reduce sexism (Logel et al., 2009), to remove cues that
convey a strongly masculine representation of STEM fields

483

(Cheryan et al., 2009; Murphy et al., 2007; Ramsey, Betz, &
Sekaquaptewa, 2013; see also Purdie-Vaughns, Steele, Davies,
Ditlmann, & Crosby, 2008), and to increase the representation of
women. Consistent with the concept of critical mass (Etzkowitz,
Kemelgor, Neuschatz, Uzzi, & Alonzo, 1994), a community of
women may reduce social marginalization and the need for specific intervention. Efforts to increase the representation of women
in STEM thus go hand-in-hand with efforts to help women function well in male-dominated STEM settings as means to promote
gender equality.

References
Aguilar, L., Walton, G., & Wieman, C. (2014). Psychological insights for
improved physics teaching. Physics Today, 67, 43– 49. doi:10.1063/PT
.3.2383
Appel, M., & Kronberger, N. (2012). Stereotypes and the achievement gap:
Stereotype threat prior to test taking. Educational Psychology Review,
24, 609 – 635. doi:10.1007/s10648-012-9200-4
Arkes, H. R., & Tetlock, P. E. (2004). Attributions of implicit prejudice, or
“Would Jesse Jackson ‘fail’ the Implicit Association Test?” Psychological Inquiry, 15, 257–278. doi:10.1207/s15327965pli1504_01
Bowen, N. K., Wegmann, K. M., & Webber, K. C. (2013). Enhancing a
brief writing intervention to combat stereotype threat among middleschool students. Journal of Educational Psychology, 105, 427– 435.
doi:10.1037/a0031177
Carrigan, C., Quinn, K., & Riskin, E. A. (2011). The gendered division of
labor among STEM faculty and the effects of critical mass. Journal of
Diversity in Higher Education, 4, 131–146. doi:10.1037/a0021831
Cheryan, S., Plaut, V. C., Davies, P., & Steele, C. M. (2009). Ambient
belonging: How stereotypical environments impact gender participation
in computer science. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 97,
1045–1060. doi:10.1037/a0016239
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Apfel, N., & Brzustoski, P.
(2009, April 17). Recursive processes in self-affirmation: Intervening to
close the minority achievement gap. Science, 324, 400 – 403. doi:
10.1126/science.1170769
Cohen, G. L., & Garcia, J. (2005). “I am us”: Negative stereotypes as
collective threats. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89,
566 –582. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.89.4.566
Cohen, G. L., & Sherman, D. K. (2014). The psychology of change:
Self-affirmation and social psychological intervention. Annual Review of
Psychology, 65, 333–371. doi:10.1146/annurev-psych-010213-115137
Conway, M., & Ross, M. (1984). Getting what you want by revising what
you had. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 47, 738 –748.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.47.4.738
Dal Cin, S., MacDonald, T. K., Fong, G. T., Zanna, M. P., & EltonMarshall, T. E. (2006). Remembering the message: The use of a reminder cue to increase condom use following a safer sex intervention.
Health Psychology, 25, 438 – 443. doi:10.1037/0278-6133.25.3.438
Etzkowitz, H., Kemelgor, C., Neuschatz, M., Uzzi, B., & Alonzo, J. (1994,
October 7). The paradox of critical mass for women in science. Science,
266, 51–54. doi:10.1126/science.7939644
Flam, F. (1991, June 21). Still a “chilly climate” for women? Science, 252,
1604 –1606. doi:10.1126/science.252.5013.1604
Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (2012). A social psychological approach to
educational intervention. In E. Shafir (Ed.), Behavioral foundations of
policy (pp. 329 –350). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Good, C., Aronson, J., & Inzlicht, M. (2003). Improving adolescents’
standardized test performance: An intervention to reduce the effects of
stereotype threat. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 24,
645– 662. doi:10.1016/j.appdev.2003.09.002
Good, C., Rattan, A., & Dweck, C. S. (2012). Why do women opt out?
Sense of belonging and women’s representation in mathematics. Journal

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

484

WALTON, LOGEL, PEACH, SPENCER, AND ZANNA

of Personality and Social Psychology, 102, 700 –717. doi:10.1037/
a0026659
Greenwald, A. G., Poehlman, T. A., Uhlmann, E. L., & Banaji, M. R.
(2009). Understanding and using the Implicit Association Test: III.
Meta-analysis of predictive validity. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 97, 17– 41. doi:10.1037/a0015575
Hanselman, P., Bruch, S. K., Gamoran, A., & Borman, G. D. (2014).
Threat in context: School moderation of the impact of social identity
threat on racial/ethnic achievement gaps. Sociology of Education, 87,
106 –124. doi:10.1177/0038040714525970
Harackiewicz, J. M., Canning, E. A., Tibbetts, Y., Giffen, C. J., Blair, S. S.,
Rouse, D. I., & Hyde, J. S. (2014). Closing the social class achievement
gap for first-generation students in undergraduate biology. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 106, 375–389. doi:10.1037/a0034679
Harackiewicz, J. M., Rozek, C. S., Hulleman, C. S., & Hyde, J. S. (2012).
Helping parents to motivate adolescents in mathematics and science: An
experimental test of a utility-value intervention. Psychological Science,
23, 899 –906. doi:10.1177/0956797611435530
Hoshino-Browne, E., Zanna, A. S., Spencer, S. J., Zanna, M. P., Kitayama,
S., & Lackenbauer, S. (2005). On the cultural guises of cognitive
dissonance: The case of Easterners and Westerners. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89, 294 –310. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.89.3
.294
Hulleman, C. S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2009, December 4). Promoting
interest and performance in high school science classes. Science, 326,
1410 –1412. doi:10.1126/science.1177067
Hyde, J. S., & Mertz, J. E. (2009). Gender, culture, and mathematics
performance. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 106, 8801– 8807. doi:10.1073/pnas
.0901265106
Inzlicht, M., & Ben-Zeev, T. (2000). A threatening intellectual environment: Why females are susceptible to experiencing problem-solving
deficits in the presence of males. Psychological Science, 11, 365–371.
doi:10.1111/1467-9280.00272
Jamieson, J. P., Mendes, W. B., Blackstock, E., & Schmader, T. (2010).
Turning the knots in your stomach into bows: Reappraising arousal
improves performance on the GRE. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 46, 208 –212. doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2009.08.015
Johns, M., Inzlicht, M., & Schmader, T. (2008). Stereotype threat and
executive resource depletion: Examining the influence of emotion regulation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 137, 691–705.
doi:10.1037/a0013834
Kernis, M. H. (2005). Measuring self-esteem in context: The importance of
stability of self-esteem in psychological functioning. Journal of Personality, 73, 1569 –1605. doi:10.1111/j.1467-6494.2005.00359.x
Logel, C., Walton, G. M., Spencer, S. J., Iserman, E. C., von Hippel, W.,
& Bell, A. (2009). Interacting with sexist men triggers social identity
threat among female engineers. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96, 1089 –1103. doi:10.1037/a0015703
Lott, J. L., Gardner, S. K., & Powers, D. A. (2009 –2010). Doctoral student
attrition in the STEM fields: An exploratory event history analysis.
Journal of College Student Retention: Research, Theory, & Practice, 11,
247–266.
MacKinnon, D. P., Lockwood, C. M., Hoffman, J. M., West, S. G., &
Sheets, V. (2002). A comparison of methods to test mediation and other
intervening variable effects. Psychological Methods, 7, 83–104.
Markus, H., & Nurius, P. (1987). Possible selves: The interface between
motivation and the self-concept. In K. Yardley & T. Honess (Eds.), Self
and identity: Psychosocial perspectives (pp. 157–172). New York, NY:
Wiley.
McFarland, C., & Ross, M. (1982). Impact of causal attributions on
affective reactions to success and failure. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 43, 937–946. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.43.5.937

Miyake, A., Smith-Kost, L. E., Finkelstein, N. D., Pollock, S. J., Cohen,
G. L., & Ito, T. A. (2010, November 26). Reducing the gender achievement gap in college science: A classroom study of values affirmation.
Science, 330, 1234 –1237. doi:10.1126/science.1195996
Moss-Racusin, C. A., Dovidio, J. F., Brescoll, V. L., Graham, M., &
Handelsman, J. (2012). Science faculty’s subtle gender biases favor male
students. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, 109, 16474 –16479.
Murphy, M. C., Steele, C. M., & Gross, J. J. (2007). Signaling threat: How
situational cues affect women in math, science, and engineering settings.
Psychological Science, 18, 879 – 885. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007
.01995.x
National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, and
Institute of Medicine of the National Academies. (2007). Rising above
the gathering storm: Energizing and employing America for a brighter
economic future. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
National Science Foundation, National Center for Science and Engineering
Statistics. (2013). Women, minorities, and persons with disabilities in
science and engineering: 2013 [Special Report NSF 13–304]. Arlington,
VA: Author. Retrieved from http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/wmpd/
Nosek, B. A., Banaji, M. R., & Greenwald, A. G. (2002). Math ⫽ male,
me ⫽ female, therefore math ⫽ me. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 83, 44 –59. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.83.1.44
Nosek, B. A., & Smyth, F. L. (2011). Implicit social cognitions predict sex
differences in math engagement and achievement. American Educational Research Journal, 48, 1125–1156. doi:10.3102/
0002831211410683
Oyserman, D., Brickman, D., Bybee, D., & Celious, A. (2006). Fitting in
matters: Markers of in-group belonging and academic outcomes. Psychological Science, 17, 854 – 861. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2006
.01794.x
Paunesku, D., Walton, G. M., Romero, C. L., Smith, E. N., Yeager, D. S.,
& Dweck, C. S. (2014). Mindset interventions are a scalable treatment
for academic underperformance. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Peach, J. M., Yoshida, E., Spencer, S. J., Zanna, M. P., & Steele, J. R.
(2011). Recognizing discrimination explicitly while denying it implicitly: Implicit social identity protection. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 47, 283–292. doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2010.09.007
Pronin, E., Steele, C. M., & Ross, L. (2004). Identity bifurcation in
response to stereotype threat: Women and mathematics. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 40, 152–168. doi:10.1016/S00221031(03)00088-X
Purdie-Vaughns, V., Steele, C. M., Davies, P. G., Ditlmann, R., & Crosby,
J. R. (2008). Social identity contingencies: How diversity cues signal
threat or safety for African Americans in mainstream institutions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 94, 615– 630. doi:10.1037/
0022-3514.94.4.615
Ramsey, L. R., Betz, D. E., & Sekaquaptewa, D. (2013). The effects of an
academic environment intervention on science identification among
women in STEM. Social Psychology of Education, 16, 377–397. doi:
10.1007/s11218-013-9218-6
Shapiro, C. A., & Sax, L. J. (2011). Major selection and persistence for
women in STEM [Special issue]. New Directions for Institutional Research, 2011, 5–18. doi:10.1002/ir.404
Sherman, D. K., & Cohen, G. L. (2006). The psychology of self-defense:
Self-affirmation theory. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental
social psychology (Vol. 38, pp. 183–242). San Diego, CA: Academic
Press.
Sherman, D. K., & Hartson, K. A. (2011). Reconciling self-defense with
self-criticism: Self-affirmation theory. In M. D. Alicke & C. Sedikides
(Eds.), Handbook of self-enhancement and self-protection (pp. 128 –
151). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Sherman, D. K., Hartson, K. A., Binning, K. R., Purdie-Vaughns, V.,
Garcia, J., Taborsky-Barba, S., . . . Cohen, G. L. (2013). Deflecting the

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

INTERVENTIONS FOR WOMEN’S EXPERIENCE IN ENGINEERING
trajectory and changing the narrative: How self-affirmation affects academic performance and motivation under identity threat. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 104, 591– 618. doi:10.1037/
a0031495
Shook, N., & Clay, R. (2012). Interracial roommate relationships: A
mechanism for promoting a sense of belonging at university and academic performance. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48,
1168 –1172. doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2012.05.005
Smeding, A. (2012). Women in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM): An investigation of their implicit gender stereotypes and stereotypes’ connectedness to math performance. Sex Roles,
67, 617– 629. doi:10.1007/s11199-012-0209-4
Smeding, A., Dumas, F., Loose, F., & Régner, I. (2013). Order of administration of math and verbal tests: An ecological intervention to reduce
stereotype threat on girls’ math performance. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 105, 850 – 860. doi:10.1037/a0032094
Steele, C. M., Spencer, S. J., & Aronson, J. (2002). Contending with group
image: The psychology of stereotype and social identity threat. In M. P.
Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 34, pp.
379 – 440). San Diego, CA: Elsevier Science.
Stinson, D. A., Logel, C., Zanna, M. P., Holmes, J. G., Cameron, J. J.,
Wood, J. V., & Spencer, S. J. (2008). The cost of lower self-esteem:
Testing a self- and social-bonds model of health. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 94, 412– 428. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.94.3.412
Stout, J. G., Dasgupta, N., Hunsinger, M., & McManus, M. A. (2011).
STEMing the tide: Using ingroup experts to inoculate women’s selfconcept in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM).
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 100, 255–270. doi:
10.1037/a0021385
The College Board. (2013). 2013 college-bound seniors: Total group
profile report. Retrieved from http://media.collegeboard.com/digital
Services/pdf/research/2013/TotalGroup-2013.pdf.
Thoman, D. B., Smith, J. L., Brown, E. R., Chase, J., & Lee, J. Y. K.
(2013). Beyond performance: A motivational experiences model of
stereotype threat. Educational Psychology Review, 25, 211–243. doi:
10.1007/s10648-013-9219-1
Times Higher Education. (2013). World university rankings, 2013–2014.
Retrieved from http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/world-univers
ity-rankings/2013-14/subject-ranking/subject/engineering-and-IT/order/
rank%7Casc.
Walton, G. M. (2014). The new science of wise psychological interventions. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 23, 73– 82. doi:
10.1177/0963721413512856

485

Walton, G. M., & Carr, P. B. (2012). Social belonging and the motivation
and intellectual achievement of negatively stereotyped students. In M.
Inzlicht & T. Schmader (Eds.), Stereotype threat: Theory, processes, and
application (pp. 89 –106). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2007). A question of belonging: Race,
social fit, and achievement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 82–96. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.92.1.82
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011, March 18). A brief social-belonging
intervention improves academic and health outcomes of minority students. Science, 331, 1447–1451. doi:10.1126/science.1198364
Walton, G. M., Paunesku, D., & Dweck, C. S. (2012). Expandable selves.
In M. R. Leary & J. P. Tangney (Eds.), Handbook of self and identity
(pp. 141–154). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Walton, G. M., & Spencer, S. J. (2009). Latent ability: Grades and test
scores systematically underestimate the intellectual ability of negatively
stereotyped students. Psychological Science, 20, 1132–1139. doi:
10.1111/j.1467-9280.2009.02417.x
Walton, G. M., Spencer, S. J., & Erman, S. (2013). Affirmative meritocracy. Social Issues and Policy Review, 7, 1–35. doi:10.1111/j.1751-2409
.2012.01041.x
Wilson, T. D., Damiani, M., & Shelton, N. (2002). Improving the academic
performance of college students with brief attributional interventions. In
J. Aronson (Ed.), Improving academic achievement: Impact of psychological factors on education (pp. 89 –108). Oxford, England: Academic
Press. doi:10.1016/B978-012064455-1/50008-7
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological interventions
in education: They’re not magic. Review of Educational Research, 81,
267–301. doi:10.3102/0034654311405999
Yeager, D. S., Walton, G. M., Brady, S. T., Akcinar, E. N., Paunesku, D.,
Keane, L., . . . Dweck, C. S. (2014). Brief pre-matriculation messages
can reduce postsecondary inequality at institutional scale. Manuscript
submitted for publication.
Yoshida, E., Peach, J. M., Zanna, M. P., & Spencer, S. J. (2012). Not all
automatic associations are created equal: How implicit normative evaluations are distinct from attitudes and uniquely predict meaningful
behavior. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48, 694 –706.
doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2011.09.013

Received October 24, 2013
Revision received May 19, 2014
Accepted May 21, 2014 䡲

