Wise Interventions

1

Running Head: Wise Interventions

Wise Interventions:
Psychological Remedies for Social and Personal Problems

Gregory M. Walton

Timothy D. Wilson

Stanford University

University of Virginia

Manuscript Under Review. Please Do Not Distribute.

Author note: We are grateful for helpful comments and constructive feedback on earlier versions
of this manuscript from Eddie Brummelman, Ben Castleman, Frances Chen, Angela Duckworth,
Liz Dunn, Carol Dweck, Mike Frank, Christine Logel, Mary Murphy, Dave Paunesku, David
Kirp, Lee Ross, Steve Spencer, Barbara Watkins, Seymour Weingarten, David Yeager, Jamil
Zaki, and members of the Dweck/Walton lab.

!

Wise Interventions

2

Abstract
Long-standing social problems, such as poor school achievement, personal and intergroup
conflicts, bad health, and unhappiness, can seem like permanent features of the social landscape.
We describe a new approach to such problems. Rooted in basic research and theory in social
psychology, wise interventions help people accomplish their goals and flourish by addressing
how they make sense of themselves, other people, and social situations. We provide a
comprehensive theoretical review and organization of wise interventions. This review
emphasizes the importance of meaning-making in human behavior, how meaning-making is
guided by three basic motivations, and how deleterious meanings can be changed with carefully
designed interventions to cause lasting and consequential improvement for large numbers of
people. We also emphasize how meanings arise within social contexts and thus how
interventions cannot be understood or effectively implemented in isolation, how this approach
complements and extends traditional approaches to social reform, which emphasize not meaningmaking but objective change to situations or to the habits and abilities of individuals, and
highlight high-leverage directions for future research.

Keywords: intervention, subjective construal, mindset, education

!

Wise Interventions

Wise Interventions: Psychological Remedies for Social and Personal Problems
I. Introduction
Consider the following everyday problems:
•

A couple has a fight. How can they manage this conflict? Will it help to try to control
their emotions and re-explain their views to one another? Is it best to simply not talk
about the issue any more? Or would a specific kind of dialogue be fruitful?

•

A teacher finds that her students respond poorly to critical feedback. Even though she
wants to help her students improve, they seem discouraged. How can she give feedback
in a way that motivates students?

•

A social worker finds that a new mother in an at-risk family is increasingly angered by
her difficulty getting her baby to sleep at night. How can he help her cope, and prevent
abuse?

•

A college administrator finds that first-generation and racial-ethnic minority students
drop out at high rates, even when they enter college with strong academic credentials.
How can she help these students succeed?
Problems like these can have substantial personal, societal, and economic costs:

marriages fail; children do not learn; babies are harmed; and students drop out. How can we
address them? And what, if anything, do they have in common? At root, we suggest, all
social problems are, in part, psychological problems. To solve them, one must have a viable
theory of human behavior that can be translated into effective ways of helping people
accomplish their goals and flourish (Lewin, 1951). Although many such theories have been
offered, we focus on an approach emanating from social psychology. This approach, which

!

3

Wise Interventions

4

we call wise interventions, involves a set of precise, theory- and research-based techniques
that address specific psychological processes to help people flourish in diverse settings of
life. Wise interventions emphasize subjective meaning-making—how people make sense of
themselves and social situations—and, in doing so, can effectively change behavior in ways
that accrue over time. (Walton, 2014; Walton & Dweck, 2008; Wilson, 2011; see also
Goffman, 1963; Steele, 1997).
Wise interventions represent the application of modern psychological research to classic
interests in the bases of social problems (Asch, 1952; Clark & Clark, 1947; Lewin, 1947).
Indeed, in recent years, an explosion of wise interventions has addressed myriad social and
personal problems. Many of these interventions are striking in their impact. Consider the
problems mentioned above. One intervention comprised three 7-minute exercises designed to
encourage couples to reflect on marital conflicts from the perspective of a neutral third party who
wants the best for all (Finkel, Slotter, Luchies, Walton, & Gross, 2013). This 21-minute exercise
prevented an otherwise typical decline in couples’ marital satisfaction over a year. A second
involved a paper-clipped note appended to teachers’ critical feedback on middle-school students’
essays. The note conveyed that the teacher gave the feedback in an effort to help the student
achieve a higher standard, which the teacher believed the student could reach. This raised the
percentage of African American students who chose to revise their essay from 27% to 64%, and
sustained minority students’ trust in school over the rest of the school year (Yeager, PurdieVaughns et al., 2014). A third involved training paraprofessionals to ask at-risk new mothers a
series of simple questions about struggles in parenting on regular home visits over the baby’s
first year. These questions encouraged mothers to see struggles as normal and solvable problems,
not as meaning they were “a bad mom” or their child was “a bad baby.” This reduced the rate of

!

Wise Interventions

5

abuse over the child’s first year from 23% to 4% (Bugental et al., 2002), reduced later aggression
and stress markers in children, and improved children’s cognitive functioning at least through the
age of three (Bugental, Schwartz, & Lynch, 2010). A fourth intervention used stories from
college students to convey that it is normal to worry at first about whether you belong in college
and these concerns pass with time. Delivered to first-year college students, this raised African
American students’ grades over the next three years, halving the racial achievement gap (Walton
& Cohen, 2011). Illustrating the policy implications, this and related interventions delivered
online prior to college matriculation to full institutional cohorts improved first-year persistence
and achievement for socially disadvantaged students in three samples (N>9,500), reducing
achievement gaps by 31-40% at scale (Yeager, Walton, et al., 2016).
The results of these and many other interventions underscore three essential lessons: (1)
specific psychological processes play a critical role in the unfolding of individuals’ behavior in
the social world; (2) these processes can be altered in precise ways; and (3) doing so can lead to
significant and lasting personal and social improvement.
What are these processes? When people lack an understanding of the bases of
psychological interventions—of the processes they target, of how they may be changed, and of
how change can be sustained over time—results like these can seem magical (Yeager & Walton,
2011). The purpose of this article is to provide a comprehensive review of wise psychological
interventions and thus to demystify them. In so doing, we go beyond other reviews, which have
focused on a single intervention (e.g., Cohen & Sherman, 2014) or content area (e.g., education,
Yeager & Walton, 2011), or have provided only a high level summary (Walton, 2014). In
clarifying this approach for researchers and policy-makers alike, we hope to inspire the further
development and responsible use of wise interventions and its integration with other approaches

!

Wise Interventions

6

to social reform. Doing so, we hope, will both advance psychological theory and promote
positive change.
Our focus is on the psychological processes targeted by wise interventions and their role
in major social problems. We do not restrict our analysis to any one problem space. Instead, we
emphasize critical processes that contribute to virtually all forms of human behavior, including
personal issues (e.g., a lack of well-being), interpersonal problems (e.g., relationship problems,
intergroup conflict), and major societal problems (e.g., persistent achievement gaps, lack of
political participation) (for review methods, see Footnote 1). Although our focus is broad, we
often illustrate key points in the context of education, because many wise interventions have
been tested in this important context.
Roadmap
First, we describe the theoretical foundations of wise interventions and how these arise
from basic research in social psychology. The chief insight is that people’s behavior stems from
how they make sense of themselves and social situations and that this meaning-making is guided
by three basic motivations: the need to be accurate, the need for self-integrity, and the need to
belong. Second, we describe five principles that characterize wise interventions. Third, we
describe specific strategies used to change meanings and group wise interventions into three
“families” according to the three motives that guide meaning-making (accuracy, self-integrity,
and belonging). Fourth, to illustrate the distinctive qualities of wise interventions, we compare
them with two common approaches to social reform. Finally, we review implications and highpriority directions for future research.
II. Theoretical Foundations of Wise Interventions: Social-Psychological Insights about
Human Behavior

!

Wise Interventions

7

Beyond wise interventions, two broad theoretical approaches have guided social reforms.
One assumes that the key determinants of behavior are qualities of the actor—personality traits,
genotypes, brain development, habits, and skills. Interventions based on this approach aim to
equip people with the abilities they need to overcome obstacles and succeed in life, such as
education in general (Brinch & Galloway, 2011) as well as specific programs designed to raise
intelligence in children or resilience in adults (e.g., Jaeggi, Buschkuehl, Jonides, & Perrig, 2008).
A second approach focuses on the environment. It assumes that to flourish people need to be in
situations that help them succeed rather than that constrain their behavior or close off
opportunities (Sachs, 2005). This might involve increasing resources for schools, moving
children to neighborhoods that provide greater opportunities (Sanbonmatsu et al., 2011), or
altering incentive structures (Fryer, 2011).
These approaches address social problems whose root cause involves a lack of essential
capacity—a deficit in either the skills or habits of the person or the resources, opportunities, or
incentives in the environment. To succeed in any endeavor, people need adequate personal
resources and an environment that allows them to draw on these resources effectively. In school,
students need a basic level of ability and a conducive environment, including a stable home life,
three meals a day, and skilled teachers, to succeed.
Wise interventions do not address a lack of capacity. Instead, they assume that among
many people and in many situations there is often already significant room for improvement—
that people are capable and situations afford opportunities yet people fail to take full advantage
of these opportunities. Why? The answer involves meaning making.
Meaning-Making
A key tenet of social psychology is that how people interpret their personal qualities and

!

Wise Interventions

8

social situations determines their behavior (Asch, 1952; Heider, 1944; Jones & Davis, 1965;
Kelley, 1973; Lewin, 1947; Ross & Nisbett, 1991). Even when people have the ability to succeed
and are in environments that allow them to do so they may fail if they view their circumstances
in a self-defeating manner.
A variety of terms have been used to describe these interpretations, including subjective
construal (Ross & Nisbett, 1991), mindsets (Dweck, 2006), and stories (Wilson, 2011). To avoid
confusion and awkward terminology we use colloquial synonyms like “meaning making” and
“interpretation.” Regardless of the term, the key principle is that, to predict behavior, it is
essential to get inside people’s heads and see how they understand their actions and
circumstances. To predict how students will respond to a bad grade, for example, the key is how
they understand that grade. Do they view it as a sign that they lack ability or that more effort or
another type of effort is needed? Critically, this approach prioritizes the person and the situation
together: how people make sense of situations, how situations contribute to this meaningmaking, and the implications this meaning making has for their behavior and well-being.
Certainly some situations are so powerful that most people understand them in the same
way. Some of social psychology’s most famous studies emphasize the power of the situation.
Latané and Darley (1970) showed that the greater the number of people who witnessed an
emergency, the less likely any one person would offer help. But even in these studies it was not
the power of the objective situation per se that determined people’s behavior but how people
understood it. The greater the size of the group the more likely people were to assume that no
assistance was required, that someone else would or had already intervened, or that the
responsibility to do so lay elsewhere.
Most events leave room for interpretation, ranging from the healthy to the toxic. Students

!

Wise Interventions

9

can interpret critical feedback from a teacher as an opportunity to improve their work. Or they
can worry, accurately or inaccurately, that the teacher dislikes them, doubts their ability, or is
biased. Here the goal of a wise intervention is not to restructure the school day so teachers have
more opportunities to provide critical feedback (a situation-centric approach) or to teach students
better study habits (a person-centric approach). It is to shape how feedback is represented to
students and thus the meaning it conveys to them (Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns et al., 2014).
Just as there is considerable latitude in how people make sense of social situations, so
there is latitude in how people make sense of themselves. Many people in Western society are
exposed to the idea that intelligence is essentially fixed at birth, an idea reinforced by “Gifted
and Talented” programs, a corporate focus on “talent” (Murphy & Dweck, 2010), a research
preoccupation with IQ (Herrnstein & Murray, 1994; Jensen, 1969; Terman & Oden, 1947), and
praise like “You’re so smart!” (Gunderson et al., 2013; Mueller & Dweck; 1998; see also
Haimovitz & Dweck, 2016; Rattan, Good, & Dweck, 2012). Students who hold this fixedmindset about intelligence interpret academic struggles as evidence that they lack ability or have
reached the edge of their abilities. This inference undermines subsequent effort, persistence,
learning, and achievement (Dweck, 1999; Dweck & Leggett, 1988). Growth-mindset of
intelligence interventions teach students about modern neuroscience and the potential for
intelligence to grow (“like a muscle”) with effort, effective learning strategies, and the help of
others. This message does not provide students new learning resources (a situation-centric
approach) or make students more intelligent (a person-centric approach). It changes the meaning
of academic struggle. Struggle becomes an opportunity to learn, not a sign of limitations, and
students respond with increased effort and resilience in pursuing learning opportunities. This
message, conveyed in diverse developmentally appropriate exercises, has been shown to improve

!

Wise Interventions 10
performance over an academic term or longer among students in middle school (Blackwell,
Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2007; Good, Aronson, & Inzlicht, 2003), high school (Paunesku,
Walton, Romero, Smith, Yeager, & Dweck, 2015; Yeager, Romero et al., 2016), and college
(Aronson, Fried, & Good, 2002; Yeager, Walton, et al., 2016). Often the greatest effects are for
struggling students, for whom the meaning of academic struggle is most pressing (Paunesku et
al., 2015; Yeager, Romero et al., 2016).
Although subjective meaning-making is a primary focus of social psychology, its
importance is recognized across the social sciences. The seminal Coleman Report found that
variation in school achievement within schools was much larger than variation between schools
(Coleman et al., 1966). Why do some children struggle, even in high-achieving schools? And
why do some children succeed even in struggling schools? One reason involves inequalities in
family circumstances and the broader society, which children bring to school in the form of
differences in preparation. But the Coleman Report also suggested that inequality can take a
psychological form. Experiences of disadvantage can place a child in a circumstance in which
“he cannot assume that the environment will respond to his actions…a general belief…that
nothing he could ever do would change things.” If so, “it may well be…that one of the keys
toward success for minorities which have experienced disadvantage and a particularly
unresponsive environment…is a change in this conception” (p. 321). There is thus a need to
understand how such beliefs and meanings arise and may be changed. This approach does not
deny the powerful role of situational forces like discrimination and poverty. It rather aims to
understand a portion of this power: how it is expressed in how people make sense of important
experiences, and how to remedy this consequence.
Three Basic Motives Underlying Meaning Making

!

Wise Interventions 11
When there is room for interpretation, as there often is, what determines the meaning a
perceiver comes up with? Social psychologists have identified three basic motives driving human
meaning-making: The desires to be accurate, to think well of oneself, and to belong. Each insight
has contributed to the development of effective interventions.
1. Accuracy. First, obviously there needs to be some correspondence between a person’s
perception of the world and what is actually out there; if people lived in a complete fantasy
world they would not survive for long. Infants attend to caregivers’ emotional reactions to assess
the safety of a situation and behave accordingly (Sorce, Emde, Campos, & Klinnert, 1985).
Attribution theory thus portrays people as reasonable information processors—lay scientists
trying to make sense of their own and other people’s behavior as best they can (Heider, 1944;
Jones & Davis, 1965; Kelley, 1967; Weiner, 1985).
However, even when people are trying to be accurate, they draw meanings from the
world as it appears to them—from their perspective and social circumstance. Meanings are thus
not just “in the head” but reflections of the external world (e.g., Gunderson et al., 2013). As a
consequence, the same event can appear differently to people who have different experiences and
vantage points, and this can lead to pejorative inferences. Students who face negative stereotypes
in intellectual settings can reasonably interpret critical academic feedback as a sign of bias on the
part of an evaluator (Cohen, Steele, & Ross, 1999). This interpretation is much less plausible for
students who do not contend with a negative stereotype. Although they are in similar objective
circumstances, they are in radically different psychological circumstances (Steele, 1997).
When meanings are detrimental—like those prompted by pejorative characterizations of
the self (e.g., low self-esteem) or one’s group (e.g., stereotypes) or by toxic lay theories such as
fixed theories of intelligence—people can get stuck in negative ways of thinking and acting that

!

Wise Interventions 12
become self-reinforcing. Many wise interventions aim to “unstick” these patterns and redirect
people into more productive ways of viewing their circumstances. Thus representing critical
feedback as given in an effort to help students meet a higher standard can cause lasting benefits
for racial-minority students (Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns et al., 2014).
2. Self-Integrity. While people want their interpretations to be accurate, they are not
disinterested observers of the world. The second basic motive of meaning making is that people
want to think well of themselves—to believe they are adequate, moral, and competent (Aronson,
1968; Sherman & Cohen, 2006; Steele, 1988). An understanding of this need for “self-integrity”
has led researchers to develop novel ways of helping people maintain a positive global selfimage, which can improve functioning in the face of negative events (e.g., Cohen et al., 2009).
3. Belonging. The third basic motive arises from the fact that human beings are an
inherently social species. Forming and maintaining positive social relationships and membership
in valued social groups is one of our most important tasks from birth (Baumeister & Leary, 1995;
Bowlby, 1988). We want to feel accepted and included by others, to belong to social groups, and
to contribute positively to the lives of others. As a result, our interpretations of important aspects
of world and behavior toward it are highly sensitive to how we think other people view and
behave. Researchers have uncovered novel ways to leverage this need to belong to promote
positive behaviors (e.g., Braga & Bond, 2008; Goldstein, Cialdini, & Griskevicius, 2008; Grant
& Hofmann, 2011).
These three motives—to be accurate, to have self-integrity, and to belong—are not
exhaustive; indeed, the precise characterization of basic motives and how they interact and keep
each other in check is a matter of much discussion (e.g., Baumeister & Leary, 1995; Deci &
Ryan, 2000; Heine, Lehman, Markus, & Kitayama, 1999; Pyszczynski & Greenberg, 1987;

!

Wise Interventions 13
Steele, 1988; Swann, 1983; Weiner, 1985). For our purpose, what is most important is that each
of the three motives described above has led to distinct types of interventions that we will review
shortly.
Before discussing the principles of wise interventions, it is important to note how the
three motives that underpin them were discovered and understood. The answer is with hundreds
of carefully designed laboratory experiments. This foundational work has given rise to
theoretical insights that allowed researchers to design interventions that never would have been
conceived or attempted otherwise, such as the seemingly implausible idea that a short reflection
on personal values would raise African American adolescents’ school achievement for years
(Cohen et al., 2009). Indeed, one purpose of this paper is to illustrate how decades of theoretical
work in social psychology—much of which seemed, at the time, to have little applied benefit—
has blossomed into a theoretically-driven approach to help solve a wide array of personal and
social problems.
III. Principles of Wise Interventions
Wise interventions attempt to change how people make sense of themselves and their
social environment, interpretations driven by the three motives just discussed. Later we review
specific strategies to effect such change. Here we discuss more broadly five principles inherent
to wise interventions.
The term wise originates in the work of the sociologist Erving Goffman (1963), who used
it to describe straight people who saw beyond the homophobia of the 1950s to recognize the full
humanity of gay people. Later Steele (1997) described “wise schooling” as practices sensitive to
the experiences of students who confront negative stereotypes in intellectual settings. Drawing
on this tradition, we use wise to describe insight into how people make sense of themselves or a

!

Wise Interventions 14
situation they are in. Wise interventions are wise to the meanings and inferences people draw
(Walton, 2014). They are characterized by the following principles.
1. Psychological Precision
Wise interventions aim to alter a specific interpretation to bring about positive change.
They are thus not multifaceted “kitchen sink” reforms nor general programs, like a new tutoring
service. Instead, wise interventions often operate within the context of existing programs.
For example, many students worry about whether they will belong when they enter a new
school. Yet this worry is felt most acutely when students enter school settings in which their
group is underrepresented and negatively stereotyped. In this circumstance, students can risk
inferring from even commonplace challenges (e.g., feelings of loneliness, academic criticism),
that they or their group does not belong in the school in general. To address this worry, the
social-belonging intervention uses stories from older students to convey that worries about
belonging are normal at first in a new school and improve with time. The intervention does not
restructure the academic transition. Instead, this message helps students sustain a sense of
belonging in the face of adversities and build peer and mentor relationships. As noted, in one
study, African American students who received this intervention earned a higher college GPA
over 3 years, halving the racial achievement gap (Walton & Cohen, 2011; see also Walton,
Logel, Peach, Spencer, & Zanna, 2015; Yeager, Walton, et al., 2016).
A second intervention aimed to improve romantic relationships for people with low selfesteem. Doubting their own value, such people tend to dismiss compliments from partners, for
instance as “just something she had to say” (Murray, Holmes & Collins, 2006; Murray, Rose,
Bellavia, Holmes, & Kusche, 2002). To encourage people to see a compliment as truly reflecting
a partner’s love, Marigold, Holmes, and Ross (2007, 2010) asked people in dating relationships

!

Wise Interventions 15
to recall a recent compliment from their partners. They then posed a single question, which
assumed the compliment had a broad significance: “Explain why your partner admired you.
Describe what it meant to you and its significance for your relationship.” As compared to simply
recalling the circumstances of the compliment, this query led people with low self-esteem to feel
more confident in their partner’s love immediately and, over the next several weeks, set in
motion a cycle of more positive feelings and behaviors in both members of the couple,
improving the relationship as a whole.
Both interventions precisely targeted self-reinforcing, negative interpretations and
changed these in ways that led to a cycle of enduring improvement in psychology and behavior.
This precision does not mean that wise interventions are simple; to effect change, wise
interventions often rely on multiple processes, as we describe later, and involve a deep
understanding of psychological processes and the context. But the target of this change is a
specific meaning or inference.
The precision of wise interventions is important for both theoretical and applied reasons.
First, it allows researchers to unambiguously identify the causal effect of a specific psychological
process within a complex system. Wise interventions can thus shed light on psychological
processes and their function within systems, contributing to theory. Second, precision can allow
some kinds of wise interventions to be relatively brief and low-cost. And third, in targeting
specific processes, wise interventions can provide a theoretical account of what approach will
work with whom and in what context. Such an account is far more challenging for multifaceted
reforms. When an intervention does many things at once, reformers may not know when or why
the intervention works or does not work (see Kazdin, 2007).
For instance, wise interventions will work only in contexts that give rise to the relevant

!

Wise Interventions 16
psychological process (see the first row of Table 1, which illustrates contextual factors necessary
for the effectiveness of wise interventions). People with high self-esteem generally need no
inducement to view a compliment as having a broad meaning; they do not benefit from an
intervention to bolster this confidence (Marigold et al., 2007). Interventions to mitigate the threat
that arises from negative stereotypes (social identity threat) are generally effective only for
students who face a negative stereotype in a school setting (Cohen et al., 2009; Walton & Cohen,
2011). They are also often most effective in settings in which the student’s group is
underrepresented, where identity threat arises most acutely (Hanselman, Bruch, Gamoran, &
Borman, 2014; Walton, Logel, et al., 2015). This does not mean that wise interventions cannot
have broad, population-level effects. In many cases, many people face similar psychological
circumstances and draw predictably similar meanings. In these cases, wise interventions can
cause widespread benefits (e.g., Paunesku et al., 2015; Yeager, Walton et al., 2016).
As noted, the meanings people draw are not just “in the head” but typically reasonable
inferences from the social world as it presents itself to a person. Understanding ideas and
meanings as cycling from social contexts and into and out of minds (Markus & Kitayama, 2010;
Markus & Conner, 2014) implies multiple points of entry for intervention. Thus it is possible
both to alter teacher practice to represent critical feedback as intended to support students’
growth (Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns et al., 2014 Experiments 1 and 2) and to teach students to view
critical feedback in general as motivated by an effort to promote learning (Yeager, PurdieVaughns et al., 2014 Experiment 3). The first approach alters how the world presents itself to a
student; the second alters students’ lens for making sense of an important aspect of the world.
2. Understanding Psychological Processes as One Factor in Complicated Causal
Systems

!

Wise Interventions 17
Although wise interventions target precise psychological processes, they are not myopic in this
focus. Psychological processes do not exist in a vacuum but play a part in complex systems
(Walton, 2014; Yeager & Walton, 2011). Thus in addition to theory about psychological
processes, wise interventions involve theory about how a given process contributes to behavior
or a social problem in the context of other forces (Lewin, 1947).
Most generally, for wise interventions to work there needs to be capacity for
improvement in place. In general wise interventions remove psychological barriers to help
systems function more efficiently (Lewin, 1947). In this sense, wise interventions are engine oil,
not the engine. Engine oil doesn’t make the car run—the engine does. But engines need oil to
perform optimally. Similarly, psychological interventions do not, on their own, improve
achievement, health, or relationships. They rely on existing resources in people and systems and
aim to help these function optimally to improve outcomes.
Thus wise interventions complement and do not replace the situational approaches to
social reform mentioned earlier. Indeed, changing meanings can be critical to the success of such
reforms. If students are struggling, a school may hire extra tutors, expanding students’
opportunities to learn. However, this expense may be wasted if students do not see struggle and
setbacks as opportunities to learn (Lepper, Woolverton, Mumme, & Gurtner, 1993; Rattan et al.,
2012; Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns, et al., 2014). In one illustrative study, experimentally varying the
quality of instruction caused no improvement in how much struggling college students learned—
unless they were first led to view struggles as challenges that could be overcome with effort and
good strategies (Menec et al., 1994). In another, providing access to high-quality learning
materials raised struggling elementary school students’ arithmetic performance (Bandura &
Schunk, 1981). But when students were also encouraged to adopt proximal goals (“complete at

!

Wise Interventions 18
least 6 pages of instructional items per session”)—an addition designed to help students build
self-efficacy—the improvement doubled. By the same token, structural reforms can be necessary
for wise interventions to be effective. More oil won’t help an engine with a broken piston rod run
(see Row B in Table 1).
Understanding psychological processes and structural factors as working in tandem
provides a more nuanced understanding of school quality. When students fail to achieve, we
often assume deficits in learning opportunities and aim to remedy these, such as by reducing
class size, improving curricula, improving teacher training, or overhauling the entire school (e.g.,
charter schools, Fryer, 2012). When these reforms fall short, it is easy to blame inherent
deficiencies in students, families, and/or communities such as a lack of critical cognitive
(Herrnstein & Murray, 1994) or noncognitive skills (Duckworth & Seligman, 2005) or cultural
values essential to success.
Yet an often overlooked determinant of student achievement is the psychological climate
of a school (Steele & Cohn-Vargas, 2013; Tough, 2016). Many excellent schools are excellent
precisely because they attend to students’ psychological experience (Martinez & McGrath,
2014). Conversely, when schools struggle it is important to ask if a psychological barrier
prevents better outcomes. Indeed, wise interventions to remedy feelings of non-belonging,
identity threat, or fixed mindsets about intelligence can cause large gains in achievement without
expanding available learning opportunities (Yeager & Walton, 2011). These findings suggest
that significant potential for greater learning and achievement exists in many students and many
schools but is hidden and often goes unrealized as a consequence of psychological barriers
(Coleman et al., 1966; Walton & Spencer, 2009). Remedying these barriers may be a crucial step
to creating truly high quality school environments in which all students can learn and grow.

!

Wise Interventions 19
Because wise interventions operate within the context of complex systems they are
organic to them unlike external impositions like a new program or artificial incentive scheme.
Moreover, the psychological processes targeted by wise interventions are often implicit and not
fully accessible to people (Nisbett & Wilson, 1977; Wilson, 2002). A consequence is that the
effects of wise interventions can be relatively invisible to recipients. Suppose a psychological
intervention causes lasting gains in students’ achievement. The student might attribute their
success to their own hard work and the effective teaching they received, and rightly so. But they
may not recognize how their learning was facilitated by a change in their interpretation of
schooling. Although this invisibility may frustrate an intervener who wants to claim credit for an
intervention’s success, it can allow recipients to take pride in their accomplishments rather than
cede them to an external influence (McCord, 1978), potentially increasing effectiveness (Ross &
Nisbett, 1991). Indeed, in some cases awareness of an intervention can undermine its effects
especially if people feel the intervention is imposed upon them (Sherman, Cohen, et al., 2009),
not a choice they made (Lyubomirsky et al., 2011; Perry et al., 2010; Silverman, Logel, &
Cohen, 2013; Walton, Logel, et al., 2015).
Table 1. Classes of contextual factors necessary for wise interventions to apply in a setting and
to be effective.
Contextual Factors Important for the Effectiveness of Wise Interventions
A. The targeted psychological process is present and undermines people’s functioning.
B. Capacity for improvement is in place (e.g., in school, quality learning opportunities).
C. The situation affords opportunities for a change in psychology to become embedded in the
structure of people’s lives and can thus propel benefits forward in time (e.g., in school, better
relationships that support greater success).
→ Absent such affordances, an intervention may be effective in the short-term but not cause
lasting benefits.
3. Recursive Change in People and Situations
One of the most exciting aspects of wise interventions is their potential, in conjunction
with the systems in which they are delivered, to improve the course of people’s lives long into

!

Wise Interventions 20
the future. This is because assumptions people make about themselves and social situations
readily become self-fulfilling and embedded in the structure of their lives. In altering these
assumptions, wise interventions can set in motion recursive cycles that propel gains forward in
time or even make them “snowball” (Kenthirarajah & Walton, 2015; Rosenthal & Jacobson,
1968; Storms & McCaul, 1976; Yeager & Walton, 2011). From this perspective, lasting change
does not reside only within the person, for instance in how people make sense of the world or
their “character.” Nor is it restricted to a given situation which, once people exit, may lose its
influence. Instead, change is represented as an ongoing pattern of transactions between the
person and the social environment.
For example, when a student with a growth-mindset redoubles her efforts in response to a
poor grade and improves on the next test, this may confirm in her mind the potential for growth,
cause her teacher to invest more in her, and lessen her risk of entering a remedial track
(Blackwell et al., 2007), each of which positions the student for greater future success.
Walton and Cohen’s (2007) social-belonging intervention offered students a narrative for
making sense of early adversities like feelings of isolation or struggle in college as normal
challenges that can be overcome. This change in interpretation helped socially disadvantaged
students earn higher grades through the end of college (Walton & Cohen, 2011). Moreover, 3-5
years after college—7-9-years after the intervention—African American adults who had received
the intervention in the first year of college reported greater life and career satisfaction—all the
result of a one-hour session they attended in their first year of college. These gains were
mediated not by recollections of the intervention experience but by reports of more substantive
mentor relationships students developed with faculty during and after college (Brady et al., in
prep B; see also Yeager, Walton, et al., 2016). In short, the intervention altered how students

!

Wise Interventions 21
made sense of early challenges in college. This empowered them to build positive relationships,
creating a better social circumstance that facilitated greater success in life.
An important implication is that the long-term effects of wise interventions depend not
just on the psychological process targeted by the intervention but on the affordances of the
situation (Gibson, 1977): Does the situation afford opportunities for improvement such that an
initial change in psychology can become embedded in people’s lives? Will a romantic partner
respond positively to a positive overture? Can racial-minority students form strong relationships
on campus? If not, lasting change is unlikely (see Row C in Table 1). Importantly, the degree to
which a situation affords opportunities for improvement is not identical with its current quality.
In some cases, even long-standing negative situations, such as repeated patterns of academic
underperformance, can improve in response to a change in the psychology and behavior of a
person.
Another implication is that the long-term effects of wise interventions may depend on
timing. Often recursive processes are most amenable to change at the beginning of an
experience, such as when students enter a new school when both meanings and patterns of social
interaction are in flux and yet to be established (Cook et al., 2012; Raudenbush, 1984; Walton &
Cohen, 2011; Wilson & Linville, 1982, 1985; Yeager, Walton, et al., 2016).
A third implication is that long-term effects may depend on whether people integrate a
change in meaning in their lives. A risk of externally imposed, time-bound interventions is that a
change in meaning may attenuate or even reverse when the intervention ends. In a tragic
example, Schultz (1976) aimed to bolster a sense of control among retirement-home residents by
allowing residents to control or to predict when a college student would visit them over two
months. As compared to residents who received the same visits at random or no visits, residents

!

Wise Interventions 22
in the treatment conditions showed better health and well-being at the end of this period (e.g.,
rated as having more “zest for life”). But then the visits ended. At a 42-month follow-up,
residents in the treatment conditions were rated as less healthy and were more likely to have died
in the interim than those in the comparison conditions (Schultz & Hanusa, 1978). The
intervention located a rich psychological idea—a sense of personal control—narrowly in a
temporary situation limited to the study. Providing and then removing this sense of control was
worse than not providing it at all. By contrast, another intervention aimed to bolster a sense of
control in ways that nursing home residents could incorporate in their daily routines (e.g., to take
care of a plant, when to go to a movie). This intervention appears to have caused short- and longterm benefits (although there are statistical and methodological questions about this study,
Langer & Rodin, 1976; Rodin & Langer, 1977).
4. Methodological Rigor and Process
People cannot rigorously evaluate attempts to change their own and others’ behavior in
their daily lives. A person fighting with a spouse does not have the luxury of comparing one
strategy to a “no treatment” control group to see how well the strategy worked (and it would
probably be poor form to tell your spouse that he or she is in the control group). But a scientific
approach allows us to formally evaluate wise interventions in randomized field experiments,
typically with thoughtful control conditions to remove obvious confounds.
The development of wise interventions typically starts small, often in laboratory research
with the goal to clarify key processes, their nature, consequences, and malleability. Such
research is usually inspired by qualitative work, past theory or laboratory experimentation, or
other observations of the world (e.g., Steele, 1997). It then moves to small-scale field
experiments, which aim to develop effective strategies for intervening in field settings, and to

!

Wise Interventions 23
examine how an intervention affects psychological processes and outcomes often over time.
Usually this work involves a deep appreciation for the barriers a group of people face and the
kind of change that would be most welcome. Starting small has advantages in terms of cost and
efficiency, and limits the damage of any negative effect.
Once an intervention is better understood and shown to be effective in small-scale field
trials, researchers may develop forms that can be delivered to larger numbers of people. At this
stage, a critical question involves heterogeneity—in what kinds of contexts and with what kinds
of people is the intervention effective or not and why: the robustness or generalizability of the
intervention. These intersections may inform theory about social contexts and their opportunities
and affordances as well as theory about the intervention and psychological processes (see Weiss,
Bloom, & Brock, 2013).
When an intervention is delivered in a highly scalable way to large and diverse samples,
we may generally anticipate smaller effect sizes than when it is precisely tailored for and handdelivered, so to speak, to a more homogenous population (Paunesku et al., 2015; Yeager,
Romero, et al., 2016). Yet when an intervention can be scaled at low cost (e.g., through online
modules), the critical question may be not its relative but its absolute effectiveness (e.g., Bond et
al., 2012). Low-cost exercises that benefit only some people but can reach many people can be
very valuable. Growth-mindset interventions provide a model of this process, from laboratory
studies (e.g., Mueller & Dweck, 1999) to small-scale field trials (Aronson et al., 2002; Blackwell
et al., 2007; Good et al., 2003) to large-scale field trials (Paunesku et al., 2015; Yeager, Romero,
et al., 2016) to publicly available resources (e.g., https://www.mindsetkit.org/).
The strategy of starting small and scaling up contrasts with the manner in which many
social reforms are implemented, namely widely before rigorous testing. Sadly, once programs

!

Wise Interventions 24
are tested with randomized controlled trials, many turn out to be ineffective or to cause harm
(e.g., Scared Straight programs designed to reduce teenage violence; the D.A.R.E. anti-drug
program; infant simulator programs designed to reduce teenage pregnancy by giving teens a
make-believe infant to care for; Brinkman et al., 2016; Wilson, 2005, 2011). Instead, the
systematic development and evaluation of wise interventions mimics the development of medical
interventions (e.g., new drugs). Innovation, theory development, and rigorous evaluation take
place at each step. However, the primary questions addressed at each stage differ, from the
nature of a psychological process (laboratory research), to intervention methods and effects over
time (small-scale field trials), to scaling and heterogeneity (large-scale field trials). This process
informs fundamental questions about psychological processes, methods of intervention,
intersections with social contexts, and the bases of social problems.
5. Ethical Considerations
Wise interventions address core aspects of people’s lives, including their health, wellbeing, achievement, and relationships. Yet like a powerful garden hose, psychological
interventions can go awry. They can have unpredicted effects, negative effects, or effects that
can be positive in some respects but negative in others (Schulz & Hanusa, 1978; Silverman,
Gwinn, & Van Boven, 2015). Thus it is essential from an ethical viewpoint as well as a practical
and scientific one to conduct rigorous tests of the effectiveness of an intervention and the
soundness of the theorizing that prompted it, as well as to identify any potential negative
consequences even if for a minority of recipients.
An additional important reason to take a formal, scientific approach is to make explicit
the psychological and behavioral changes prioritized by a reform and to identify any tradeoffs.
Often the changes promoted by wise interventions are endorsed by all concerned (e.g., better

!

Wise Interventions 25
health, higher achievement, greater well-being). Some cases, however, raise competing values
(e.g., Shook & Fazio, 2008). For example, broken-windows policing—which aims to instill
norms of order by cleaning up physical signs of disorder and strictly enforcing quality of life
crimes like loitering (Wilson & Kelling, 1982)—may reduce crime (Braga & Bond, 2008) but
increase the harassment of racial minorities (Department of Justice, 2016; Ridgeway, 2007). In
bringing such tradeoffs to light, a scientific approach can promote a more informed debate, such
as how to achieve benefits without incurring costs. This approach can also help identify common
practices that cause harm, such as demographic queries immediately before standardized tests,
which can exacerbate identity threat and achievement gaps (Danaher & Crandall, 2008).
Wise interventions can also raise specific concerns. First, attempts to change private
beliefs and behavior may make some people uncomfortable. Yet such attempts are ubiquitous in
social life, from marketing to personal communications to social policy. People routinely try a
new strategy to motivate a student, to address a personal conflict, or to encourage people, say, to
quit smoking. Such “everyday” efforts are inevitable as people pursue their goals. The question
is thus not whether to deliver psychological interventions but how to do it well—effectively and
responsibly.
The problem with everyday interventions is that often they are based on a poor
understanding of human nature. They rely on lay theories about psychology or “common sense.”
Common sense is not always wrong, of course, but it often leads to interventions that are
ineffective or do more harm than good (Wilson, 2011). In medicine, relying on common sense
can produce disastrous results. Fortunately, most people recognize the limits of their knowledge
about disease and heed advice from physicians and other experts. But when it comes to
“treating” psychological processes that give rise to problems of social life—that make people

!

Wise Interventions 26
unhappy or struggle in school or prolong conflicts—lay people and policymakers alike often rely
on “home remedies” that are no more effective than blood-letting is in curing disease.
Wise interventions, by contrast, leverage precise theory with good intentions to help
people flourish. They are evaluated using experiments including to identify possible harms and
to keep these good intentions and theory in check. Upon such evaluations, institutions and
society at large can choose to implement those interventions at scale if they align with commonly
agreed-upon goals and have adequate evidence. In these ways, wise interventions are more likely
to be effective than counterfactuals; they do not change too many factors at once and are
therefore less intrusive than other reforms; and they help decision-makers make more informed
decisions.
Finally, people can think that wise interventions fault people for having unproductive
ways of thinking, “blaming the victim” and reducing social problems to personal failures (see
Ikizer & Blanton, 2016). This is a misperception. As we have seen, people’s views generally
reflect reasonable inferences about the world from their perspective. People do not just choose
how to think about important aspects of the world, and cannot easily “snap out of” bad ways of
thinking. Wise interventions help people reinterpret their circumstances in ways that are often
difficult to do on their own to bring about changes in their lives consistent with their goals.
IV. Strategies and Types of Wise Interventions
How do wise interventions change how people make sense of themselves and their
circumstances? Here we review specific strategies. We then organize wise interventions into
three families, which target different motives of meaning-making.
Overview of Strategies to Encourage Change
Unlike learning a new skill (like calculus or self-control), efforts to change the meaning

!

Wise Interventions 27
people ascribe to themselves and social experiences generally do not involve practice or
repetition; more is not necessarily better. To change how people view their self-identity, make
sense of how a romantic partner regards them, or decide whether they belong in a difficult math
class, mere repetition of some mantra is unlikely to be effective (like Stuart Smiley: “I’m
Good Enough, I’m Smart Enough, and Doggone It, People Like Me!”, or Bart Simpson writing
on the blackboard: “I’ll be good. I’ll be good. I’ll be good…”). Rather, wise interventions use
strategies honed in basic research to offer people constructive new meanings and attributions in
compelling ways.
Typically wise interventions aim to be minimally directive. They offer people new
information, place them in new situations, or give them well-designed reflection exercises, and
then allow people to draw new conclusions on their own. This wisdom follows a guiding
principle of social psychology beginning with dissonance theory (Festinger & Carlsmith, 1959):
Influence attempts are most effective when they lead people to internalize or “own” the relevant
change. Indeed, direct efforts to change people’s beliefs can seem controlling, stigmatizing, or
irrelevant and if so are unlikely to be taken to heart (Brehm, 1966; see Sherman, Cohen et al.,
2009), especially among adolescents and adults (Yeager, Fong, Lee, Espelage, 2015; Yeager,
Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2013), and people in cultures that prize personal independence (Markus
& Kitayama, 1991). Thus wise interventions generally do not tell people that they “should” adopt
a new belief but allow them to adopt it on their own (see Brady et al. 2016; Silverman et al.,
2013; Walton, Logel, et al., 2015).
Four broad types of change strategies have been used successfully: (1) direct labeling, (2)
prompting new meanings, (3) increasing commitment through action, and (4) active reflection
exercises. Below we describe each at a high level. Later, in describing the three families of wise

!

Wise Interventions 28
interventions, we use specific examples to illustrate each strategy.
1. Direct Labeling. A classic study found that twice as many people cooperated when a
prisoner’s dilemma activity was labeled “the Community Game” than when it was called “the
Wall Street Game” (Liberman, Samuels, & Ross, 2004). A direct approach to intervention is to
provide people a positive label that defines an otherwise ambiguous aspect of themselves, a
social situation, or other people. This can motivate people to behave in accordance with the label
(self-labeling: Miller, Brickman, & Bolen, 1975; situation-labeling: Goldstein et al., 2008;
labeling of others: Rosenthal & Jacobson, 1968). Directly labeling an aspect of the self, however,
can be more effective with children than adults, who may have more established self-views and
may react against messages that appear coercive. Additionally, direct labels can backfire if they
imply that a personal quality is fixed, not an area in which people can grow. Thus telling children
“You’re so smart” can undermine their resilience to setbacks (Mueller & Dweck, 1998).
2. Prompting New Meanings. Many wise interventions give people a basis for drawing
a new inference but do not provide the inference itself. Doing so can prompt people to reconsider
how they think about themselves, others, or a situation—to revise their implicit “stories”—
without directly telling them what to think (Wilson, 2011). As we will see, prompting can be
accomplished by altering situations, providing new information, or asking questions that imply
new meanings (e.g., situations: Braga & Bond, 2008; Redelmeier et al., 2003; information:
Blackwell et al., 2007; Wilson & Linville, 1982; questions: Bryan, Walton, Rogers, & Dweck,
2011; Marigold et al., 2007, 2010).
3. Increasing Commitment Through Action. Other interventions use strategies
developed in research on cognitive dissonance to actively engage people in committing to a new
idea (Aronson, 1968; Festinger, 1957). When people experience tension between their behaviors

!

Wise Interventions 29
and attitudes, they are motivated to resolve this tension, and often do so by revising their
attitudes to accord with their behavior. Thus creating situations that inspire people to freely act in
line with a new belief can cement psychological change. A number of studies, for example, have
made good use of the saying-is-believing approach (Aronson, 1999). People receive new
information that supports a key idea. Often this idea is presented as intuitive and one they
already endorse. They are then asked to explain this idea to others, often in a letter of advice to
younger or less experienced people than themselves using examples from their own experience.
Compared to simply providing people with information, this (1) encourages people to think
about an idea actively rather than to just receive it passively, promoting learning; (2) treats them
as co-creators of an effort to help others, leveraging prosocial motivations (Yeager, Henderson,
et al., 2014), rather than as recipients of an intervention, a potentially stigmatizing role (Alvarez
& van Leeuwen, 2015; Yeager, Romero, et al., 2016), or as recipients of a persuasive appeal,
which could be rejected; (3) allows people to advocate for an idea, increasing its persuasive
appeal (Festinger & Carlsmith, 1959); and (4) helps people connect an idea to their own lives
and thus to personalize and take ownership of it, allowing standardized materials to speak to
people with diverse experiences. Interventions that include saying-is-believing procedures have
yielded some of the largest and longest-lasting gains observed in the literature, including some
growth-mindset interventions (Aronson et al., 2002; Paunesku et al., 2015), some attributionalretraining interventions (Wilson & Linville, 1985), social-belonging interventions (Walton &
Cohen, 2011), theory-of-personality interventions (Yeager, Johnson, et al., 2014), some wisefeedback interventions (Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns et al., 2014, Experiment 3), prosocial-purpose
interventions (Yeager, Henderson, et al., 2014), and empathic-discipline interventions
(Okonofua, Paunesku, & Walton, 2016).

!

Wise Interventions 30
Later we discuss other commitment strategies derived from dissonance theory (e.g.,
hypocrisy, counterattitudinal behavior).
4. Active Reflection Exercises. A variety of exercises help people reframe problems,
often through writing. These exercises are distinct in that recipients are not provided new
information or asked to change their behavior in any way. Rather, they are instructed to write in
an open-ended manner in ways that help them reinterpret events on their own. An example is
value-affirmation exercises, which aim to mitigate psychological threat by reconnecting people
with core personal values (Cohen et al., 2009). Others help people reexamine negative events,
which can help people find resolution or new meaning and forestall maladaptive ruminative
thoughts to improve health and well-being (e.g., Finkel et al., 2013; Kross & Ayduk, 2011;
Pennebaker, 1997; Ramirez & Beilock, 2011).
Each change strategy can help people reinterpret themselves and a social situation. There
are differences among them, though, and some are better designed to change some kinds of
meanings than others—as we will now see.
Three Families of Wise Interventions
All wise interventions capitalize on the foundational insight reviewed earlier—that how
people make sense of themselves and their situation is a primary determinant of behavior.
Interventions vary, however, in which of the three motives for meaning-making they
emphasize—the need to be accurate, the need for self-integrity, or the need to belong. While the
resulting families of intervention overlap, they also illustrate distinctive approaches to helping
people flourish. Here we outline theoretical principles relevant to each psychological process and
illustrate each family and relevant strategies for change with examples. Table 2 summarizes the
intersection between families of wise interventions and change strategies. Some cells are blank

!

Wise Interventions 31
simply because research has not (yet) shown the relevant change strategy to alter the relevant
psychological process. Extensive examples of interventions targeting each process are provided
in Supplementary Tables 1-3.1
Table 2. What to change and how to change it. Three families of psychological processes
targeted by wise interventions and a sample of strategies to change them.
Change
Family of Wise Intervention
Strategy
The Need to be
Need for Self-Integrity
Need to Belong
Accurate
Direct
•Identity labeling
• Explicit social
Labeling
normative appeals
•Labeling of other
people’s potential
• Other explicit social
information, e.g., that
represents a behavior as
an opportunity to help
others
Prompting
•Alter situation to imply
• Alter social situation to
New
new meanings
prompt new inferences
Meanings
about what is
•Provide new
normative
information to imply
new meanings
• Provide new social
information (e.g.,
•Leading questions
stories) that suggests
new norms
Increasing
•Saying-is-believing
• Saying-is-believing
• Saying-is-believing
Commitment •“Do Good, Be Good”
• Hypocrisy
Through
• Effort justification
Action
• Counter-attitudinal
behavior
• Personal commitment
1

We hope that future scholarship will extend these tables to provide a systematic up-to-date resource for the field.
Examples are culled from numerous searches, including a September 2016 PsychInfo search combining
“intervention” with diverse science and psychology journals (Child Development, Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Psychological Science, Journal of Applied
Psychology, Journal of Applied Social Psychology, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, Journal of Educational Psychology, and Science). Many references were also obtained from prior
empirical and review articles. We retained studies that (1) featured one or more psychologically precise independent
variables (i.e., interventions), which (2) addressed subjective meaning-making; (3) assessed real-world behaviors,
attitudes, or emotions of inherent importance to the person and/or society (this excluded studies that assessed only
behavioral intentions, or behavior, attitudes, or emotions in response to a stimulus presented in a laboratory context);
and (4) were evaluated in randomized controlled trials to test causal effects. This review prioritized novel
psychological processes; thus some studies that replicate and extend other interventions are included as “see also.”

!
!

Wise Interventions 32
Active
Reflection
Exercises

•Writing about negative
events
•Third person
perspective in writing
about negative events

• Value-affirmation

• Contingent valueaffirmation

Interventions that Capitalize on the Need to be Accurate
As noted earlier, even when people are trying to draw accurate inferences about
themselves and the social world, they can get stuck in maladaptive ways of thinking that become
self-reinforcing and ultimately cause profound personal harm. A college student who attributes a
bad grade to her lack of intelligence will find it difficult to study for the next test, ensuring
another poor grade and confirming her pejorative view. Many wise interventions aim to help
people reinterpret their circumstances in less pejorative ways drawing on attribution theory
(Storms & McCaul, 1976; Valins & Nisbett, 1971; Wilson, Damiani, & Shelton, 2002).
Importantly, these approaches are concerned more with helping people come up with
nonpejorative interpretations, regardless of whether these interpretations are accurate in some
objective sense (Abramson, Seligman, & Teasdale, 1978). But they do so by capitalizing on
people’s desire to form accurate views, by assuming that people are motivated to see the world
as it is and are thus open to information that suggests new views.
Direct Labeling. The most direct approach is to tell people about themselves or others.
For instance, 5th graders told they were “litter-conscious” littered less than students given
persuasive appeals not to litter, as long as 7 weeks later (Miller et al., 1975). Telling teachers that
certain students are likely to “bloom” can facilitate teaching that gives rise to greater academic
growth in students (Rosenthal & Jacobson, 1968; see also Raudenbush, 1984).
Prompting New Meanings. Many interventions prompt new meanings indirectly, by
leading people to a new inference.

!

Wise Interventions 33
Altering situations. Changing situations can be a powerful way to prompt new meanings.
One example involves a heuristic people use to evaluate past experiences: People tend to place
disproportionate weight on how the experience ended. Thus improving the end of an experience
can improve later assessments of it (Kahneman, Fredrickson, Schreiber, & Redelmeier, 1993).
Leveraging this insight, one intervention prolonged colonoscopies by leaving the colonscope
inside patients’ rectums at the end of the procedure and then withdrawing it slowly. Although
people experienced pain for longer and more pain in total, this reduced the pain they experienced
at the end. In turn, patients recalled the experience as less painful as a whole, and were 41%
more likely to agree to another colonoscopy an average of 5 years later if needed (Redelmeier et
al., 2003).
Changing situational cues can be especially important when people’s processing capacity
is limited. Alcohol is commonly believed to make people more risk-seeking but, in fact, it
narrows people’s attention to the immediate situation and thus makes proximal cues more
impactful (Steele & Josephs, 1990). Drinkers can thus be risk-seeking in settings that encourage
risky behavior but especially risk-averse when cues discourage risk. Taking advantage of this
process, one study had undergraduates view a safe-sex video and, in one condition, also gave
them a bracelet and asked them to remember the dangers of unsafe sex whenever they looked at
it (Dal Cin, MacDonald, Fong, Zanna, & Elton-Marshall, 2006). Five to seven weeks later,
undergraduates reported on their last sexual experience. Among those who had not been drinking
when they had sex, 46% given the bracelet reported having used a condom, as compared to 25%
who just saw the safe-sex video. Among those who had been drinking, however, the benefit was
even larger: 71% in the bracelet condition used a condom, versus 36% who just saw the video. A
third group that saw no video and received no bracelet was indistinguishable from students in the

!

Wise Interventions 34
safe-sex video condition. Thus reminding students of the dangers of unsafe sex had no effect—
unless they carried a token of this reminder with them into situations in which they might have
unprotected sex, which could change the meaning of this act and relevant behavior.
Providing information. Many interventions provide information that leads people to a
new inference. In school, students can risk inferring that struggles reflect internal deficiencies, a
self-defeating attribution, rather than factors they can control or that improve with time.
Although there has been some success with direct attempts to change students’ attributions
(Perry & Hamm, in press), most interventions prompt adaptive attributions indirectly, such as by
sharing stories of challenges older students experienced and how these improved with time (e.g.,
Stephens et al., 2014; Wilson et al., 2002; Wilson & Linville, 1982) or by providing information
about how intelligence is not fixed but can grow with effort and good strategies (Blackwell et al.,
2007).
Leading Questions. Another approach is to ask questions that imply a new inference. We
have already seen several such interventions, for instance to help people interpret a compliment
from a relationship partner as having a global meaning (Marigold et al., 2007, 2010) or to
interpret difficulties with a baby as not evidence that the child is “a bad baby” but as a normal
problem to be solved (Bugental et al., 2002). Another leading-question intervention raised grades
in high school science. Students were asked to write several times over a semester about how
course material might be relevant or useful to them or someone they knew (Hulleman &
Harackiewicz, 2010). Importantly, the question assumed this relevance, and prompted students to
justify and expound upon this. Notably, just telling students that academic material is useful may
not produce the same benefits, especially if the reasons given are less relevant to a person or if
doing so increases pressure and reduces confidence (Canning & Harackiewicz, 2015).

!

Wise Interventions 35
Another study used leading questions to tie voting to the self-concept (Bryan et al.,
2011). The day before two major elections, people were asked survey questions about voting
(e.g., “How important is it to you to vote in tomorrow’s election”) or about being a voter (e.g.,
“How important is it to you to be a voter in tomorrow’s election”) (italics added). The latter
wording, which encouraged people to see voting as having stakes for their identity, produced one
of the largest increases in voter turnout ever observed.
Leading questions can also prompt people to plan how to organize their behavior to
accomplish their goals, termed implementation intentions (Gollwitzer, 1999). In a classic study, a
fearful message about tetanus had no effect on the likelihood that college seniors went to a clinic
to get a tetanus shot (Leventhal, Singer, & Jones, 1965). But asking students to review their
schedule to find a convenient time raised the percentage of students who got the shot from 3% to
28%. Students did not need more motivation to get the shot. They needed to turn this goal into a
plan. Another study randomized a mailer sent to more than three thousand employees
announcing free flu shot clinics (Milkman, Beshears, Choi, Laibson, & Madrian, 2011). When
the flier asked people to “make a plan” and what day and time they would come, vaccination
rates rose from 33% to 37%.
Increasing Commitment Through Action. An effective way to change people’s beliefs
is to change their behavior first. As long as people view their behavior as freely chosen and not
coerced, they may infer that their beliefs are in accord with their actions (Bem, 1972). In a
program called Teen Outreach, for example, high school students are asked to perform volunteer
work in a community agency of their choice over the school year. Students randomly assigned to
this program, versus those who do not take part, do better in school and are less likely to become
pregnant or get someone pregnant (Allen, Philliber, Herrling, & Kuperminc, 1997). One way the

!

Wise Interventions 36
program works is by increasing teens’ sense of autonomy and their connection with their
community. That is, students’ self-views change to be consistent their actions (volunteering).
Many interventions combine new information with saying-is-believing, to encourage
people to commit to a new idea and to help them connect it to their own lives. Aronson and
colleagues (2002), for instance, delivered a growth-mindset of intelligence intervention by
asking college students to write letters of advice to struggling middle school students describing
the value of a growth mindset. This raised the college students’ semester grades (see also
Okonofua et al., 2016; Paunesku et al., 2015; Walton & Cohen, 2011; Wilson & Linville, 1985).
Illustrating the benefits of this approach, one growth-mindset intervention was more effective
when 9th grade students were told that the exercise was designed to solicit their expertise to help
future students than when told it was designed to help them (Yeager, Romero, et al., 2016).
Active Reflection Exercises. Written reflection exercises can help people reconstrue
negative events. In a seminal study, Pennebaker (1997) showed that having students write
concretely about troubling and even traumatic experiences improved health (e.g., fewer visits to
the medical center) and well-being. Writing may help clarify the nature and limits of a negative
experience, bringing unproductive ruminative thoughts to a close. Subsequent investigators have
used more directive exercises to maximize benefits (see Ramirez & Beilock, 2011). For example,
Kross and colleagues (2014) asked people to write about a negative event from a third-person
perspective, as if they were a fly on the wall observing it, and to explain why the event occurred
the way it did. Compared to people who wrote about the event from a first-person perspective
(e.g., “I failed a test”), those who adopted the third-person perspective (“Greg failed a test”) were
more likely to interpret the event in a non-pejorative way, to stop ruminating on it, and to
experience less psychological distress (see also Kross & Ayduk, 2011; Kross et al., 2005; Park,

!

Wise Interventions 37
Ayduk, & Kross, 2015). As described earlier, Finkel and colleagues (2013) asked married
couples in three 7-minute writing exercises over a year to consider how “a neutral third party
who wants the best for all” would think about a conflict in their marriage, barriers to them taking
this perspective, and how they could overcome these barriers to take this perspective in future
conflict situations. This halted the typical decline in marital satisfaction over a year.
Some implementation-intention interventions also use writing exercises. For example, in
mental contrasting with implementation intentions, people write about a goal they want to
achieve, obstacles that might prevent them from achieving this goal, and how they can overcome
these obstacles. This can increase the likelihood that students succeed academically and in other
domains (Duckworth, Kirby, Gollwitzer, & Oettingen, 2013; see also Morisano, Hirsh, Peterson,
Pihl, & Shore, 2010; Oettingen, 2012).
Summary. These strategies capitalize on people’s motivation to make sense of
themselves or their circumstances in accurate ways. In some cases recipients are relatively
passive, such as when they receive subtle prompts that imply a new way of viewing a situation.
Others require active engagement, such as saying-is-believing and active reflection exercises, but
this may make them more engaging and increase the likelihood people will personalize the idea
conveyed.
Interventions that Capitalize on the Need for Self-Integrity
As noted earlier, people have a strong desire to see themselves as adequate, moral, and
competent. Experiences that threaten this sense of self-integrity can give rise to a range of
personal and social problems (Aronson, 1968; Sherman & Cohen, 2006; Steele, 1988). To
address these problems, many interventions aim to reduce psychological threats. Others create
circumstances in which people will feel inconsistent or hypocritical if they do not behave

!

Wise Interventions 38
positively, effectively leveraging motivations for self-integrity to instigate positive behavior (see
Table 4).
Remedying Threats to Self-Integrity Through Value-Affirmation Writing Exercises.
People routinely experience psychological threats, from information that a habit (e.g., smoking)
imperils one’s health; to an upcoming test one might fail; to a stereotype that casts one in a
negative light; to a personal conflict. In addition to challenging a specific aspect of the self, such
as the perception of oneself as healthy, events like these can undermine a person’s desired view
of themselves as good, moral, and competent in general (Sherman & Cohen, 2006; Steele, 1988).
This broad threat to self-integrity can increase stress, undermine well-being, and lead people to
act in maladaptive or self-destructive ways, such as to deny the validity of health risk
information (Sherman et al., 2000).
To help people function more effectively, value-affirmation interventions provide people
a way to reflect on enduring positive aspects of themselves so as to bolster their global sense of
self-integrity (Sherman & Cohen, 2006; Steele 1988). In a classic exercise, people review a list
of values (e.g., relationships with friends and family, artistic ability), identify a value that is most
important to them, and then describe why. This is not hollow self-esteem boosting. Value
affirmations do not build people up with false praise or facilitate exaggerated self-views. Rather,
reflecting on personal values of enduring importance helps focus people on ways they are
worthy, competent people in important areas of their lives beyond that which is threatened. In so
doing, value affirmations “lower the heat,” place a specific threat in a broader context, reduce
stress, and help people respond in more effective, less defensive ways (Cohen & Sherman, 2014;
Critcher & Dunning, 2015; Sherman & Cohen, 2006; Sherman & Hartson, 2011; Walton,
Paunesku, & Dweck, 2012). Moreover, because threat and suboptimal responses often become

!

Wise Interventions 39
self-reinforcing—threat undermines functioning, further increasing threat—a greater sense of
psychological safety can cause enduring benefits (Cohen et al., 2009).
Some of the most powerful benefits of value-affirmation interventions involve its effects
in reducing social identity threat, mitigating educational inequality. The worry that one could be
viewed through the lens of a negative stereotype can heighten anxiety and distraction and,
ironically, make it harder to perform well (Steele, 1997, 2010; Steele, Spencer, & Aronson,
2002; Schmader, Johns, & Forbes, 2008; Walton & Spencer, 2009). Following basic laboratory
research (Martens, Johns, Greenberg, & Schimel, 2006), seminal field experiments found that
African American adolescents who completed value affirmations as in-class writing exercises at
the beginning of 7th grade earned higher course grades that semester, reducing race differences
by 40%, as well as reduced accessibility of negative stereotypes (Cohen et al., 2006). These
academic benefits persisted through 8th grade, with the greatest benefits for initially lowperforming African American students who may otherwise experience the most severe cycle of
threat and poor performance (Cohen et al., 2009). The long-term gains seem to arise in part
because students who feel psychologically safe in school are better able to develop a secure
sense of belonging (Cook et al., 2012; see also Brady et al., 2016; Layous et al., 2016; Sherman
et al., 2013). Six years after the original intervention, African American students who had
completed the affirmation exercises were more likely to enroll in college (92% versus 78%;
Goyer, Garcia et al., under review; for scaling studies, see Borman, Grigg, & Hanselman, 2016;
Dee, 2015; Hanselman et al., 2014).
In college samples, affirmation interventions have raised women’s performance in maledominated science and engineering fields, eliminating gender differences (Miyake et al., 2010;
Walton, Logel et al., 2015); raised biology grades among first-generation college students,

!

Wise Interventions 40
eliminating social-class differences (Harackiewicz et al., 2014; Tibbetts et al., 2016); and raised
GPA among Latino American students over two years (Brady et al., 2016). In each case, students
who faced identity threat in the context benefited most.
Value affirmation can also reduce threats that arise from sources beyond negative
stereotypes, including to increase acceptance of the health risks of smoking (Harris et al., 2007)
and excess drinking (Armitage, Harris, & Arden, 2011) and reduce drinking (Armitage et al.,
2011); to reduce physiological stress as a major exam approaches (Sherman, Bunyan, Creswell,
& Jaremka, 2009); to increase the ability to self-regulate to accomplish goals on laboratory tasks
(Schmeichel & Vohs, 2009) and, in field settings, to promote weight loss over several months
(Logel & Cohen, 2012); and to improve interpersonal behavior and relationships over periods up
to several months among narcissistic adolescents (Thomaes, Bushman, Orobio de Castro, Cohen,
& Denissen, 2009), antisocial adolescents (Thomaes, Bushman, Orobio de Castro, & Reijntjes,
2012) and socially insecure college students (Stinson, Logel, Shepherd, & Zanna, 2011).
Leveraging Motivations for Self-Integrity: Increasing Commitment Through
Action. Whereas value affirmations aim to remedy threats to self-integrity, other interventions
leverage motivations for self-integrity to promote positive behavior (Table 4). Typically they
create circumstances that lead people to view positive attitudes or behavior as important to being
a good and coherent person.
Table 4. Two ways to address needs for self-integrity and to belong to produce positive change.
Motivational System
Strategy
The Need for Self-Integrity
The Need to Belong
Remedy
• Value-affirmation interventions
• Facilitate a sense of social
Threat that
connection when this connection is
Undermines
lacking
Functioning
• Challenge salient negative social
norms
• Represent social adversities as
temporary and improveable
!

Wise Interventions 41

Leverage
Motivation
to Promote
Positive
Behavior
Change

• Increasing commitment through
action, including through including
commitment devices, hypocrisy,
effort justification, and counterattitudinal behavior

• Facilitate a sense of unconditional
regard
• Create or facilitate connections to
individuals or groups linked to
positive behaviors
• Represent existing social groups or
communities in ways that highlight
positive social norms
• Represent positive behavior change
as a way to help others

Hypocrisy. One approach is to create circumstances in which positive behavior helps
people resolve a sense of personal hypocrisy. In a variation of the “saying-is-believing”
technique, college students were asked to advocate for safe-sex practices to high school students
and, in addition, and were made to feel hypocritical by recalling times they did not practice safe
sex themselves. As compared to either students who only advocated for safe sex (who can see
themselves as exemplary) or who only recalled their own inconsistent past practice (who can see
unsafe sex as not a big deal) but did not do both, those in the hypocrisy condition subsequently
purchased more condoms (Stone, Aronson, Crain, Winslow, & Fried, 1994).
Another study used hypocrisy to promote positive intergroup attitudes during the Civil
Rights movement. Undergraduates were asked to rank-order personal values, and learned that
peers tended to rank “freedom” more highly than “equality” (Rokeach, 1971). The researcher
suggested that this meant “students, in general, are much more interested in their own freedom
than…in the freedom for other people” (p. 454). Students were then asked about their support for
and participation in civil rights demonstrations. The researcher suggested that both students who
opposed civil rights and students who said they supported civil rights but had not demonstrated
“care a great deal about their own freedom but are indifferent to other people’s freedom.” As
long as 15-17 months later, this induction of hypocrisy led students to value “equality” more
highly and to endorse civil rights more strongly. Moreover, treated students were more likely in
!

Wise Interventions 42
the interim to respond to a solicitation from a civil rights organization, the NAACP (26% versus
11% in the control condition) and to enroll in an academic program in intergroup relations (42%
versus 22%), suggesting both the behavioral consequences of the intervention and the recursive
processes that may sustain its effects.
Counter-attitudinal behavior. Another strategy is to create a circumstance that motivates
people to freely act in ways that contradict a problematic attitude; this can motivate people to
revise the attitude (Festinger & Carlsmith, 1959). One study led Asian and White students to feel
socially connected to a Mexican-American peer, disposing them to share her interests including
her cultural interests, and also invited students to work with this peer on a Mexican cultural
activity, designing a music video for a Mexican band she liked (Brannon & Walton, 2013). After
doing so, students showed lower levels of implicit prejudice against Latinos and, six months
later, reported greater interest in talking with Mexican American peers and more positive
attitudes toward undocumented Mexican immigrants. These gains were found relative to students
who worked with the peer to design a video for a non-Mexican band and students required to
design the video for the Mexican band—neither group freely took part in a Mexican cultural
activity, which could seem inconsistent with prejudice against Latinos. They were also found
relative to students not led to feel socially connected to the Mexican-American peer, who did not
engage as enthusiastically with the cultural task.
Commitment. A third strategy is to create a context that encourages people to freely
commit to a future behavior, increasing the odds people will follow through because not doing so
would appear inconsistent. In a classic demonstration, 94% of beach-goers asked to watch
another person’s belongings chased down an accomplice who attempted to steal a radio, as
compared to 20% not asked (Moriatry, 1975). A classic intervention used small group

!

Wise Interventions 43
discussions to encourage housewives to serve cheap organ meats to their families during the
meat shortages of World War II (Lewin, 1947). Although the intervention included multiple wise
elements, an important feature was that the facilitator asked women at the end of the discussion
to indicate by a show of hands who would serve organ meats to their families over the next
week. This increased the percentage who did from 3% to 32%. A recent application found that
placing the signature line at the top rather than the bottom of a car insurance form—thus making
people commit to truth-telling before completing the form—led motorists to disclose having
driven 10% more miles (26,098 vs. 23,671), increasing payments and promoting fairness (Shu et
al., 2012; for a qualification, see Gollwitzer, Sheeran, Michalski, & Seifert, 2009).
Backfires. The fact that it is possible to both reduce threat to self-integrity to improve
functioning and to leverage motivations for self-integrity to promote positive behavior means
that interventions in this space can backfire. Attempting to reduce threat when threat is what
motivates positive behavior, or to leverage motivations for self-integrity when self-integrity is
already under threat, may be counterproductive. Indeed, when people are failing, valueaffirmation can lead people to disengage from goals, in part by allowing them to accept that they
are bad at a task (Vohs, Park, & Schmeichel, 2012). If one reason students stay in a remedial
college math program despite struggles is because inferring that they are bad at school would
undermine their sense of being a good person, exercises that satisfy this need could undermine
persistence.
Thus interventions that contend with the need for self-integrity should, in particular,
proceed with care and rigorous evaluation. In general, it may be helpful to leverage motivations
for self-integrity when people do not place adequate value on a behavior, increasing its
importance by linking it to core concerns of the self. However, when people already value

!

Wise Interventions 44
relevant goals, as is often the case, it is important to ask whether progress toward these goals is
stymied by chronic threats to self-integrity.
Interventions that Capitalize on the Need to Belong
Like interventions that address the need for self-integrity, interventions that address
belonging can either remedy threats that undermine functioning or leverage this motivation to
instigate positive behavior (Table 4).
Remedying Threats to Belonging. Several interventions aim to foster or protect a sense
of social connectedness among people for whom social relationships are otherwise at risk.
Prompting new meanings. Receiving periodic caring notes from a hospital following a
suicidal or depressive incident can reduce suicide rates over several years (Motto & Bostrom,
2001; see also Carter et al., 2013). Illustrating the meaning these notes can have for people, one
former patient replied, “You will never know what your little notes mean to me. I always think
someone cares about what happens to me, even if my family did kick me out. I am really
grateful” (Motto & Bostrom, 2001, p. 832).
In other cases, worries about belonging can lead people to behave in maladaptive ways;
this can be remedied with new social information. One cause of excess college drinking is that
students overestimate the prevalence of and comfort with drinking among peers, which can
motivate them to drink more to fit in (Prentice & Miller, 1993). When students’ misperceptions
are corrected, students who are less comfortable with drinking and more sensitive to others’
disapproval drink less (Schroeder & Prentice, 1998; see also DeJong et al., 2006, 2009; Perkins,
2003). In this process, students are not conforming to a new norm but freed to act in violation of
prevalent drinking norms.
Increasing commitment through action: Saying-is-believing. Other studies use saying-

!

Wise Interventions 45
is-believing procedures to drive home social information aimed at mitigating threats to
belonging. Walton and Cohen (2011) bolstered their social-belonging intervention by asking
students to videotape a speech explaining why worries about belonging are normal in the
transition to college and improve with time using examples from their own lives. These videos,
students were told, could be shown to future students to aid in their transition. Saying-isbelieving procedures are also used in theory-of-personality interventions, which describe how
people can change—and thus that bullies are not always bullies, and victims are not always
victims—to reduce stress and aggression in response to peer bullying among adolescents
(Yeager, Johnson, et al., 2014).
Active reflection exercises. Although active reflection exercises have not often been used
to remedy threats to belonging, one study found that asking adolescents to reflect on times they
experienced unconditional regard from peers reduced feelings of shame several weeks later when
students received poor grades (Brummelman et al., 2014).
Leveraging Belonging Motivations. Other interventions leverage people’s motivations
to form and maintain social relationships, to be appropriate members of their social community,
and to contribute positively to others to promote positive behavior. Many interventions change
representations of social norms—of what is normative of people “like me” (Hallsworth, List,
Metcalfe, & Vlaev, 2014; Lewin, 1947; Paluck, 2009), of attractive or desirable people (Paluck
& Shepherd, 2012), of a setting (Braga & Bond, 2008; Goldstein et al., 2008), or of what should
be done (Schultz, Nolan, Cialdini, Goldstein, & Griskevicius, 2007). Each approach can motivate
conformity.
Direct labeling. Many interventions provide people direct information that defines what
is typical or valued in their social community. In one trial of more than 100,000 delinquent

!

Wise Interventions 46
taxpayers, the most effective communication to encourage payment provided the strongest social
norm statement (“Nine out of ten people in the UK pay their taxes on time. You are currently in
the very small minority of people who have not paid us yet”) (Hallsworth et al., 2014). Among
16,515 citizens, it produced an additional £1.9 million (≈$2.73 million) in tax revenue over 23
days. Social-norm information embedded in utility bills can similarly reduce home energy
consumption, in both small-scale trials (Schultz et al., 2007) and large-scale trials, especially
among high users (Allcott, 2011).
A greater focus on belonging can increase the effectiveness of social-norm appeals. One
study used normative information to increase the rate at which hotel guests reused towels
(Goldstein et al., 2008). Although this study is best known for the specificity of the normative
information—the greatest effects were observed when the norm referenced the very room the
guest was staying in—an underappreciated aspect of the study is that all of the key conditions
combined normative information (“Almost 75% of guests…[reuse] their towels more than
once”) with an appeal to join a social community: “JOIN YOUR FELLOW GUESTS IN
HELPING TO SAVE THE ENVIRONMENT” (capitalized in the original). Experimentally
distinguishing these elements, one study found that normative information alone (“65% of
people…have reduced their paper towel use”) caused no reduction in paper towel use in public
restrooms. But when this information was supplemented with an invitation to “join in” and “do it
together,” usage dropped by 14% (Howe, Carr, & Walton, in prep). Further studies suggest that
normative information alone can make people feel pressured to change undermining
effectiveness and may not generate a feeling of working together toward a common goal, an
important source of motivation (Carr & Walton, 2014).
In the previous examples, people received information indicating that positive behaviors

!

Wise Interventions 47
were normative. What about when the norm is negative? In this case, making salient
improvement can motivate positive change. For instance, the consumption of large quantities of
meat is a negative and highly visible norm yet one that is declining. In one study, informing
lunch goers that the number of people who make an effort to limit their meat consumption is
rising (a “dynamic norm”) doubled the number who ordered lunch without meat (34%), as
compared to both a static-norm condition (17%) and a neutral control condition (21%)
(Sparkman & Walton, under review). The effects arose in part because people conformed to an
anticipated future norm of reduced meat eating and because they saw change in others as
effortful and thus as reflecting the importance to others, motivating personal change.
Prompting new meanings. Rather than providing normative information, other
interventions change situations or tell stories that prompt new inferences about what is typical or
valued. Braga and Bond (2008) randomized 34 crime hotspots to “broken-windows” policing—
cleaning up graffiti and other signs of disorder to signal that rule-breaking was unacceptable.
This reduced citizen 911 calls by 20% over 6 months relative to matched hotspots that received
standard policing (see also Keizer, Linenberg, & Steg, 2008). Stories can also prompt new
inferences. In one study, a radio soap opera featuring stories of positive intergroup relationships
improved intergroup attitudes in post-genocidal Rwanda (Paluck, 2009).
Social information can also represent a behavior as an opportunity to help others,
leveraging prosocial motivations. Grant and Hofmann (2011) manipulated whether a sign on
hospital soap dispensers urged medical professionals to wash their hands to protect their own
health or their patients’. The patient-focused sign raised the rate of proper hand washing from
81% to 89% over a 2-week period with no change for the self-focused signs. Change in a single
word—but one that tied the behavior to a core social motivation—improved health practice.

!

Wise Interventions 48
Increasing commitment through action: Saying-is-believing. Other interventions
connect foundational but tedious learning tasks to students’ desire to help others and make a
difference (Yeager, Henderson, et al., 2014; see also Paunesku et al., 2015). In the pro-social
purpose intervention, students identify a social problem important to them, review stories from
other students about how a desire to make a difference motivated them to work harder and learn
in school, and then write about their own their purpose for learning for future students. This can
raise GPA in math and science, with the greatest effects for initially low-performing students, as
well as promote sustained effort on boring foundational learning tasks.
Active reflection exercise: Contingent value-affirmation. In a novel approach, Fotuhi,
Logel, Spencer, Fong, and Zanna (2014) asked smokers to reflect on a personally important
value they shared with a close friend or family member who supported their intention to quit.
This simultaneously allays a threat to self-integrity posed by the health risks of smoking and
leverages belonging needs to motivate behavior change. At a 6-month follow-up, this increased
the percentage of smokers who had quit (36%), as compared to both a control condition (1%)
and a standard values-affirmation (16%).
Summary
Although many interventions squarely address one motivation for meaning-making or
another, others overlap. For example, people almost always want to arrive at an accurate
interpretation of their standing in the social world, yet that interpretation may be colored by selfintegrity and/or belonging issues. In Walton and Cohen’s (2011) intervention, the root of African
American students’ difficulties in the transition to college involved worries about belonging.
Thus the intervention addressed the need to belong. Yet students were also surely motivated to
form fact-based interpretations of their college experience, and thus drew reasonable inferences

!

Wise Interventions 49
from information about other students’ experiences. The intervention also took advantage of
students’ motivation for self-integrity, by asking them to volunteer to make speeches for future
students that described early worries about belonging as temporary. It may be that the most
effective interventions take this eclectic approach, leveraging multiple motivations and change
strategies. Before designing an intervention, however, researchers should be clear about which
motivations are at play and which change strategies will be most effective at addressing those
motivations to encourage adaptive changes in meaning.
V. Comparison to More Traditional Approaches to Social Intervention
Wise interventions conceptualize the person and the situation together, particularly the
situation as viewed through the eyes of the actor. However, as noted earlier, many reforms
separate the two and prioritize objective change in either situations or persons. To illustrate the
distinctive contribution of wise interventions and how these approaches can complement one
another, it is helpful to compare them.
The primary distinction between situation- and person-centric approaches is in the causal
theory underlying the intervention. The former posits that the nature of objective situations is
critical to success, and that optimizing situations can promote success (e.g., Hanks, Just, Smith,
& Wansink, 2012). The latter emphasizes people’s traits, abilities, and habits of thought and
interventions to alter them (e.g., Jaeggi et al., 2008). The idea is that people carry within them
tools critical to success (e.g., intelligence), and that it is fruitful to improve the tools people have
in their mental toolbox. Each approach is clearly important but each is enhanced by a
consideration of subjective meaning-making. Because people are pervasive meaning-makers,
every event—from a change in a situation to an effort to build personal skills—is subject to
meaning-making, and this can alter the effectiveness of a reform. After reviewing situation- and

!

Wise Interventions 50
person-centric approaches separately, we discuss how these approaches can be combined.
Changing Situations
Adding Resources. Often we try to remedy problems by adding resources. As we have
shown, however, the effectiveness of a new resource can be constrained by how people make
sense of it, including new learning materials (Bandura & Schunk, 1981), constructive critical
feedback (Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns, et al., 2014), as well as opportunities for intergroup contact
(Aronson & Osherow, 1980; Brannon & Walton, 2013; Mallett & Wilson, 2010; see also
Allport, 1954; Pettigrew & Tropp, 2006). Extra or overt help can lead people to infer that they
lack ability and cannot succeed without assistance (Graham & Barker, 1990; see discussion of
McCord, 1978 in Ross & Nisbett, 1991). Health risk information too can be ineffective if people
find it threatening and reject it (Ehret & Sherman, 2014) or fail to apply it in situations that
matter (Dal Cin et al., 2006). Pharmacological drugs can be less effective if their administration
is invisible to patients, undermining placebo effects (Benedetti et al., 2003). In each case an
understanding of meaning making can inform how best to present a new resource or opportunity.
Some major societal problems like poverty are defined by a lack of resources. Yet even in
this case one pathway to poor outcomes involves beliefs, meanings, and inferences (Coleman et
al., 1966; Destin & Oyserman, 2009). In one study of all 10th graders in Chile (N=168,552),
students from lower income families were more likely to endorse a fixed mindset about
intelligence, a perceived limitation that may predictably arise from a childhood without adequate
resources (Claro, Paunesku, & Dweck, 2016). Moreover, mindsets about intelligence were as
predictive of achievement test scores as family income, and were predictive at every income
level. The results suggest that one mechanism by which poverty undermines school achievement
is by inspiring toxic inferences. As Claro and colleagues write (p. 8667):

!

Wise Interventions 51
[W]e are not suggesting that… that teaching students a growth mindset is a
substitute for systemic efforts to alleviate poverty and economic inequality…
Rather, we are suggesting that structural inequalities can give rise to
psychological inequalities and that those psychological inequalities can reinforce
the impact of structural inequalities…[R]esearch on psychological factors can
help illuminate one set of processes through which economic disadvantage leads
to academic underachievement and reveal ways to more effectively support
students who face additional challenges because of their socioeconomic
circumstances.
In another study, students in elementary schools with larger representations of racialminority and low-income students showed lower rates of learning than students in other
schools; yet this inequality was fully mediated by lower levels of trust reported by
teachers in schools with more minority and low-income students (Goddard, Salloum, &
Berebitsky, 2016). In these cases, addressing psychological processes directly may
mitigate one pathway through which structural inequalities reproduce (e.g., Yeager,
Walton, et al., 2016).
Changing Incentives. Incentives can change people’s behavior, such as motivating
children to engage in otherwise boring tasks. But like resources, incentives are subject to
meaning-making and this can lead to ironic consequences. For example, incentives can backfire
if they cause students to see an otherwise enjoyable activity as drudgery undertaken just to earn a
prize (Lepper, Greene, & Nisbett, 1971). This is especially problematic if at some point the
incentive will become unavailable. Then people may be even less motivated to do the activity
than they would have been had the incentive never been introduced.

!

Wise Interventions 52
Disincentives too can inspire undesirable inferences. In a classic example, a fine imposed
on parents who picked up their children late at a day care increased late pick-ups—presumably
because it came to be regarded as a fee for services and the motivation to fulfill one’s obligation
to the school ceased to govern behavior (Gneezy & Rustichini, 2000; see discussion in Miller &
Prentice, 2012). Additionally, “zero-tolerance” policies and other punitive responses to
misbehavior in school can foster feelings of disrespect in students and ironically incite
misbehavior. One intervention that encouraged teachers to adapt an empathic rather than a
punitive mindset about misbehavior cut suspension rates among adolescents in half over a school
year (Okonofua et al., 2016).
A key to understanding incentives, then, is how people interpret them. Consider a study
that randomized poor, rural families in Morocco to receive (a) cash transfers conditional on
children’s school attendance, (b) cash transfers labeled as educational supports but not
contingent on school attendance, or (c) no transfers (Benhassine, Devoto, Duflo, Dupas, &
Pouliquen, 2015). Both cash transfer conditions increased school attendance and learning but the
benefits were largest when the transfers were merely labeled educational supports. Making the
cash conditional on school attendance—making it an incentive—caused no added benefit.
Instead, the government endorsement of education, conveyed through cash transfers, led parents
to see education as important for their children’s future and increased confidence in the quality
of local schools. Thus with incentives as with resources it is essential to take into account
meaning.
Finally, incentive schemes fundamentally proceed from the assumption that people are
inadequately motivated to engage in the behavior being incentivized. This is sometimes the case.
But often people have a basic motivation to behave in positive ways. This may be one reason

!

Wise Interventions 53
why teacher incentives, for instance, can be ineffective in improving student learning (Fryer,
2011). Teachers may not need more motivation but better strategies for how to help children
succeed, such as how to instill productive mindsets in children and build trust that promotes
learning (e.g., Gehlbach et al., 2016; Lepper et al., 1993; Okonofua et al., 2016; Yeager, PurdieVaughns et al. 2014).
Behavioral Nudges. An important innovation in recent years is the advent of “nudges.”
Although the term is used in various ways, we define nudges as changes to the structure of
situations to make specific positive behaviors or decisions more likely or negative ones less
likely (Sunstein, 2016; Thaler & Sunstein, 2008). A classic example is what happens if one does
nothing and accepts the status quo, such as having to sign up to become a potential organ donor
versus having to indicate an unwillingness to do so. Changing the default can have large impacts
on human behavior, including increasing membership on organ donation lists (Johnson &
Goldstein, 2003) and participation in retirement saving plans (Beshears, Choi, Laibson, &
Madrian, 2008). Nudges have proven to be an innovative way of changing behavior on a large
scale. Both the British and United States governments have established “nudge units” in which
psychologists and behavioral economists find more effective ways of delivering policies and
social services by making small changes to social situations (e.g., Service et al., 2014).
Nudges are similar to wise interventions in some ways, including the idea that seemingly
small changes to situations can bring about large changes in behavior. There are, however,
important differences. First, nudges vary in the extent to which they draw on psychological
theory, sometimes deliberately so (Sunstein, 2016). Often nudges are more problem-driven,
seeing what sorts of changes will be effective in a particular situation. We believe that the more
people’s responses to situations are understood in terms of psychological theory, especially

!

Wise Interventions 54
meaning-making processes, the better understood and the more effective these changes will be
(e.g., Hallsworth et al., 2014; Redelmeier et al., 2003).
For example, why does setting the default for people to be organ donors increase
donation rates? It is easy to think that this simply make becoming a donor more convenient
(Johnson & Goldstein, 2003). But studies show that defaults convey implicit norms. When the
default is not to donate, people think of organ donation as equivalent to giving away half their
wealth to charity when they die. But when the default is to donate, people think it is more like
letting other people go ahead in line (Davidai, Gilovich, & Ross, 2012), an easier bar to clear. A
key is the meaning people attach to defaults and not simply how convenient an action is.
A deeper understanding of people’s interpretations and motives allows for predictions
about what type of changes will change behavior. To encourage people to get a vaccine, is it
better to scare people with images of a gruesome disease or to ask them to check their schedules?
Does it matter whether people sign at the top or at the bottom of a car insurance form? Will it be
more effective to ask health care workers to wash their hands to protect their own health or their
patients’ health? Should a hotel emphasize environmental benefits to encourage guests to reuse
towels or local norms?
Psychological theory allows one to form testable hypotheses to answer these questions.
Thus, to encourage a preventative shot, a map and schedule is better than fear (Leventhal et al.,
1965; Milkman et al., 2011), an implication of research on goal pursuit (Gollwitzer, 1999). To
encourage truth-telling, the signature line should be at the top (Shu et al., 2012), an implication
of consistency motivations outlined in dissonance theory (Festinger & Carlsmith, 1959). To
encourage soap use, an emphasis on helping patients is more effective (Grant & Hofmann, 2011)
and to promote towel reuse social norms are more effective (Goldstein et al., 2008), implications

!

Wise Interventions 55
of the need to belong (Baumeister & Leary, 1995).
Psychological theory also informs how to make change lasting—how to truly change
lives. Changing a situation can elicit different behavior within that situation—making healthier
options more convenient can increase healthy eating in a cafeteria (Hanks et al., 2012). However,
when people exit this situation, what can change their future behavior? Certain change within a
situation can help people clear important thresholds. Simplifying the financial aid application
process can unlock resources that help students pursue college (Bettinger, Long, Oreopoulos, &
Sanbonmatsu, 2012; see also Hoxby & Turner, 2014). However, many of the most important
problems people face—from improving marriages, to raising achievement, to living in healthier
ways—require sustained change in many behaviors over time and situations. To alter this
requires a theory of self—including, especially, of how people make sense of themselves,
situations, and classes of situations. By changing meanings—meanings that can become selfreinforcing—wise interventions can change persons as well as situations, and thus improve the
course of people’s lives (e.g., Finkel et al., 2013; Cohen et al., 2009; Walton & Cohen, 2011).
Lastly, psychological theory can give rise to interventions that are counterintuitive and
never would have occurred to someone relying on common sense, such as the idea that
prolonging a painful medical procedure can improve patients’ well-being (Redelmeier et al.,
2003). In short, a common sense approach can lead to effective ways to change behavior in one
situation, but psychological theory that describes how people make sense of themselves and
situations can provide deeper insights and more powerful and long-lasting improvements.
Changing People
A second approach focuses on the traits, skill, and habits of thought of the individual.
Some people are smarter than others, better able to assimilate new information and put it to use.

!

Wise Interventions 56
Some are more self-controlled or grittier or have more adaptive habits of thought. These qualities
predict major life outcomes. For instance, self-control measured in childhood predicts greater
earnings, better health, and less criminality in adulthood above and beyond childhood IQ and
socioeconomic status (Moffitt, et al., 2011; see also Duckworth & Seligman, 2005; Duckworth,
Peterson, Matthews, & Kelly, 2007; Mischel et al., 1989). Such personal skills and habits are
relatively enduring qualities of the person thought to facilitate effective behavior across
situations. In contrast, wise interventions address “meta” inferences, people’s beliefs and
inferences about themselves and social situations (Dweck, 2008). To predict how a student will
do on a test, a person approach would focus on her basic level of intelligence, self-control, or
grit. Wise interventions focus on the student’s beliefs about her abilities and the situation—like
how capable she thinks she is.
Person-centric interventions thus aim to enhance capacities or remedy deficiencies in
skills or habits of thoughts. An advantage is that, in theory, the person acquires new capacities
they can use to their benefit across a wide range of situations.
Personal Skills. The most ambitious person-centric interventions seek to enhance general
intellectual and psychological skills that serve the individual over the life course. Education itself
is of course such an intervention. Schooling promotes the development of intelligence (Brinch &
Galloway, 2011; Duyme, Dumaret, & Tomkiewicz, 1999; see Nisbett et al., 2012). And highquality preschool programs can improve children’s readiness for school (e.g., Campbell,
Pungello, Miller-Johnson, Burchinal, & Ramey, 2001; Woodhead, 1988). Social competencies
can also be built through long-term interventions (Gertler et al., 2014). For example, Fast Track,
a multidimensional 10-year program to promote social competencies in young children with
conduct problems, reduced antisocial behavior in adolescence (Dodge et al., 2013) and, at age

!

Wise Interventions 57
25, reduced the percentage of participants with a psychiatric problem from 69% to 59%,
increased reported happiness, and reduced convictions for substance abuse and violent crimes
(Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group, 2015).
Other person-centric interventions aim to build specific skills theorized to be of general
importance. For instance, some research finds that training adults in tasks that tax and thus
expand working-memory capacity can raise fluid intelligence scores (Jaeggi et al., 2008; see also
Schmiedek et al., 2010). A preschool curriculum using structured dramatic play among other
techniques enhanced executive function in children (Diamond et al., 2007; for research with
adults, see Baumeister et al., 2006; Finkel et al., 2009; Inzlicht & Berkman, 2015; Job, Friese, &
Bernecker, 2015). Encouraging mothers to talk more with their infants and toddlers increased
children’s vocabulary and language production a year later, an important element of school
readiness (Weber, Fernald, & Diop, in press). An intervention that taught mothers how to be
more responsive to their irritable 6 to 9-month-old babies raised the percentage of babies who
were securely attached at 12 months, an important predictor of social and behavioral functioning
(van den Boom, 1994).
These studies suggest the value of theory-based interventions to enhance capacities; yet
caution is in order. Although correlational evidence linking various capacities to life outcomes is
strong, evidence that precise interventions to enhance these capacities cause improvement in life
outcomes is notably lacking. Proxy measures like intelligence test scores (Jaeggi et al., 2008),
executive-function test scores (Diamond et al., 2007), and language production (Weber et al.,
2016) may, in some cases, be increased by well-designed interventions. But these measures are
not outcomes of importance unto themselves (Sternberg, 2008). For example, there is
controversy about whether specific cognitive-training programs (e.g., working-memory training)

!

Wise Interventions 58
enhance broad capacities or produce narrow improvement in the ability to perform well on a
specific test or task (see Inzlicht & Berkman, 2015; Melby-Lervåg Hulme, 2013; Miles et al.,
2016; Shipstead, Redick, & Engle, 2012; Simons et al., 2016). In general, there is surprisingly
little evidence that precisely targeted capacity-training interventions improve functioning outside
testing environments, such as better school achievement, work performance, competence in
everyday cognitive tasks, health, relationships, or well-being, although more comprehensive
reforms can (Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group, 2015; Gertler et al., 2014).
Moreover, in some cases where precise capacity-training interventions have improved
life outcomes, these gains have been mediated by a change in meaning-making. One self-control
training intervention—effortfully squeezing a handgrip twice a day for 2 weeks—increased
students’ end-of-year GPA seven months later, but there was no evidence of improvement in
core self-control skills (Job, Friese, & Bernecker, 2015). Instead, the gains were mediated by a
reduction in students’ reports of the extent to which they avoided putting forth effort in their
studies.
Habits of Thought. Other interventions aim to remedy negative habits of thought or to
instill good habits through the principles of conditioning (Watson, 1913). These learned
associations can then shape inferences and behavior in meaningful ways (see Gawronski &
Bodenhausen, 2006).
In exposure therapy, people are exposed to successively closer images or experiences
relevant to a source of anxiety in a safe context (e.g., thinking about an airplane, viewing an
airplane, boarding an airplane). Doing so mitigates the threatening association and improves
clinical outcomes (McNally, 2007). Facilitating a helpful negative association, the introduction
of graphic cigarette warning labels appears to increase smokers’ motivation to quit, presumably

!

Wise Interventions 59
by repeatedly pairing smoking with threat and illness (Hammond, 2011; Hammond et al., 2003).
Understanding learning principles can also prevent the formation of deleterious associations. In
one study, pediatric cancer patients given novel candies before undergoing chemotherapy were
less likely to later develop food aversions, presumably because they associated nausea with the
novel candy not normal food (Broberg & Bernstein, 1987).
Other interventions modify approach/avoidance associations. In an impressive finding,
alcoholic inpatients taught to provide an avoidance response to alcohol by repeatedly pushing a
joystick away from images of alcohol began to automatically associate alcohol with avoidance
and, a year later, were less likely to have relapsed (46% vs. 59%) (Eberl et al., 2013; Wiers,
Ebert, Rinck, Becker, & Lindenmeyer, 2011). There is also evidence that repeatedly pulling a
joystick toward the self in response to images of racial minorities can facilitate automatic
associations between the self and minorities and reduce measures of implicit prejudice (Phills,
Kawakami, Tabi, Nadolny, & Inzlicht, 2011; see also Forbes & Schmader, 2010; Kawakami,
Steele, Cifa, Phills, & Dovidio, 2008; see also Levy, Pilver, Chung, & Slade, 2014).
A challenge for exercises to change associations is that they may be diluted and fail in the
long-term if reality provides a robust contrary association—which may be why a maladaptive
association exists in the first place (see Lai et al., 2016). However, changing how people make
sense of real-world experiences may set up new patterns of behavior (e.g., Cohen et al., 2009;
Marigold et al., 2007; Walton & Cohen, 2011). Consistent with this view, one intervention
designed to remedy implicit bias among math, science, and engineering faculty had no such
effect. Nonetheless, three months later the intervention raised awareness of gender bias and the
motivation to be non-biased, improved the department climate (e.g., reports of how much faculty
felt they fit in and valued), and, when more than a quarter of department faculty took part,

!

Wise Interventions 60
increased reported action to promote gender equity (Carnes et al., 2015). Another study found no
lasting reduction in implicit racial prejudice but increased concern about prejudice over two
weeks and, in a subsample recruited two years later, greater likelihood of objecting in an online
forum to an essay endorsing racial stereotyping (79% vs. 48%) (Forscher, Mitamura, Dix, Cox,
& Devine, under review).
Discussion. To build skills and/or change associations, person-centric interventions
typically involve practice and/or repetition. As Diamond and Lee (2011) write of interventions to
promote self-control skills, “All successful programs involve repeated practice and progressively
increase the challenge to executive functions” (p. 959). In some cases, this practice occurs in a
module outside people’s normal lives (e.g., an online task; Jaeggi et al., 2008), and as such may
require significant motivation. In other cases, it may be embedded in normal life (e.g., a
preschool curriculum, Diamond et al., 2007). A consequence of this “practice-makes-perfect”
model is that person-centric interventions typically have a dose-response relationship with
outcomes (e.g., Jaeggi et al., 2008). In contrast, as we have seen, interventions to change
meanings can involve a single dose that, by altering a recursive process, causes lasting change
(e.g., Walton & Cohen, 2011). Thus timing, not dosage, may be more important for wise
interventions (Cook et al., 2012; Raudenbush, 1984). Because effective person-centric
interventions are relatively intensive, they may also be more costly. One training program aimed
at staving off some of the cognitive declines associated with aging compensated participants for
completing exercises with as much as €1,950 (≈$2,200; Schmiedek et al., 2010). Such costs may
be justified by a program’s effectiveness. However, they also suggest the value of finding ways
to embed effective training activities in daily life (Diamond & Lee, 2011). A promising approach
involves what Robinson (2011) calls “stealth interventions”—fun daily activities that cause

!

Wise Interventions 61
benefits even without recipients’ awareness, such as ethnic dance groups, which promote
exercise and weight loss among adolescents.
There is also a risk in focusing heavily on the qualities of people. Psychologists have long
identified a general error termed the dispositionist bias or the fundamental attribution error, in
which people place excessive weight on internal, personal factors to explain behavior as
compared to external, situational factors (Ross & Nisbett, 1991). A focus on internal limitations
may obscure people’s existing capacities and strengths (Seligman et al., 2005) and detract
attention from other factors that constrain outcomes. It is thus helpful to consider whether
negative outcomes might reflect situational factors or beliefs and inferences as well as or instead
of personal limitations (e.g., Rogge, Cobb, Lawrence, Johnson, & Bradbury, 2013).
Consider self-control, which is commonly understood as an ability (Mischel et al., 1989).
Yet self-control is not just a skill. It also involves beliefs and meanings. For instance, a
reluctance to wait in the classic delay-of-gratification paradigm may reflect a child’s belief that
the experimenter’s return with the promised larger reward is less than certain (Kidd, Palmeri, &
Aslin, 2013): “a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush.” If people think that everyday life
settings cannot be counted on to reward greater effort they may choose not to self-regulate even
when they could do so (Coleman et al., 1966). Willingness to delay gratification can also be
increased simply by changing meanings. In one line of research, children exposed to a storybook
character who learns that waiting can be energizing not depleting adopted more effective waiting
strategies and waited longer (Haimovitz, Dweck, & Walton, under review). Knowing that
waiting longer was possible, children figured out how to do so (see also Karniol et al., 2011).
Another study found that teaching college students that people can choose what to believe about
willpower, encouraging a view of willpower as energizing not depleting, improved academic

!

Wise Interventions 62
regulation a month later and semester grades among students who faced high self-control
demands (Job, Flueckiger, Bernecker, Lieb, & Mata, 2016; see also Job, Dweck, & Walton,
2010; Job, Walton, Bernecker, & Dweck, 2015). In short, promoting a view of environments as
reliable and of self-regulation as energizing not depleting may promote self-control. Thus it is
important to identify when limitations in personal skills constrain outcomes and when belief
systems do, and to use person-centric and wise interventions accordingly.
VI. Combining Approaches
Society will never solve social problems without creating situations that help people
succeed (situation-centric reforms); without building important skills and habits in people
(person-centric reforms); and without addressing the critical role of subjective meaning and the
barriers to effective behavior it creates (wise interventions). How can these approaches be
brought together and, where appropriate, combined?
We have emphasized, for example, that the opportunities afforded by the context in
which wise interventions take place are essential, such as opportunities to learn created by school
systems and educators (see Table 1; Yeager & Walton, 2011). Efforts to expand opportunities
and to help people take advantage of these are thus complementary (e.g., Bandura & Schunk,
1981). It is thus imperative to systematically examine how wise interventions intersect with
diverse contexts; doing so can begin to map what barriers to better outcomes exist where. For
instance, a growth-mindset of intelligence intervention may be less effective in schools that are
chaotic or under-resourced and thus do not provide students high-quality learning opportunities;
such a finding would diagnosis structural impediments and imply structural reforms. Such efforts
are already underway. The National Growth Mindset Study and the College Transition
Collaborative are each testing mindset interventions with large samples of students entering

!

Wise Interventions 63
diverse high schools and colleges. At a high level, exploring the intersection of psychology and
social contexts will help show what capacities for improvement are available but undermined by
psychological processes and where psychological processes are not the relevant constraint, for
instance if capacity itself is inadequate.
Specific reforms can also be complementary. In the transition to college, a situationcentric approach might be to simplify forms, transmit systematic reminders of deadlines to
students, increase financial aid, or provide low-income students information about graduation
rates, net costs, and selective colleges they might be a good fit for (see respectively: Bettinger et
al., 2012; Castleman, Owen, & Page, 2015; Goldrick-Rabb et al., 2012; Hoxby & Turner, 2014).
These strategies address important barriers just not social-psychological challenges like feelings
of inadequacy and nonbelonging. Addressing these, as we have seen, can transform effects on
college students’ success (Aronson et al., 2002; Harackiewicz et al., 2014, 2016; Miyake et al.,
2010; Stephens et al., 2012; Walton & Cohen, 2011; Wilson & Linville, 1982, 1985; Yeager,
Walton, et al., 2016). Because these approaches address different barriers to a successful college
transition, combining them may be fruitful.
In some cases, a single reform can serve multiple functions. Setting defaults thoughtfully
no doubt makes a personally and socially positive choice easier (Johnson & Goldstein, 2003)
even as it also signals what is normative (Davidai et al., 2012). Providing cash to poor families
expands opportunities even as it conveys the importance of education (Benhassine et al., 2015).
Multi-component interventions can also accomplish multiple aims. Earlier we described the van
den Boom (1994) intervention, which taught mothers to be responsive to irritable babies,
promoting secure attachment. This intervention aimed to build mothers’ skills in interpreting
babies’ signals accurately, a person-centric approach in the service of meaning-making.

!

Wise Interventions 64
Similarly, Fast Track, the 10-year program to promote social competencies (Conduct Problems
Prevention Research Group, 2015), included multiple components including social-skills
training, parent groups, curricula, etc., but had as a primary goal discouraging children from
drawing global interpretations for hostile events (see Hudley & Graham, 1993). Indeed, the
intervention’s effect in reducing adolescent antisocial behavior was mediated in part by a
reduction in children’s tendency to see peers who ambiguously inflict harm as intentionally
hostile (Dodge et al., 2013; see also Heller et al., 2015). Likewise, interventions that teach
specific meditation or mindfulness practices help people cultivate emotion-regulation skills, but
what these skills do is help a person reflect on experiences, feelings, and thoughts in more
productive ways—a change in meaning, which can improve health, well-being, and personal
relationships (Creswell et al., 2016; Fredrickson et al., 2008).
It is also important to consider how wise interventions interact. Although it is tempting to
assume that combining two effective interventions will increase their impact, this is not always
the case (e.g., Good et al., 2003; Paunesku et al., 2015; Yeager, Walton et al., 2016 Experiment
2). Since the combined messages will be understood together, the meanings they inspire must
function well together (e.g., Fotuhi et al., 2014). In some goal-setting interventions, for instance,
people both identify goals and how they will implement them (Duckworth et al., 2013; Morisano
et al., 2010; see also Eskreis-Winkler et al., 2016). In other cases, even distinct interventions may
overlap, and may be best understood as different avenues into a single psychological system. For
instance, value-affirmation and social-belonging interventions both aim to remedy identity threat,
although they do so in different ways (Garcia & Cohen, 2012). It is unclear whether combining
them would increase their impact. Interventions may also compete with one another (Jessop,
Sparks, Buckland, Harris, & Churchill, 2014; see also Harris et al., 2014). One study found that

!

Wise Interventions 65
both a social-belonging intervention and a novel affirmation-training intervention, which
encouraged students to see their daily activities as expressions of their values and ways to stay
balanced, raised women’s grades in male-dominated engineering fields (Walton, Logel, et al.,
2015). However, whereas the former increased women’s friendships with men in engineering the
latter increased women’s gender identification and friendships with women. It is interesting to
speculate what would have happened had women received both messages. Although it is possible
to develop more friendships with both male peers and women, receiving both messages at once
could also be counterproductive.
VII. Implications and High Priority Directions for Future Research
Our review highlights several important high-level directions for future research.
Mechanisms of Long-Term Change
Wise interventions cause their most powerful and wide-ranging benefits when they
change people’s ongoing behavior in diverse circumstances over time. It is essential to better
understand how this broad and lasting change occurs. In general terms, we have argued that
interventions that change meanings can alter recursive cycles of psychology, behavior, and
situations. An fundamental question involves the relative roles of the person and situation aspects
of this cycle. Suppose a growth-mindset of intelligence intervention changes a student’s belief
about the malleability of intelligence and, in turn, promotes learning-oriented behaviors in school
(e.g., greater effort, seeking out effective learning strategies). Perhaps initial improved outcomes
confirm the student’s belief in the malleability of intelligence and this belief system drives longterm gains. Consistent with this process, research shows that, because people recruit reasons to
support new beliefs, new beliefs readily persevere (e.g., even when their original basis has been
discredited; Ross, Lepper, & Hubbard, 1975). Alternately, perhaps the initial change in the

!

Wise Interventions 66
student’s behavior is recognized by the teacher (Blackwell et al., 2007), who then treats the
student in more positive, growth-oriented ways (Rosenthal & Jacobson, 1968). Perhaps this
mentorship facilitates lasting gains (Brady et al. in prep B), or perhaps the teacher places the
student in a high-performance track or removes them from a remedial program, exposing them to
higher achieving peers (see Cohen et al., 2009). In an extreme case, perhaps these changes in
situation drive lasting improvement even with no lasting psychological change in the student
(e.g., in beliefs about the malleability of intelligence).
To what extent do lasting benefits arise from enduring change in how people make sense
of situations (if/then beliefs like, “If I do poorly, it means I need to work harder”; Dweck, 2008;
Mischel & Shoda, 1995) versus from change in the situations people enter as a consequence of
an initial change in meaning-making? Typically, these processes will work in tandem and
contribute to the robustness and longevity of intervention effects. But distinguishing them will
inform basic theory and predictions about when lasting change will be more or less likely.
Adaptation, Scaling, and Social Change
As we have seen, wise interventions deliberately start small, testing theory-driven
hypotheses in specific populations in specific contexts. An essential question involves how to
scale up these interventions to new populations and contexts (Yeager & Walton, 2011). Meeting
this challenge requires: (1) deep expertise in the psychological process targeted by the
intervention and tools to alter it; (2) deep expertise in the setting and population at hand, and the
nature of the psychological process in this context; and (3) effective and reliable means of largescale intervention delivery.
1. Psychological Expertise. Psychological ideas and interventions often involve nuances
that, absent a deep appreciation of psychological theory, may seem trivial yet are essential. For

!

Wise Interventions 67
example, growth-mindset interventions convey that intelligence can grow with hard work,
effective strategies, and help from others. Partial and inaccurate understandings of growth
mindset—what Dweck (2016) calls “false growth mindset”—can inspire practices that do not
substantively engage students in learning, such as praising students for effort alone, even
ineffective effort, or telling students they “can do anything” without providing learning strategies
that help students get there (see also Yeager, Romero, et al., 2016).
Marigold and colleagues’ (2007) intervention to improve relationships for people with
low self-esteem assumed that a compliment from their romantic partner had a general meaning
(“Explain why your partner admired you. Describe what it meant to you and its significance for
your relationship.”). When people were asked instead if the compliment had a general meaning
(“Explain whether you think what your partner said indicated that he/she admired you…”) there
were no benefits. Basic research shows why this detail matters: People with low self-esteem are
not unaware that a partner could truly love them. They crave this possibility but fear rejection
and so tend to doubt it (Murray et al., 2006). Thus it is not helpful to ask people to consider a
broader meaning—they already have. It is essential to assume this meaning and to encourage
people to elaborate upon it. Yet it is easy to imagine how a shallow understanding of this
psychological process could lead a well-intended person to mistake one for the other.
One of the largest effects on voter turnout ever observed was obtained by asking citizens
the day before two major statewide elections a series of questions about “being a voter” (e.g.,
“How important is it to you to be a voter in tomorrow’s election?” versus “How important is it to
you to vote…”; Bryan et al., 2011). This language represents voting as an opportunity to become
a kind of person. Its effectiveness, however, hinges on whether being “a voter” in the upcoming
election is a valued identity people aspire to. Absent this understanding, one might imagine that

!

Wise Interventions 68
the intervention should work in any election, including in low-turnout, low-profile,
uncompetitive ones (Gerber, Huber, Biggers, & Hendry, 2016). Yet in this context being “a
voter” does not carry significant identity stakes (Bryan, Walton, & Dweck, 2016).
Wise interventions are not simple. They are predicated on a deep understanding of
psychological processes built from basic research and an appreciation of the context. It is thus
essential for researchers to communicate clearly about psychological processes and to make their
assumptions explicit.
2. Expertise in the Setting and Population. It is also necessary to understand the social
context and how the targeted psychological process arises, matters, and may be modified there
(Yeager & Walton, 2011). If a psychological exercise does not speak to people’s experience in a
setting, it does nothing at all. Thus it may be necessary to revise an intervention to work
effectively in a new context (see Yeager, Walton et al., 2016 Experiment 1).
For instance, to customize a previously effective growth-mindset of intelligence
intervention for students in the transition to high school (Paunesku et al., 2015), Yeager,
Romero, and colleagues (2016) used focus groups, interviews, and rapid, iterative A/B
experiments to address such design questions as: (1) Is it better to simplify text using bullet
points than paragraphs? Yes. (2) Is it more effective to tell recipients that the exercise is designed
to help them or that it is a way to help future 9th graders? The latter. (3) Is it helpful to include
quotes from admired adults and celebrities? Yes. In one large trial, the revised intervention
outperformed the original intervention in increasing challenge seeking and shifting attributions
for difficulty from the person (e.g., low ability) to processes (e.g., ineffective strategies)—
mechanisms of greater learning that follow from a growth-mindset. In another, the revised
intervention significantly raised grades among poorly performing students relative to a control

!

Wise Interventions 69
condition, replicating prior research.
3. Standardized Means of Intervention Delivery. No matter how well-designed an
intervention is, it will be ineffective if it does not impart the key psychological message
effectively. Errors can arise when a complex idea is translated through intermediaries (e.g., from
researchers to administrators to teachers to students), the “operator” problem. Thus standardized
means to reach recipients directly are valuable. One such means is carefully designed online
reading-and-writing modules. Such modules can be accessed by people anywhere with an
Internet connection; can impart complex psychological ideas using standardized materials; and
can incorporate interactive features that enhance engagement and personalization, such as
saying-is-believing exercises. They have been used effectively to reach thousands of students
with growth-mindset, social-belonging, and related interventions (Paunesku et al., 2015; Yeager,
Romero et al., 2016; Yeager, Walton, et al., 2016). Moreover, once evaluated in a setting, online
interventions can be provided on an ongoing basis to more people at low cost.
Second, wise interventions can be embedded in direct ongoing communications. A
company, Opower, partners with utilities to embed social-norm information in bills received by
millions of residential customers. In one evaluation of nearly 600,000 households, this reduced
home energy use by 2%, with the greatest reductions among high-users (Allcott, 2011), an effect
estimated to be equivalent to what would arise from a short-term price increase of 11-20%.
Nickerson and Rogers (2010) embedded an implementation-intention intervention in phone
scripts used to encourage more than 280,000 citizens to vote, raising turnout by 4 percentage
points. Brady and colleagues (in prep B) revised a form letter a university sent to students to
place them on academic probation to reduce stigma (e.g., emphasizing valid reasons students
experience difficulties in college and stories of growth from prior probationary students); this cut

!

Wise Interventions 70
the percentage of students who were suspended or had dropped out a year later from 52% to
21%. Harackiewicz and colleagues (2012) mailed brochures to parents and created a website
highlighting how to talk with adolescents about the usefulness of math and science courses; this
increased students’ math and science enrollment. Finkel and colleagues (2013) piggybacked on
an ongoing longitudinal survey of married couples to embed a randomized intervention on how
to handle conflicts; this improved marital quality over a year. Standardized messages can also be
incorporated in social media. One social-norm message seen by 61 million people on Facebook
raised turnout in US Congressional elections by an estimated 340,000 (Bond et al. 2012; for
other examples, see Goldstein et al., 2008; Grant & Hofmann, 2011; Hallsworth et al., 2014;
Hammond et al., 2003, 2004; Milkman et al., 2011; Shu et al., 2012).
Another approach is to intervene with one person so as to alter how this person perceives
or behaves toward other people. This can improve the quality of important relationships
(romantic relationships; Marigold et al., 2007, 2010; parent-child relationships, van den Boom,
1994; teacher-student relationships, Gehlbach et al., 2016) and outcomes that arise from these
relationships (Bugental et al., 2002; Harackiewicz et al., 2012; Weber et al., 2016), such as
increased learning in school (Gehlbach et al., 2016; Rosenthal & Jacobson, 1968). Moreover,
when one person interacts with many other people, altering this person’s mindset and behavior
can have broad consequences. Okonofua and colleagues (2016) randomized 31 middle-school
teachers to an intervention aimed at encouraging an empathic rather than punitive mindsets about
student misbehavior; this cut suspension rates among the 1,682 students they taught by half.
Paluck and colleagues (2016) randomized 56 middle schools to an intervention in which 15% of
students at each treated school were randomized to receive an anti-conflict norm intervention or
not. A total of 728 students received the intervention. This reduced disciplinary problems among

!

Wise Interventions 71
the 11,938 students in the treated schools over a year by 30%. The greatest effects were observed
in schools in which more of the participating students were influential within the school peer
network and thus positioned to alter school norms (see also Powers et al., 2016). In these ways,
wise interventions can leverage social structures and relationships to instigate large-scale change.
VIII. Conclusion
Social-psychological processes play a central role in many social and personal problems.
It is possible to understand these processes in basic research; to transform this understanding into
interventions that effectively alter them and improve outcomes in field settings; to join this with
expertise in settings and populations to adapt interventions for new contexts; and to deliver
psychological interventions to remedy problems on a socially meaningful scale.
Psychological processes are not “small” in comparison to “big” problems like poor
achievement or inequality, as people sometimes think. Although structural reforms are often also
essential, from the perspective of a person deciding how to act there is nothing more important
than how that person makes sense of him- or herself and the social situation. As Yeager and
Walton (2011, pp. 283-284) wrote:
From the perspective of a researcher or teacher, an implicit theories workshop or
a value-affirmation writing exercise is just one of many classroom experiences
given to students. But to a student sitting at a desk in the third row worrying
about whether a poor test score means she is stupid or whether others will reduce
her to a negative stereotype, an experience like learning that the brain can grow
and form new connections when challenged or being invited to describe
personally important values may feel quite “large.”
Further, psychology can be understood systemically. People can think that psychological

!

Wise Interventions 72
processes matter but are idiosyncratic, as though everyone’s internal psychological life is unique,
and thus not relevant on a collective level that could contribute to social problems. If this were
the case, one-on-one therapy might be effective but not social-psychological interventions. Yet
there are many predictable psychological patterns common across people and contexts. The
better we understand these patterns—the more sophisticated our theories of psychology—the
better equipped we will be to change those that are maladaptive.
Finally, psychological processes can be changed. Even when people think that these
processes matter and can be systematic, they may throw up their hands at the possibility of
changing them, especially for large numbers of people and over meaningful periods of time.
Certainly psychological change can be challenging. Yet understanding times and contexts in
which change is more possible than others (e.g., during transitions), using effective strategies to
instigate change (e.g., saying-is-believing), and doing so in settings in which recursive processes
can transmit an initial change in psychology forward in time can cause lasting improvement in
the lives of many people. The social-psychological approach, conceptualizing the person and the
situation together, as viewed through the eyes of the actor, is thus an efficient, often
counterintuitive, and yet powerful way to help people succeed in their lives.

!

Wise Interventions 73
References
Abramson, L. Y., Seligman, M. E. P., & Teasdale, J.D. (1978). Learned helplessness in humans:
Critique and reformulation. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 87, 49-74.
Allcott, H. (2011). Social norms and energy conservation. Journal of Public Economics, 95,
1082-1095.
Allen, J. P., Philliber, S., Herrling, S., & Kuperminc, G. P. (1997). Preventing teen pregnancy
and academic failure: Experimental evaluation of a developmentally based approach.
Child Development, 64, 729-742.
Allport, G. W. (1954). The nature of prejudice. Cambridge, MA: Perseus Books
Alvarez K. & van Leeuwen, E. V. (2015). Paying it forward: How helping others can reduce the
psychological threat of receiving help. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 45, 1-9.
Armitage, C. J., Harris, P. R., & Arden, M. A. (2011). Evidence that self-affirmation reduces
alcohol consumption: Randomized exploratory trial with a new, brief means of selfaffirming. Health Psychology, 30, 633-641.
Aronson, E. (1968). Dissonance theory: Progress and problems. In R. Abelson, E. Aronson, W.
McGuire, T. Newcomb, M. Rosenberg, & P. Tannenbaum (Eds.), Theories of cognitive
consistency: A sourcebook (pp. 5-27). Chicago: McNally.
Aronson, E. (1999). The power of self-persuasion. American Psychologist, 54, 875-884.
Aronson, E. & Osherow, N. (1980) Cooperation, prosocial behaviour, and academic
performance: Experiments in the desegregated classroom. In L, Bickerman (Ed.) Applied
Social Psychology Annual, Beverley Hills: Sage.
Aronson, J., Fried, C. B., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the effect of stereotype threat on African
American college students by shaping theories of intelligence. Journal of Experimental

!

Wise Interventions 74
Social Psychology, 38, 113-125.
Asch, S.E. (1952). Social psychology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Bandura, A., & Schunk, D. H. (1981). Cultivating competence, self-efficacy, and intrinsic
interest through proximal self-motivation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
41, 586-598.
Baumeister, R. F., & Leary, M. R. (1995). The need to belong: Desire for interpersonal
attachments as a fundamental human motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 117(3), 497529.
Baumeister, R. F., Gailliot, M., DeWall, C. N., & Oaten, M. (2006). Self-regulation and
personality: How interventions increase regulatory success, and how depletion moderates
the effects of traits on behavior. Journal of Personality, 74, 1773-1801.
Bem, D. J. (1972). Self-Perception Theory. In Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, vol.
6, ed. Leonard Berkowitz, 1–63. New York: Academic Press.
Benhassine, N., Devoto, F., Duflo, E., Dupas, P., & Pouliquen V. (2015). Turning a shove into a
nudge? A ‘labeled cash transfer’ for education.” American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy, 7(3), 1–48.
Benedetti, F., Maggi, G., Lopiano, L. Lanotte, M., Rainero, I., Vighetti, S., Pollo, A. (2003).
Open versus hidden medical treatments: The patient’s knowledge about a therapy affects
the therapy outcome. Prevention & Treatment, Vol 6(1), No Pagination Specified Article
1a.
Beshears, J., Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., & Madrian, B. C. (2008). The importance of default options
for retirement saving outcomes: Evidence from the United States. In S. J. Kay & T. Sinha
(Eds.) Lessons from Pension Reform in the Americas, 59–87. Oxford: Oxford University

!

Wise Interventions 75
Press.
Bettinger, E., Long, B., Oreopoulos, P., and Sanbonmatsu, L. (2012). Helping complete college
financial aid applications: Evidence from a randomized trial with H&R Block. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 127, 1205-1242.
Blackwell, L. A., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Theories of intelligence and
achievement across the junior high school transition: A longitudinal study and an
intervention. Child Development, 78, 246-263.
Bond, R. M., Fariss, C. J., Jones, J. J., Kramer, A. D. I., Marlow, C., Settle, J. E., & Fowler, J. H.
(2012). A 61-million-person experiment in social influence and political mobilization.
Nature, 489, 295-298.
Borman, G. D., Grigg, J., & Hanselman, P. (2016). An effort to close achievement gaps at scale
through self-affirmation. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 38, 21-42.
Bowlby, J. (1988). A Secure Base: Clinical Applications of Attachment Theory. London:
Routledge.
Brady, S. T., Reeves, S L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Cook, J., Taborsky-Barba, S.,
Tomasetti, S., Davis, E., & Cohen, G. L. (2016). The psychology of the affirmed learner:
Spontaneous self-affirmation in the face of stress. Journal of Educational Psychology,
108, 353-373.
Brady, S. T., Walton, G. M., Cohen, G. L., Fotuhi, O, Gomez, E., & Urstein, R. [in prep A].
Revising the scarlet letter of academic probation: Reframing institutional messages to
increase student success and reduce shame and stigma
Brady, S. T., Walton, G. M., Cohen, G. L., Jarvis, S. [in prep B]. Downstream consequences of a
social-belonging intervention in the transition to college.

!

Wise Interventions 76
Braga, A. A. & Bond, B. J. (2008). Policing crime and disorder hot spots: A randomized
controlled trial. Criminology, 46, 577-607
Brannon, T. N. & Walton, G. M. (2013). Enacting cultural interests: How intergroup contact
reduces prejudice by sparking interest in an outgroup’s culture. Psychological Science,
24, 1947-1957.
Brehm, J. W. (1966). A theory of psychological reactance. Academic Press.
Brinch, C. N. & Galloway, T. A. Galloway (2012). Schooling in adolescence raises IQ.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109, 425-430.
Brinkman, S. A., Johnson, S. E., Codde, J. P., Hart, M. B., Straton, J. A., Mittinty, M. N, &
Silburn, S. R. (2016). Effect of infant simulator programmes to prevent teenage
pregnancy: A school-based cluster randomized controlled trial in Western Australia. The
Lancet.
Brummelman, E., Thomaes, S., Walton, G. M., Poorthuis, A. M. G., Overbeek, G., Castro, B. O.,
Bushman, B. J. (2014). Unconditional regard buffers children’s negative self-feelings.
Pediatrics, 134, 1119-1126.
Bryan, C. J., Walton, G. M., & Dweck, C. S. (2016). Psychologically authentic versus
inauthentic replication attempts. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America.
Bryan, C. J., Walton, G. M., Rogers, T. & Dweck, C. S. (2011). Motivating voter turnout by
invoking the self. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America, 108, 12653-12656.
Bugental, D. B., Ellerson, P. C., Lin, E. K., Rainey, B., Kokotovic, A., & O’Hara, N. (2002). A
cognitive approach to child abuse prevention. Journal of Family Psychology, 16, 243-

!

Wise Interventions 77
258.
Bugental, D. B., Schwartz, A., & Lynch, C. (2010). Effects of an early family intervention on
children’s memory: The mediating role effects of cortisol levels. Mind, Brain, and
Education, 4, 159-170.
Campbell, F. A., Pungello, E. P., Miller-Johnson, S., Burchinal, M., & Ramey, C. T. (2001). The
development of cognitive and academic abilities: Growth curves from an early childhood
educational experiment. Developmental Psychology, 37, 231-242.
Canning, E.A. & Harackiewicz, J.M. (2015). Teach it, don’t preach it: The differential effects of
directly-communicated and self-generated utility value information. Motivation Science,
1, 47-71.
Carnes, M. L., Devine, P. G., Manwell, L. B., Byars-Winston, A., Fine, E., Ford, C. E., Forscher,
P. S., Iaasc, C., Kaatz, A, Magua, W., Palta, M, & Sherridan, J. (2015). Effect of an
intervention to break the gender bias habit: A cluster randomized, controlled trial.
Academic Medicine, 90, 221-230.
Carr, P. B. & Walton, G. M. (2014). Cues of working together fuel intrinsic motivation. Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology, 53, 169-184.
Carter, G. L., Clover, K., Whyte, I. M., Dawson, A. H., D’Este, C. (2013). Postcards from the
EDge: 5-year outcomes of a randomised controlled trial for hospital-treated selfpoisoning. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 202, 372-380.
Castleman B.L., Owen L., Page L.C. (2015). Stay late or start early? Experimental evidence on
the benefits of college matriculation support from high schools versus colleges.
Economics of Education Review, 47, 168–179
Clark, K. B. & Clark, M. P. (1947). Racial identification and preference among negro

!

Wise Interventions 78
children. In E. L. Hartley (Ed.) Readings in Social Psychology. New York: Holt,
Rinehart, and Winston.
Claro, S., Paunesku, D., & Dweck, C. S. (2016). Growth mindset tempers the effects of poverty
on academic achievement. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113, 86648668.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., & Master, A. (2006). Reducing the racial achievement gap: A
social-psychological intervention. Science, 313, 1307-1310.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaugns, V., Apfel, N., & Brzustoski, P. (2009). Recursive
processes in self-affirmation: Intervening to close the minority achievement gap. Science,
324, 400-403.
Cohen, G. L., & Sherman, D. K. (2014). The psychology of change: Self-affirmation and social
psychological intervention. Annual Review of Psychology, 65, 333-371.
Cohen, G. L., Steele, C. M., & Ross, L. D. (1999). The mentor’s dilemma: Providing critical
feedback across the racial divide. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 1302–
1318.
Coleman, J. S., Campbell, E. Q., Hobson, C. J., McPartland, J., Mood, A. M., Weinfeld, F. D., &
York, R. L. (1966). Equality of educational opportunity. Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group. (2015). Impact of early intervention on
psychopathology, crime, and well-being at age 25. American Journal of Psychiatry, 172,
59-70.
Cook, J. E., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (2012). Chronic threat and
contingent belonging: Protective benefits of values affirmation on identity development.

!

Wise Interventions 79
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102, 479-496.
Creswell, J. D. (in press). Mindfulness interventions. Annual Review of Psychology.
Critcher, C. R., & Dunning, D. (2015). Self-affirmations provide a broader perspective on selfthreat. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 41, 3-18.
Dal Cin, S., MacDonald, T. K., Fong, G. T., Zanna, M. P., & Elton-Marshall, T. E. (2006).
Remembering the message: Using a reminder cue to increase condom use following a
safer sex intervention. Health Psychology, 25, 438-443.
Danaher, K. & Crandall, C. S. (2008). Stereotype threat in applied settings re-examined. Journal
of Applied Social Psychology, 38, 1639-1655.
Davidai, S., Gilovich, T., & Ross, L.D. (2012). The meaning of defaults for potential organ
donors. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(38), 15201-15205.
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2000). The 'what' and 'why' of goal pursuits: Human needs and the
self-determination of behavior. Psychological Inquiry, 11, 227-268.
Dee, T. S. (2005). Social identity and achievement gaps: Evidence from an affirmation
intervention. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 8, 149-168.
DeJong W., Schneider S.K., Towvim L.G., Murphy M.J., Doer E.E., Simonsen, N.R., Mason,
K.E., & Scribner, R. A. (2006). A multisite randomized trial of social norms marketing
campaigns to reduce college student drinking. Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs,
67, 868–879.
DeJong W., Schneider S.K., Towvim L.G., Murphy M.J., Doer E.E., Simonsen, N.R., Mason,
K.E., & Scribner, R. A. (2009). A multisite randomized trial of social norms marketing
campaigns to reduce college student drinking: A replication failure. Substance Abuse, 30,
127-140.

!

Wise Interventions 80
Department of Justice (2016). Investigation of the Baltimore City Police Department. Accessed:
http://civilrights.baltimorecity.gov/sites/default/files/20160810_DOJ%20BPD%20Report
-FINAL.pdf.
Destin, M., & Oyserman, D. (2009). From assets to school outcomes: How finances shape
children’s perceived possibilities and intentions. Psychological Science, 20, 414-418.
Diamond, A., Barnett, W.S., Thomas, J., & Munro, S. (2007). Preschool program improves
cognitive control. Science, 318, 1387-1388.
Diamond, A. & Lee, K. (2011). Interventions shown to aid executive function development in
children 4-12 years old. Science, 333, 959-964.
Dodge, K.A., Godwin, J., & Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group. (2013). Socialinformation processing patterns mediate the impact of preventive intervention on
adolescent antisocial behavior. Psychological Science, 24, 456-65.
Duckworth, A. L., Kirby, T., Gollwitzer, A., & Oettingen, G. (2013). From fantasy to action:
Mental contrasting with implementation intentions (MCII) improves academic
performance in children. Social Psychological and Personality Science, 4(6), 745-753.
Duckworth, A. L., Peterson, C., Matthews, M. D., & Kelly, D. R. (2007). Grit: Perseverance and
passion for long-term goals. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92(6), 10871101.
Duckworth, A. L. & Seligman, M. E. P. (2005). Self-discipline outdoes IQ predicting academic
performance in adolescents. Psychological Science, 16, 939-944.
Duyme, M., Dumaret, A-C., & Tomkiewicz, S. (1999). How can we boost IQs of “dull
children”?: A late adoption study. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 96,
8790-8794.

!

Wise Interventions 81
Dweck, C.S. (1999). Self-Theories: Their role in motivation, personality and development.
Philadelphia: Taylor and Francis/Psychology Press.
Dweck, C.S. (2006). Mindset. New York: Random House.
Dweck, C.S. (2008). Can personality be changed? The role of beliefs in personality and change.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 17, 391-394.
Dweck, C.S., & Leggett, E.L. (1988). A social-cognitive approach to motivation and personality,
Psychological Review, 95, 256-273.
Ehret, P. J., & Sherman, D. K. (2014). Public policy and health: A self-affirmation
perspective. Policy Insights from Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 1, 222-230.
Eskreis-Winkler, L., Shulman, E. P., Young, V., Tsukayama, E., Brunwasser, S. M., &
Duckworth, A. L. (2016). Using wise interventions to motivate deliberate practice.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 111, 728-744.
Festinger, L. (1957). A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press.
Festinger, L., & Carlsmith, J. M. (1959). Cognitive consequences of forced compliance. The
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 58(2), 203–210.
Finkel, E. J., DeWall, C. N., Slotter, E. B., Oaten, M., & Foshee, V. A. (2009). Self-regulatory
failure and intimate partner violence perpetration. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 97, 483-499.
Finkel, E. J., Slotter, E. B., Luchies, L. B., Walton, G. M., & Gross, J. J. (2013). A brief
intervention to promote conflict reappraisal preserves marital quality over time.
Psychological Science, 24, 1595-1601.
Forbes, C. E. & Schmader, T. (2010). Retraining attitudes and stereotypes to affect motivation

!

Wise Interventions 82
and cognitive capacity under stereotype threat. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 99, 740-754.
Forscher, P. S., Mitamura, C., Dix, E. L., Cox, W. T. L., & Devine, P. G. (Under review).
Breaking the prejudice habit: Mechanisms, timecourse, and longevity.
Fotuhi, O., Logel, C., Spencer, S., Fong, G. T., & Zanna, M. P. (2014). Contingent affirmation
intervention among smokers: Directly linking affirming values to health-specific goals.
Manuscript in preparation.
Fredrickson, B. L., Cohn, M. A., Coffey, K. A., Pek, J., & Finkel, S. M. (2008). Open hearts
build lives: Positive emotions, induced through loving-kindness meditation, build
consequential personal resources. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
95,1045-1062.
Fryer R. (2011). Financial incentives and student achievement: Evidence from randomized trials.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126, 1755-1798.
Fryer R. (2012). Learning from the Successes and Failures of Charter Schools. In The Hamilton
Project. Washington, D.C..
Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (2013). A social psychological perspective on educational
intervention. In E. Shafir (Ed.), Behavioral foundations of policy (pp. 329-350). New
York, NY: Russell Sage.
Gawronski, B., & Bodenhausen, G. V. (2006). Associative and propositional processes in
evaluation: An integrative review of implicit and explicit attitude change. Psychological
Bulletin, 132, 692-731.
Gehlbach, H., Brinkworth, M. E., King, A. M., Hsu, L. M., McIntyre, J., & Rogers, T. (2016).
Creating birds of similar feathers: Leveraging similarity to improve teacher-student

!

Wise Interventions 83
relationships and academic achievement. Journal of Educational Psychology, 108, 342352.
Gerber, A. S., Huber, G. A., Biggers, D. R., & Hendry, D. J. (2016). A field experiment shows
that subtle linguistic cues might not affect voter behavior. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Science, 113, 7112-7117.
Gertler, P, Heckman, J., Pinto, R., Zanolini, A., Vermeersch, C., Walker, S., Chang, S. M., &
Grantham-McGregor, S. (2014). Labor market returns to an early childhood stimulation
intervention in Jamaica. Science, 344, 998-1001.
Gibson, James J. (1977). The Theory of Affordances. In R. Shaw and J. Bransford (Ed.),
Perceiving, Acting, and Knowing (pp. 67-82). Lawrence Erlbaum.
Gneezy, U. & Rustichini, A. (2000). A fine is a price. The Journal of Legal Studies, 29, 1-17.
Goffmann, E. (1963). Stigma: Notes on the management of spoiled identity. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Goldrick-Rab S., Harris, D. N., Kelchen, R., & Benson, J. (2012). Need-based financial aid and
college persistence. Experimental evidence from Wisconsin (October 10, 2012).
Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1887826.
Goldstein, N. J., Cialdini, R. B., & Griskevicius, V. (2008). A room with a viewpoint: Using
social norms to motivate environmental conservation in hotels. Journal of Consumer
Research, 35, 472-482.
Gollwitzer, P. M. (1999). Implementation intentions: Strong effects of simple plans. American
Psychologist, 54, 493-503.
Gollwitzer, P. M., Sheeran, P., Michalski, V., & Seifert, A. E. (2009). When intentions go
public: Does social reality widen the intention-behavior gap? Psychological Science,

!

Wise Interventions 84
20, 612-618.
Good, C., Aronson, J., & Inzlicht, M. (2003). Improving adolescents’ standardized test
performance: An intervention to reduce the effects of stereotype threat. Journal of
Applied Developmental Psychology, 24, 645-622.
Goddard, R. D., Salloum, S. J., & Berebitsky, D. (2016). Trust as a mediator of the relationship
between poverty, racial composition, and academic achievement. Educational
Administration Quarterly, 45, 292-311.
Goyer, J. P., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Binning, K. R., Cook, J. E., Reeves, S. L., Apfel,
N., Taborsky-Barba, S., Sherman, D. K., & Cohen, G. L. (under review). Into swifter
currents: Self-affirmation nudges minority middle schoolers onto a college trajectory.
Graham, S., & Barker, G. (1990). The downside of help: An attributional-developmental analysis
of help-giving as a low ability cue. Journal of Educational Psychology, 82, 7- 14.
Grant, A. M., & Hofmann, D. A. (2011). It’s not all about me: Motivating hospital hand hygiene
by focusing on patients. Psychological Science, 22, 1494-1499.
Gunderson, L., Gripshover, S., Romero, C., Goldin-Meadow, S., Dweck, C.S., Levine, S. (2013).
Parent praise to 1-3 year-olds predicts children’s motivational frameworks 5 years later.
Child Development, 84, 1526-1541.
Haimovitz, K., & Dweck, C. S. (2016). What predicts children's fixed and growth mindsets? Not
their parent’s views of intelligence but their parents' views of failure. Psychological
Science, 27, 859-869.
Haimovitz, K., Dweck, C. S., & Walton, G. M. (under review). Implicit theories of willpower
encourage children to generate self-control strategies.
Hallsworth M, List J, Metcalfe R, Vlaev I. (2014). The behavioralist as tax collector: Using

!

Wise Interventions 85
natural field experiments to enhance tax compliance. Working Paper 20007, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. http://www.nber.org/papers/w20007.
Hammond D, Fong G.T., McDonald P.W., Cameron R., Brown K.S. (2003). The impact of the
graphic Canadian warning labels on adult smoking. Tobacco Control, 12, 391-395.
Hammond D., Fong G.T., McDonald P.W., Brown K.S., Cameron R. (2004). Graphic cigarette
package warning labels and adverse outcomes: Evidence from Canadian smokers.
American Journal of Public Health, 94, 1442-1445.
Hanks, A. S., Just. D. R., Smith, L. E., & Wansink B. (2012). Healthy convenience: Nudging
students toward healthier choices in the lunchroom,” Journal of Public Health, 34, 370376.
Hanselman, P., Bruch, S.K., Gamoran, A., & Borman, G.D. (2014). Threat in context: School
moderation of the impact of social identity threat on racial/ethnic achievement gaps.
Sociology of Education, 87, 106-124
Harackiewicz, J.M., Canning, E.A., Tibbetts, Y., Giffen, C.J., Blair, S.S., Rouse, D.I., & Hyde,
J.S. (2014). Closing the social class achievement gap for first-generation students in
undergraduate biology. Journal of Educational Psychology, 106, 375-389.
Harackiewicz, J.M., Canning, E.A., Tibbetts, Y., Priniski, S.J., & Hyde, J.S. (2016). Closing
achievement gaps with a utility-value intervention: Disentangling race and social
class. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 111, 745-765.
Harackiewicz, J.M., Rozek, C.R., Hulleman, C.S., & Hyde, J.S. (2012) Helping parents to
motivate adolescents in mathematics and science: An experimental test of a utility-value
intervention. Psychological Science, 23, 899-906.
Harris, P. R., Brearley, I., Sheeran, P., Barker, M., Klein, W. M. P., Creswell, J. D., Levine, J.

!

Wise Interventions 86
M., & Bond, R. (2014) Combining self-affirmation with implementation intentions to
promote fruit and vegetable consumption. Health Psychology, 33, 729-736.
Harris, P. R., Mayle, K., Mabbott, L., & Napper, L. (2007). Self-affirmation reduces smokers’
defensiveness to graphic on-pack cigarette warning labels. Health Psychology, 26, 437446.
Heider, F (1944). Social perception and phenomenal causality. Psychological Review, 51, 358–
374.
Heine, S. J., Lehman, D. R., Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1999). Is there a universal need for
positive self-regard? Psychological Review, 106, 766-794.
Heller, S. B., Shah, A. K., Guryan, J., Ludwig, J., Mullainathan, S., Pollack, H. A. (2015).
Thinking, fast and slow? Some field experiments to reduce crime and dropout in
Chicago. Working Paper 21178, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge,
MA. http://www.nber.org/papers/w21178.
Herrnstein, R. J. & Murray, C. (1994). The bell curve: Intelligence and class structure in
American life. New York: The Free Press.
Hoxby, C. & Turner, S. (2014). Expanding college opportunities for high-achieving, low income
students. Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper No. 12-014.
Howe, L. C., Carr, P. B., & Walton, G. M. (Under review). Making common cause: The feeling
of working together facilitates normative behavior.
Hudley, C., & Graham, S. (1993). An attributional intervention with African American boys
labeled as aggressive. Child Development, 64, 124-138.
Hulleman, C.S. & Harackiewicz, J.M. (2009). Promoting interest and performance in high school
science classes, Science, 326, 1410-1412.

!

Wise Interventions 87
Ikizer E. G. & Blanton, H. (2016). Media coverage of “wise” interventions can reduce concern
for the disadvantaged. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 22, 135-147.
Inzlicht, M., & Berkman, E. (2015). Six questions for the resource model of control (and some
answers). Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 9/10, 511-524.
Jaeggi, S. M, Buschkuehl, M., Jonides, J., & Perrig, W. J. (2008). Improving fluid intelligence
with training on working memory. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America, 105(19), 6829-6833.
Jensen, A. R. (1969) How much can we boost IQ and scholastic achievement? Harvard
Educational Review, 39, 1-123.
Jessop, D. C., Sparks, P., Buckland, N., Harris, P. R., & Churchill, S. (2014). Combining selfaffirmation and implementation intentions: Evidence of detrimental effects on behavioral
outcomes. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 47, 137-147.
Job, V., Dweck, C. S., & Walton, G. M. (2010). Ego-depletion—Is it all in your head? Implicit
theories about willpower affect self-regulation. Psychological Science, 21, 1686-1693.
Job, V. Flueckiger, L., Bernecker, K., Lieb, R. & Mata, J. (2016). An implicit theories about
willpower intervention helps students to deal with demands: Effects on academic selfregulation and grades. Manuscript in preparation.
Job, V., Friese, M., & Bernecker, K. (2015). Effects of practicing self-control on academic
performance. Motivation Science, 1, 219-232.
Job, V., Walton, G. M., Bernecker, K., & Dweck, C. S. (2015). Implicit theories about willpower
predict self-regulation and grades in everyday life. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 108, 637-347.
Johnson, E. J. & Goldstein, D. G. (2003). Do defaults save lives? Science, 302, 1338-1339.

!

Wise Interventions 88
Jones, E. E., & Davis, K. E. (1965) From acts to dispositions: the attribution process in social
psychology, in L. Berkowitz (ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Volume
2, pp. 219-266), New York: Academic Press.
Kahneman, D., Fredrickson, D.L., Schreiber, C.A., & Redelmeier, D.A. (1993). When more pain
is preferred to less: Adding a better end. Psychological Science, 4, 401-405.
Karniol, R., Galili, L., Shtilerman, D., Naim, R., Stern, K., Manjoch, H., & Silverman, R. (2011).
Why Superman can wait: Cognitive self-transformation in the delay of gratification
paradigm. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 40, 307-317.
Kawakami, K., Steele, J. R., Cifa, C., Phills, C. E., & Dovidio, J. F. (2008). Approaching math
increases math = me, math = pleasant. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 44,
818- 825.
Kazdin, A.E. (2007). Mediators and mechanisms of change in psychotherapy research. In S.
Nolen-Hoeksema, T.D. Cannon, & T. Widiger (Eds.), Annual Review of Clinical
Psychology, 3, 1-27.
Keizer, K., Lindenberg, S., & Steg, L. (2008). The spreading of disorder. Science, 322, 16811685.
Kelley, H. H. (1967). Attribution theory in social psychology. In D. Levine (ed.), Nebraska
Symposium on Motivation (Volume 15, pp. 192-238). Lincoln: University of Nebraska
Press.
Kelley, H.H. (1973). The processes of causal attribution. American Psychologist, 28, 107-128.
Kenthirarajah, D. & Walton, G. M. (2015). How brief social-psychological interventions can
cause enduring effects. In R. Scott & S. Kosslyn (Eds.) Emerging Trends in the Social
and Behavioral Sciences, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons.

!

Wise Interventions 89
Kidd, C., Palmeri, H., & Aslin, R.N. (2013.) Rational Snacking: Young children’s decisionmaking on the marshmallow task is moderated by beliefs about environmental reliability.
Cognition, 126, 109-114.
Kross, E., & Ayduk, O. (2011). Making meaning out of negative experiences by self-distancing.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 20, 187-191.
Kross, E., Ayduk, O., & Mischel, W. (2005). When asking “why” does not hurt: Distinguishing
rumination from reflective processing of negative emotions. Psychological Science, 16,
709-715.
Kross, E., Bruehlman-Senecal, E., Park. J., Burson, A., Shablack, H., Bremner, R., Moser, J., &
Ayduk, O. (2014). Self-talk as a regulatory mechanism: How you do it matters. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 106, 304-324.
Lai, C. K., Skinner, A. L., Cooley, E., Murrar, S., Brauer, M., Devos, T., . . . Nosek, B. A.
(2016). Reducing implicit racial preferences: II. Intervention effectiveness across time.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 145(8), 1001-1016.
Langer E. J. & Rodin, J. (1976). The effects of choice and enhanced personal responsibility for
the aged: A field experiment in an institutional setting. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 34, 191-198.
Latané, B. & Darley, J.M. (1970). The unresponsive bystander: Why doesn’t he help? New York:
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Layous, K., Davis, E. M., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Cook, J. E., & Cohen, G. L. (2016).
Feeling left out, but affirmed: Protecting against the negative effects of low belonging in
college. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology.
Lepper, M. R., Greene, D., & Nisbett, R. E. (1973). Undermining children’s intrinsic interest

!

Wise Interventions 90
with extrinsic reward: A test of the “overjustification” hypothesis. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 28, 129–37.
Lepper, M. R., Woolverton, M., Mumme, D. L., & Gurtner, J. (1993). Motivational techniques of
expert human tutors: Lessons for the design of computer-based tutors. In S. P. Lajoie &
S. J. Derry (Eds.), Computers as cognitive tools (pp. 75-105). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Leventhal, H., Singer, R., & Jones, S. (1965). Effects of fear and specificity of recommendation
upon attitudes and behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2, 20-29.
Levy, B. R., Pilver, C., Chung, P., & Slade, M. D. (2014). Subliminal strengthening improving
older individuals’ physical function over time with an implicit-age-stereotype
intervention. Psychological Science, 25, 2127-2135.
Lewin, K. (1947). Group decision and social change. In T. M. Newcombe & E. L. Hartley (Eds.),
Readings in social psychology (pp. 459- 473). New York: Henry Holt.
Lewin, K. (1951). Field theory in social science: Selected theoretical papers (D. Cartwright,
Ed.). New York, NY: Harper & Row
Liberman, N., Samuels, S. M., & Ross, L. (2004). The name of the game: Predictive power of
reputations versus situational labels in determining prisoner’s dilemma game moves.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 1175-1185.
Logel, C. & Cohen, G. L. (2012). The role of the self in physical health: Testing the effect of a
values-affirmation intervention on weight loss. Psychological Science, 23, 53-55.
Lyubomirsky, S., Dickerhoof, R., Boehm, J. K., & Sheldon, K. M. (2011).Becoming happier
takes both a will and a proper way: An experimental longitudinal intervention to boost
well-being. Emotion, 11, 391-402.
Mallett, R. K., & Wilson, T. D. (2010). Increasing positive intergroup contact. Journal of

!

Wise Interventions 91
Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 382-387.
Marigold, D. C., Holmes, J. G., & Ross, M. (2007). More than words: Reframing compliments
from romantic partners fosters security in low self-esteem individuals. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 232–248.
Marigold D. C., Holmes J.G., Ross, M. (2010). Fostering relationship resilience: An intervention
for low self-esteem individuals. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 624–
630.
Markus H. R. & Conner, A. (2014). Clash! 8 Cultural Conflicts That Make Us Who We Are.
Penguine: New York.
Markus, H., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the self: Implications for cognition, emotion,
and motivation. Psychological Review, 98, 224-253.
Markus H. R. & Kitayama, S. (2010). Cultures and selves: A cycle of mutual constitution.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 5, 420-430.
Martens, A., Johns, M., Greenberg, J., & Schimel, J. (2006). Combating stereotype threat: The
effect of self-affirmation on women’s intellectual performance. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 42, 236-243.
Martinez M. & McGrath, D. (2014). Deeper Learning: How Eight Innovative Public Schools Are
Transforming Education in the Twenty-First Century. The New Press: New York.
McCord, J. (1978). A thirty-year follow-up of treatment effects. American Psychologist, 33, 284289.
McNally, R. J. (2007). Mechanisms of exposure therapy: How neuroscience can improve
psychological treatments for anxiety disorders. Clinical Psychology Review, 27, 750-759.
Melby-Lervåg, M. & Hulme, C. (2013). Is working memory training effective? A meta-analytic

!

Wise Interventions 92
review. Developmental Psychology, 49, 270-291.
Menec, V. H., Perry, R, P., Struthers, C. W., Schonwetter, D. J., Hechter, F. J., & Eichholz, B. L.
(1994). Assisting at-risk college students with attributional retraining and effective
teaching. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 24, 675-701.
Miles, E., Sheeran, P., Baird, H., Macdonald, I., Webb, T. L., Harris, P. R. (2016). Does selfcontrol improve with practice? Evidence from a six-week training program. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 145, 1075-1091.
Milkman, K., Beshears, J., Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., & Madrian, B. C. (2011). Using
implementation intentions prompts to enhance influenza vaccination rates. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Science, 108, 10415-10420.
Miller, R. L., Brickman, P., & Bolen, D. (1975). Attribution versus persuasion as a means for
modifying behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 31, 430-441.
Miller, D. T., & Prentice, D. A. (2012). Psychological levers of behavior change. In E. Shafir
(Ed.), Behavioral foundations of policy. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Mischel, W. & Shoda, Y. (1995). A cognitive-affective system theory of personality:
Reconceptualizing situations, dispositions, dynamics, and invariance in personality
structure. Psychological Review, 102, 246-268.
Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., & Rodriguez, M. L. (1989). Delay of gratification in children. Science,
244, 933-938.
Miyake, A., Smith-Kost, L. E., Finkelstein, N. D., Pollock, S. J., Cohen, G. L., & Ito, T. A.
(2010). Reducing the gender achievement gap in college science: A classroom study of
values affirmation. Science, 330, 1234-1237.
Moffitt, T.E., Arseneault, L., Belsky, D., Dickson, N., Hancox, R.J., Harrington, H.L., Houts, R.,

!

Wise Interventions 93
Poulton, R., Roberts, B., Ross, S., Sears, M., Thomson, M., and Caspi, A. (2011). A
gradient of childhood self-control predicts health, wealth, and public safety. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Science, 108, 2693-2698.
Moriatry, T. (1975). Crime, commitment, and the responsive bystander: Two field experiments.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 31, 370-376.
Morisano, D., Hirsh, J. B., Peterson, J. B., Pihl, R. O., & Shore, B. M. (2010). Setting,
elaborating, and reflecting on personal goals improves academic performance. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 95, 255-264.
Motto, J. A. & Bostrom, A. G. (2001). A randomized controlled trial of postcrisis suicide
prevention. Psychiatric Services, 52, 828-833.
Mueller, C. M. & Dweck, C. S. (1998). Intelligence praise can undermine motivation and
performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 33-52.
Murphy, M. C., & Dweck, C.S. (2010). A culture of genius: How an organization’s lay theories
shape people’s cognition, affect, and behavior. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 36, 283- 296
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., & Collins, N. L. (2006). Optimizing assurance. The risk regulation
system in relationships. Psychological Bulletin, 132, 664–666.
Murray, S. L., Rose, P., Bellavia, G., Holmes, J. G., & Kusche, A. (2002). When rejection stings:
How self-esteem constrains relationship-enhancement processes. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 83, 556-573.
Nickerson, D.W. & Rogers, T. (2010). Do you have a voting plan? Implementation intentions,
voter turnout, and organic plan-making. Psychological Science, 21, 194-199.
Nisbett, R.E., Aronson, J., Blair, C., Dickens, W., Flynn, J., Halpern, D. F., & Turkheimer, E.

!

Wise Interventions 94
(2012). Intelligence: New findings and theoretical developments. American
Psychologist, 67(2), 130-159.
Nisbett, R. E. & Wilson, T. D. (1977). Telling more than we can know: Verbal reports on mental
processes. Psychological Review, 84, 231-259.
Oettingen, G. (2102). Future thought and behavior change. European Review of Social
Psychology, 23, 1-63.
Okonofua, J. A. Paunesku, D., & Walton, G. M. (2016). Brief intervention to encourage
empathic discipline cuts suspension rates in half among adolescents. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 113, 5221-5226.
Page-Gould, E., Mendoza-Denton, R., & Tropp, L. R. (2008). With a little help from my crossgroup friend: Reducing anxiety in intergroup contexts through cross-group friendship.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 95, 1080–1094.
Paluck, E.L. (2009). Reducing intergroup prejudice and conflict using the media: A field
experiment in Rwanda. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96, 574-587.
Paluck, E.L., & Shepherd, H. (2012). The salience of social referents: A field experiment on
collective norms and harassment behavior in a school social network. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 103, 899-915.
Paluck, E.L., Shepherd, H., & Aronow, P. (2016). Changing climates of conflict: A social
network experiment in 56 schools. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
113(3), 566–571, doi: 10.1073/pnas.1514483113.
Park, J., Ayduk, O., & Kross, E. (2015). Stepping back to move forward: Expressive writing
promotes self-distancing. Emotion, 16, 349-364.
Paunesku, D., Walton, G. M., Romero, C. L., Smith, E. N., Yeager, D. S., & Dweck, C. S.

!

Wise Interventions 95
(2015). Mindset interventions are a scalable treatment for academic underperformance.
Psychological Science, 26, 784-793.
Pennebaker, J.W. (1997). Writing about emotional experiences as a therapeutic process.
Psychological Science, 8, 162-166.
Perkins H.W. (2003). The emergence and evolution of the social norms approach to substance
abuse prevention. In H. W. Perkins (Ed.) The Social Norms Approach to Preventing
School and College Age Substance Abuse: A Handbook for Educators, Counselors, and
Clinicians, pp. 3–17. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass
Perry, R. P. & Hamm, J. M. (in press). An attribution perspective on competence and motivation:
Theory and treatment interventions. In A. Elliot, C. Dweck, & D. Yeager (Eds.),
Handbook of Competence and Motivation (2nd Edition): Theory and Applications. New
York: Guilford Press.
Perry, R. P., Stupnisky, R. H., Hall, N. C., Chipperfield, J. G., & Weiner, B. (2010). Bad starts
and better finishes: Attributional retraining and initial performance in competitive
achievement settings. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 29(6), 668-700.
Pettigrew, T. F., & Tropp, L. R. (2006). A meta-analytic test of intergroup contact theory.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 90, 751-783.
Phills, C.E., Kawakami, K., Tabi, E., Nadolny, D., & Inzlicht, M. (2011). Mind the gap:
Increasing associations between the self and Blacks with approach behaviors. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 100, 197-210.
Powers, J. T., Cook, J. E., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., Cohen, G. L. (2016).
Changing environments by changing individuals: The emergent effects of psychological
intervention. Psychological Science, 27, 150-160.

!

Wise Interventions 96
Pyszczynski, T., & Greenberg, J. (1987). Toward an integration of cognitive and motivational
perspectives on social inference: A biased hypothesis-testing model. In L. Berkowitz
(Ed.), Advances in Experimental Social Psychology (Vol. 20, pp. 297-340). San Deigo,
CA: Academic Press.
Ramirez, G., & Beilock, S. L. (2011). Writing about testing worries boosts exam performance in
the classroom. Science, 331, 211-213.
Rattan, A., Good, C., & Dweck, C.S. (2012). "It's ok - not everyone can be good at math":
Instructors with an entity theory comfort (and demotivate) students. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 48, 731–737.
Raudenbush, S.W. (1984). Magnitude of teacher expectancy effects on Pupil IQ as a function of
the credibility of expectancy induction: A synthesis of findings from 18 experiments.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 76(1), 85-97.
Redelmeier D.A., Katz, J., & Kahneman, D. (2003). Memories of colonoscopy: A randomized
trial. Pain, 104, 187-194.
Ridgeway, G. (2007). Analysis of Racial Disparities in the New York Police Department's Stop,
Question, and Frisk Practices. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation.
http://www.rand.org/pubs/technical_reports/TR534.html.
Robinson, T. (2011). Stealth interventions for obesity prevention and control: Motivating
behavior change. In L. Dube, A. Bechara, A. Dagher, A. Drewnowski, J. Lebel, P. James,
R. Yada, M. Laflamme-Sanders (Eds.), Obesity prevention: The role of society and brain
on individual behavior (pp. 319-327.
Rodin, J. & Langer, E. J. (1977). Long-term effects of a control-relevant intervention with the
institutionalized aged. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35, 897-902

!

Wise Interventions 97
Rogge, R.D., Cobb, R.J., Lawrence, E., Johnson, M.D., & Bradbury, T.N. (2013). Is skills
training necessary for the primary prevention of marital distress and dissolution? A 3year experimental study of three interventions. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 81, 949-961.
Rokeach, M. (1971). Long-range experimental modification of values, attitudes, and behavior.
American Psychologist, 26, 453-459.
Rosenthal, R. & Jacobson, L. (1968). Pygmalion in the Classroom. New York: Holt, Rinehart &
Winston.
Ross, L., Lepper, M. R., & Hubbard, M. (1975). Perseverance in self perception and social
perception: Biased attributional processes in the debriefing paradigm. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 32, 880-892.
Ross, L., & Nisbett, R. E. (1991). The person and the situation: Perspectives of social
psychology. New York, NY: Mcgraw-Hill.
Sachs, J. D. (2005). The End of Poverty: Economic Possibilities for Our Time. New
York: Penguin Books.
Sanbonmatsu, L., Ludwig, J., Katz, L. F., Gennetian, L. A., Duncan, G. J., Kessler, R. C., Adam,
E., McDade, T. W. & Lindau, S. T.. (2011). Moving to Opportunity for Fair Housing
Demonstration Program: Final Impacts Evaluation. Report prepared by the National
Bureau of Economic Research for the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development, Office of Policy Development and Research. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office of Policy Development and
Research.
Schmader, T., Johns, M., & Forbes, C. (2008). An integrated process model of stereotype threat

!

Wise Interventions 98
effects on performance. Psychological Review, 115(2), 336-356.
Schmeichel, B. J. and Vohs, K. D. (2009). Self-affirmation and self-control: Affirming core
values counteracts ego depletion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96, 770782.
Schmiedek, F., Lövdén, M., & Lindenberger, U. (2010). Hundred Days of Cognitive Training
Enhance Broad Cognitive Abilities in Adulthood: Findings from the COGITO
Study. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience, 2, 27.
Schultz, P. W., Nolan, J. M., Cialdini, R. B., Goldstein, N. J., & Griskevicius, V. (2007). The
constructive, destructive, and reconstructive power of social norms. Psychological
Science, 18, 429-434.
Schroeder, C. M. & Prentice, D. A. (1998). Exposing pluralistic ignorance to reduce alcohol use
among college students. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 28, 2150-2180.
Schulz, R. (1976). Effects of control and predictability on the physical and psychological wellbeing of the institutionalized aged. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 33,
563-573.
Schulz, R., & Hanusa, B. H. (1978). Long-term effects of control and predictability-enhancing
interventions: Findings and ethical issues. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
36(11), 1194.
Seligman, M. E P, Steen, T., Park, N., & Peterson, C. (2005). Positive psychology progress:
Empirical validation of interventions. American Psychologist, 60, 410-421.
Service, O., Hallsworth, M., Halpern, D., Algate, F., Gallagher, R. Nguyen, S., Ruda, S.,
Sanders, M., with Pelenur, M., Gyani, A., Harper, H., Reinhard, J., & Kirkman, E.
(2014). EAST: Four Simple Ways to Apply Behavioural Insights. The Behavioural

!

Wise Interventions 99
Insights. http://www.behaviouralinsights.co.uk/publications/east-four-simple-ways-toapply-behavioural-insights/ (accessed 10/4/2016).
Sherman, D. K., Bunyan, D. P., Creswell, J. D., & Jaremka, L. M. (2009). Psychological
vulnerability and stress: The effects of self-affirmation on sympathetic nervous system
responses to naturalistic stressors. Health Psychology, 28, 554-562.
Sherman, D. K., & Cohen, G. L. (2006). The psychology of self-defense: Self-affirmation
theory. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.) Advances in Experimental Social Psychology (Vol. 38, pp.
183-242). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Sherman, D. K., Cohen, G. L., Nelson, L. D., Nussbaum, A. D., Bunyan, D. P., & Garcia, J.
(2009). Affirmed yet unaware: The role of awareness in the process of self-affirmation.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 97, 745-764.
Sherman, D.K. & Hartson, K.A. (2011). Reconciling self-defense with self-criticism: Selfaffirmation theory. In M. D. Alicke & C. Sedikides (Eds). Handbook of SelfEnhancement and Self-Protection (pp. 128-151). New York: Guilford Press.
Sherman, D. K., Hartson, K. A., Binning, K. R., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., Taborsky-Barba,
S., Tomassetti, S., Nussbaum, A. D., & Cohen, G. L. (2013). Deflecting the trajectory
and changing the narrative: How self-affirmation affects academic performance and
motivation under identity threat. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 104, 591618.
Sherman, D., Nelson, L., & Steele, C. M. (2000). Do messages about health risks threaten the
self? Increasing the acceptance of threatening health messages via self-affirmation.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26, 1046-1058.
Shipstead, Z., Redick, T. S., & Engle, R. W. (2012). Is working memory training effective?

!

Wise Interventions100
Psychological Bulletin, 138, 628-654.
Shook, N. J., & Fazio, R. H. (2008). Interracial roommate relationships: An experimental test of
the contact hypothesis. Psychological Science, 19, 717–723.
Shu, L. L., Mazar, N., Gino, F., Ariely, D., & Bazerman, M. H. (2012). Signing at the beginning
makes ethics salient and decreases dishonest self-reports in comparison to signing at the
end. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 109, 15197-15200.
Silverman, A. M., Gwinn, J. D., & Van Boven, L. (2015). Stumbling in their shoes: Disability
simulations reduce judged capabilities of disabled people. Social Psychological and
Personality Science, 6, 464-471.
Silverman, A. M., Logel, C., & Cohen, G. L. (2013). Self-affirmation as a deliberate coping
strategy. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 49, 93-98
Simons, D. J., Boot, W. R., Charness, N., Gathercole, S. E., Chabris, C. F., Hambrick, D. Z.,
Stine-Morrow, E. A. L. (2016). Do “brain-training” programs work? Psychological
Science in the Public Interest, 17, 103-186.
Sorce, J. F., Emde, R. N., Campos, J., & Klinnert, M. D. (1985). Maternal emotional signaling:
Its effect on the visual cliff behavior of 1-year-olds. Developmental Psychology, 21, 195200.
Sparkman, G. & Walton, G. M. (under review). I’ll have what she’s going to have: Dynamic
norms promote beneficial counternormative behavior.
Steele, C. M. (1988). The psychology of self-affirmation: Sustaining the integrity of the self. In
L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 21, pp. 261-302).
San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Steele, C. M. (1997). A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape intellectual identity and

!

Wise Interventions101
performance. American Psychologist, 52, 613-629.
Steele, C. M. (2010). Whistling Vivaldi: And other clues how stereotypes affect us. New York:
Norton & Company Inc.
Steele, C. M., & Josephs, R. A. (1990). Alcohol myopia: Its prized and dangerous effects.
American Psychologist, 45(8), 921-933.
Steele, C. M., Spencer, S. J., & Aronson, J. (2002). Contending with group image: The
psychology of stereotype and social identity threat. In M.P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances
experimental social psychology (Vol. 34, pp. 379-440). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Steele D. M. & Cohn-Vargas, B. (2013). Identity Safe Classrooms: Places to Belong and Learn.
Corwin: Thousand Oaks, CA.
Stephens, N. M., Hamedani, M. G., & Destin, M. (2014). Closing the social-class achievement
gap: A difference-education intervention improves first-generation students’ academic
performance and all students’ college transition. Psychological Science, 25, 943-953.
Sternberg, R. J. (2008). Increasing fluid intelligence is possible after all. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 105, 6791-6792.
Stinson, D.A., Logel, C., Shepherd, S., & Zanna, M.P. (2011) Rewriting the self-fulfilling
prophecy of social rejection: Self-affirmation improves relational security and social
behavior up to 2 months later. Psychological Science, 22, 1145-1149.
Stone, J., Aronson, E., Crain, A. L., Winslow, M. P., & Fried, C. B. (1994). Inducing hypocrisy
as a means of encouraging young adults to use condoms. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 20(1), 116-128.
Storms, M. D., & McCaul, K. D. (1976). Attribution processes and emotional exacerbation of
dysfunctional behavior. In J. H. Harvey, W. J. Ickes, & R. F. Kidd (Eds.), New directions

!

Wise Interventions102
in attribution research (Vol. 1). Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.
Sunstein, C. R. (2016). The council of psychological advisers. Annual Review of Psychology.
Swann, W. B., Jr. (1983). Self-verification: Bringing social reality into harmony with the self. In
J. Suls & A. G. Greenwald (Eds.), Social psychological perspectives on the self (Vol. 2,
pp. 33-66). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Terman, L. M. & Oden, M. (1947). The Gifted Child Grows Up: Twenty-five Years’ Follow-up
of a Superior Group. Genetic Studies of Genius Volume 4. Stanford (CA): Stanford
University Press.
Thaler R. H. & Sunstein, C. R. (2008). Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth, and
Happiness. Penguin Books: New York.
Thomaes, S., Bushman, B. J., Orobio de Castro, B., Cohen, G., & Denissen, J. J. A.
(2009). Reducing narcissistic aggression by buttressing self-esteem: An experimental
field study. Psychological Science, 20, 1536-1542.
Thomaes, S., Bushman, B. J., Orobio de Castro, B., & Reijntjes, A. (2012). Arousing “gentle
passions” in young adolescents: Sustained experimental effects of value-affirmations on
prosocial feelings and behaviors. Developmental Psychology, 48, 103-110.
Tibbetts, Y., Harackiewicz, J. M., Canning, E. A., Boston, J. S., Priniski, S. J., & Hyde, J. S.
(2016). Affirming independence: Exploring mechanisms underlying a values affirmation
intervention for first-generation students. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
110, 635-659.
Tough, P. (2016). Helping Children Succeed: What Works and Why. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt:
New York.
Valins, S. Nisbett, R. E. (1971). Attribution processes in the development and treatment of

!

Wise Interventions103
emotional disorders. In E.E. Jones, D. E. Kanouse, H. H. Kelley, R. E. Nisbett, S. Valins,
& B. Weiner (Eds.), Attribution: Perceiving the causes of behavior (pp. 137-150).
Morristown, NJ: General Learning Press.
van den Boom, D. C. (1994). The influence of temperament and mothering on attachment and
exploration: An experimental manipulation of sensitive responsiveness among lowerclass mothers with irritable infants. Child Development, 65, 1457-1477.75
Vohs, K. D., Park, J., & Schmeichel, B. J. (2013). Self-affirmation can enable goal
disengagement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 104, 14-27.
Walton, G. M. (2014). The new science of wise psychological interventions. Current Directions
in Psychological Science, 23, 73-82.
Walton, G. M. & Cohen, G. L. (2007). A question of belonging: Race, social fit, and
achievement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 82-96.
Walton, G. M. & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A brief social-belonging intervention improves academic
and health outcomes of minority students. Science, 331, 1447-1451.
Walton, G. M. & Dweck, C. S. (2009). Solving social problems like a psychologist.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 4, 101-102
Walton, G. M., Logel, C., Peach, J., Spencer, S, & Zanna, M. P. (2015). Two brief interventions
to mitigate a “chilly climate” transform women’s experience, relationships, and
achievement in engineering. Journal of Educational Psychology, 107, 468-485.
Walton, G. M., Paunesku, D., & Dweck, C. S. (2012). Expandable selves. In M. R. Leary & J. P.
Tangney (Eds.) Handbook of Self and Identity (pp. 141-154). New York: The Guilford
Press.
Walton, G. M. & Spencer, S. J. (2009). Latent ability: Grades and test scores systematically

!

Wise Interventions104
underestimate the intellectual ability of negatively stereotyped students. Psychological
Science, 20, 1132-1139.
Watson, J. B. (1913). Psychology as the behaviorist views it. Psychological Review. 20, 158–
177.
Weber, A., Fernald, A., & Diop, Y. (2016). When cultural norms discourage talking to babies:
Effectiveness of a parenting program in rural Senegal. Child Development.
Weiner, B. (1985). An attributional theory of achievement motivation and emotion.
Psychological Review, 92, 548-573.
Weiss, M.J., Bloom, H.S., & Brock, T. (2013). A conceptual framework for studying the sources
of variation in program effects. MDRC Working Papers on Research Methodology.
Wilson J. Q. & Kelling, G. L. (1982). Broken windows: The police and neighborhood safety.
The Atlantic Monthly, 249, 29-38.
Wilson, T. D. (2002). Strangers to ourselves: Discovering the adaptive unconscious. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Wilson, T. D. (2005). The message is the method: Celebrating and exporting the experimental
approach. Psychological Inquiry, 16, 185-193.
Wilson, T. D. (2011). Redirect: The surprising new science of psychological change. New York:
Little Brown.
Wilson, T. D., Damiani, M., & Shelton, N. (2002). Improving the academic performance of
college students with brief attributional interventions. In J. Aronson (Ed.), Improving
academic achievement: Impact of psychological factors on education (pp. 88-108). San
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. (1982). Improving the academic performance of college

!

Wise Interventions105
freshmen: Attribution therapy revisited. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
42, 367-376.
Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. (1985). Improving the performance of college freshmen using
attributional techniques. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 287-293.
Woodhead, M. (1988). When psychology informs public policy: The case of early childhood
intervention. American Psychologist, 43, 443-454.
Yeager, D. S., Fong, C. J., Lee, H. Y., & Espelage, D. (2015). Declines in efficacy of antibullying programs among older adolescents: Theory and a three-level meta-analysis.
Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 37, 36-51.
Yeager, D. S., Henderson, M., D’Mello, S., Paunesku, D. Walton, G. M., Spitzer, B. J., &
Duckworth, A. L. (2014). Boring but important: A self-transcendent purpose for learning
fosters academic self-regulation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 107, 559580.
Yeager, D. S., Johnson, R., Spitzer, B., Trzesniewski, K., Powers, J., & Dweck, C. S. (2014).
The far-reaching effects of believing people can change: Implicit theories of personality
shape stress, health, and achievement during adolescence. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 106 (6), 867-884.
Yeager, D. S., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., Pebley, P., Master, A., Hessert, W.,
Williams, M. & Cohen, G. L. (2014). Breaking the cycle of mistrust: Wise interventions
to provide critical feedback across the racial divide. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 143 (2), 804-824.
Yeager, D., Romero, C., Hulleman, C., Schneider, B., Hinojosa, C., Lee, H. Y., O’Brien, J.,
Flint, K., Roberts, A., Trott, J., Greene, D., Walton, G. M., & Dweck, C. (2016). Using

!

Wise Interventions106
design thinking to make psychological interventions ready for scaling: The case of the
growth mindset during the transition to high school. Journal of Educational Psychology,
108, 374-391.
Yeager, D.S., Trzesniewski, K., & Dweck, C.S. (2013). An implicit theories of personality
intervention reduces adolescent aggression in response to victimization and
exclusion. Child Development, 84, 970-988.
Yeager, D. S. & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological interventions in education: They're
not magic. Review of Educational Research, 81, 267-301.
Yeager, D. S., Walton, G. M., Brady, S. T., Akcinar, E. N., Paunesku, D., Keane, L., Kamentz,
D., Ritter, G., Duckworth, A. L., Urstein, R., Gomez E., Markus, H. R. Cohen, G. L., &
Dweck, C. S. (2016). Teaching a lay theory before college narrows achievement gaps at
scale. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
113, E3341-3348.

!

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables

1

Supplementary Tables
Supplementary Tables 1-3 provide a theoretical organization and brief summaries of
more than 150 interventions culled from our literature review. Supplementary Table 1 includes
interventions that address the need to be accurate. Supplementary Table 2 includes interventions
that address the need for self-integrity. Supplementary Table 3 includes interventions that
address the need to belong. Interventions that cut across categories are referenced in multiple
tables but with a primary description in one. Although most entries reference a specific study, in
some cases interventions that have been examined in multiple studies—for instance, in multiple
forms or with multiple populations—are described in a single entry with multiple citations.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables

2

Table S1. Wise interventions approach #1: Wise interventions that address the need to be accurate.
SubCategory
My identity

Object of
Judgment
Who am I?
(Current identity)

Reference
EskreisWinkler et
al., under
review
Miller et al.,
1975

Who could I
become?
(Prospective or
potential
identity)

Who do I not
want to become
or be confused
with?

Specificity of
Content
Change
Intervention
Area
Strategy
Category A: The Self (My Self)
Specific
SelfPrompting
regulation
new
meanings, by
altering the
situation
Specific
Education
Direct
labeling, of
self-identity

Bryan et al.,
2011; see also
Bryan et al.,
2016; Gerber
et al., 2016

Specific

Civic
behavior

Oyserman et
al., 2006; see
also
Oyserman et
al., 2002

General

Education

Berger &
Rand, 2008

Specific

Health

Sherman et
al., 1992

Specific

Close
relationships

Prompting
new
meanings, by
asking
leading
questions
Active
reflection
exercise, on
future selves;
Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

Prompting by
providing
new
information
Prompting
new
meanings, by

Summary
Asking adolescents to role play “someone slightly harderworking than you” increased persistence following failure
and focus on challenging learning tasks.
5th graders commended by teachers and other school
personnel for keeping their room clean and being litterconscious, as compared to encouraging them to clean up
and those in a control condition, littered less when
unobtrusively observed as long as seven weeks later.
Changing the grammatical structure of 10 survey items
completed the day before a major election to represent
voting in terms of nouns—as an opportunity to become
“a voter”—rather than in verbs—as a task to be
completed, “to vote”—increased voter turnout by 11
percentage-points.
Predominantly African American inner city students in a
high poverty middle school took part in an 11-session
program delivered approximately twice weekly over 7
weeks to encourage children to imagine themselves as
becoming more successful in school and becoming
successful adults, to identify potential obstacles, to
understand these as normal and not self-defining, and to
identify strategies to overcome obstacles. As compared to
a randomized control group this improved students’
standardized test scores and grades, and reduced
depression, absences, and in-school misbehavior through
a 2-year follow-up.
Posting a flier in undergraduate dorms indicating that
most drinking on campus is done by graduate students
reduced drinking among undergraduates who did not
want to be confused with graduate students.
Arresting rather than warning married and employed men
detained for misdemeanor domestic battery reduced the
incidence of subsequent domestic violence offenses;

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables
altering the
situation
My self

My emotions

Do I think
positively about
my self?

What does this
feeling mean?

Lyubomirsky,
et al., 2011;
see also
Boehm et al.,
2011;
Emmons &
McCullough,
2003; Layous
et al., 2013;
Lyubomirksy
et al., 2005;
Sheldon &
Lyubomirsky,
2006;
Seligman et
al., 2005

General

Well-Being

Active
reflection
exercise, on a
positive
aspect of self;
Prompting by
providing
new
information

Seligman et
al., 2005

General

Well-Being

Active
reflection
exercise, on a
positive
aspect of self

Fredrickson
et al., 2008;

General

Well-being

Active
reflection

3

however, for unmarried/unemployed men, who may have
less stake in conventional society, such arrests increased
recidivism.
College students were encouraged to take 15-minutes per
week over 8 weeks (1) to make regular expressions of
gratitude—to write about “times in their lives when they
were grateful for something that another person did for
them and then writing a letter about those experiences
directly to that person (but not sending it)”—or (2) to
make regular expressions of optimism—to write about
“to visualize living a life consistent with their ideal self”
in terms of romance, educational attainment, family life,
etc.. Students who self-selected into a study on a
“happiness intervention” (who were presumably
motivated to increase their happiness) and who
completed one of these exercises, as compared to those in
a randomized control condition (who listed what they had
done over the past week to increase “organizational
skills”) and to students who self-selected into a study on
“cognitive exercises” in any of the conditions, reported
greater well-being at the end of the writing period and at
a 6-month follow-up. Other trials have found that the
effectiveness of such activities can be enhanced when
people read a peer testimonial, who said the activity
helped them (Layous et al., 2013). Gratitude exercises
can also improve well-being and sleep quality among
adults with chronic disease (Emmons & McCullough,
2003).
Encouraging visitors to a website on “happiness
exercises” (1) to “write down three things that went well
each day and their causes every night for a week” or (2)
to take an online survey of “character strengths,” where
they received individualized feedback on their top five
strengths, and were then asked to “use one of these top
strengths in a new and different way every day for one
week,” as compared to writing down early memories
every day for a week, increased happiness and reduced
depressive symptoms over six months.
Teaching people to practice loving-kindness mediation—
a contemplative practice designed to increase feelings of

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables
see also Cohn
&
Fredrickson,
2010

exercise, on
emotions

Hülsheger et
al., 2012; see
also Creswell,
2016

General

Work, wellbeing

Active
reflection
exercise, on
emotions

Hülsheger et
al., 2015

Specific

Work

Active
reflection
exercise, on
emotions

Ramirez &
Beilock, 2011

Specific

Education

Active
reflection
exercise, on a
negative

4

warmth and caring for the self and others—in 6 hour-long
sessions over 7 weeks caused increases in positive
emotions, which mediated an increased sense of purpose
in life, increased feelings of social support, and reduced
illness symptoms. This in turn predicted increased life
satisfaction and fewer depressive symptoms. Fifteen
months after the program ended, about one in three
participants reported continuing to mediate and those
who did continued to report more positive emotions.
Employees in diverse jobs took part in a 2-week
intervention to teach them “mindfulness mediation and
informal daily exercises [aimed] at cultivating an
accepting, nonjudgmental attitude to what one
experiences in each moment.” As compared to a notreatment randomized control group, this reduced
emotional exhaustion and increased job satisfaction over
10 work days.
Hairdressers learned about emotion-regulation techniques
including “(a) reappraising difficult situations by
considering that offensive client behavior is not meant as
personal assault, but rather reflects the customer’s
personal problems (reappraisal); (b) reappraising difficult
situations by considering them a personal challenge and
opportunity for growth (reappraisal); (c) putting
themselves in the client’s shoes (perspective taking). To
train attentional deployment, participants were
encouraged to (d) trigger positive emotions by thinking of
positive and enjoyable past or future events.” They then
wrote down, on each of four consecutive mornings, how
they could use these techniques in a “typical difficult
situation with a customer” at work and, on each of 10
consecutive evenings, how they had done so, what was
effective and how they could improve their use of the
strategy. As compared to those in a control condition,
hairdressers in the treatment condition earned higher tips
over the 10 days.
9th-grade students given the opportunity to write down
thoughts and feelings about the first final exam of high
school immediately before taking the test earned higher
scores if they were anxious about test-taking (B+ vs. B-).

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables

My goals

When and how
will I accomplish
my goals?
(Implementation
intentions)

aspect of self
Active
reflection
exercise, on
goals

Chen et al.,
under review

Specific

Education

Christiansen
et al., 2010

Specific

Health

Active
reflection
exercise, on
goals

Duckworth et
al., 2013; see
also
Duckworth et
al., 2011

Specific

Education

Active
reflection
exercise, on
goals

Harris et al.,
2014

General and
specific

Health

Jessop et al.,
2014

General and
specific

Health

Active
reflection
exercise, on
goals
Active
reflection

5

Encouraging undergraduates to reflect on what learning
resources would help them learn best—identifying
specific resources, writing about why each resource they
chose would be helpful, and creating a specific plan to
use that resource—improved performance in an
introductory statistics class by one-third of a letter grade.
The effect was mediated by greater reflection students
reported about their learning progress which, in turn,
predicted greater reported effectiveness of learning
resources.
Chronic pain patients who, in addition to conventional
care at an outpatient pain center, completed a 1-hour
intervention focused on goal setting with regard to
exercise. The intervention comprised (1) mental
contrasting (listing positive aspects of exercising more
and obstacles to this), (2) problem-solving to overcome
these obstacles using a cognitive-behavioral approach,
and (3) implementation intentions using “If…then…”
statements (e.g., “If I am afraid of hurting myself, then I
will remember that movement is good against pain”). As
compared to patients who received only conventional
care, those in the treatment condition had greater physical
capacity along both behavioral measures and subjective
ratings 3-weeks after discharge and 3-months after
returning home.
Asking urban 5th grade students to identify an important
personal goal relevant to their school work and to write
about obstacles that could prevent them from achieving
this goal and what they would do if such obstacles arose
following an “If… , then…” template (“mental contrasting
with implementation intentions”), improved students’
grades, attendance, and classroom behavior that academic
quarter.
[see Table S2]

[see Table S2]

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables

Leventhal et
al., 1965

Specific

Health

Milkman et
al., 2011

Specific

Health

Morisano et
al., 2010

Specific

Education

Nickerson &
Rogers, 2010

Specific

Civic
Behavior

Pham &
Taylor, 1999

Specific

Education

Prestwich et
al., 2005

Specific

Health

exercise, on
goals
Prompting
new
meanings, by
asking
leading
questions
Prompting
new
meanings, by
asking
leading
questions
Active
reflection
exercise, on
goals

Prompting
new
meanings, by
asking
leading
questions
Active
reflection
exercise, on
goals

Active
reflection
exercise, on
goals

6

College seniors learned about the importance of getting a
tetanus shot in either a high or low fear condition.
Regardless of this manipulation, giving seniors a map
with the health center circled and asking students when
would be a convenient time for them to go increased the
percentage of students who got a tetanus shot from 3.3%
to 27.6%.
3,272 employees of a large utility company received
mailers with information about upcoming flu shot clinics.
Including a prompt to write down the date and time the
employee would get the shot increased vaccination rates
from 33.1% to 37.3%.
A series of online exercises in which struggling college
students identified personal life goals and how they
would implement these (i.e., goal-setting +
implementation intentions) raised term GPA over the
next four months, and reduced the percentage of students
who ended the term less than full-time enrolled from 20%
to 0%.
Adding to a get-out-the-vote call script implementation
intention questions—asking when a person would vote,
where they would be coming from, and what they would
be doing beforehand—increased turnout in a competitive
presidential primary by 0.9%. (intention to treat) or 4.1%
(average treatment on treated).
Undergraduates asked to mentally simulate the process
for doing well on an exam (good study habits), as
compared to those asked to simulate a positive outcome
(getting a good grade) or those in a control condition,
earned higher exam scores 1 week later. The intervention
also increased planning, reduced anxiety, and increased
studying.
Female undergraduates were asked to decide where and
when they would perform a breast self-exam and to
commit to doing so. This increased the number of breast
self-exams women reported performing one and six
months later. In a second study, women randomized to

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables

Prestwich et
al., 2008

Specific

Health

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information;
Active
reflection
exercise, on
goals
Active
reflection
exercise, on
goals

Prestwich et
al., 2010

Specific

Health

Sherman et
al., 2010

Specific

Health

Prompting
new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Stadler et al.,
2009

Specific

Health

Active
reflection
exercise, on
goals

7

form implementation intentions were again more likely to
perform breast self-exams over the next month. In
addition, those who had a romantic partner and chose to
have their partner perform the exam for them were
especially likely to have performed a breast self-exam.
People who were both (1) exposed to information
concerning the health risks of saturated food and (2)
asked to make “If….then…” plans to avoid buying foods
high in saturated fat (e.g., “If I’m in the supermarket then
I will check the food labels of the product and not buy the
product if the label says the food contains more than
1.5% saturated fat”) reported less consumption of
saturated fat 1 month later. This effect was found relative
to people who did neither (1) nor (2) and who did either
but not both.
Adults asked to form specific plans about when they
would walk briskly 5 days/week using the form “When
I’m in situation X, then I will do Y” and who received
text message reminders of either their walking goal or
plan reported walking briskly for at least 30 minutes/day
more than participants in a control condition over the
next month.
Based on the theory that some forms of cognition are
represented in the motor system, researchers theorized
that the physical embodiment of health behaviors can
promote those behaviors among people who intend to
enact them. Among people who intended to floss, those
who held floss while watching a video about the
importance of flossing, instead of just watching the video
flossed more over the next week. People who jogged in
place while watching a video of a person exercising, as
compared to those who just watched the video, exercised
16 minutes/day more over the next week.
Women received information about the benefits of
exercise. Those in the “mental contrasting +
implementation intentions” group also wrote down “(1)
their most important current wish regarding physical
activity (e.g., biking to work); (2) the most positive
outcome of realizing their wish (e.g., getting into better
shape) and events and experiences they associated with

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables

What do I need
to do to

Stadler et al.,
2010

Specific

Health

Active
reflection
exercise, on
goals

EskreisWinkler et

General

Education

Increasing
commitment

8

this positive outcome; (3) the most critical obstacle (e.g.,
getting up too late) together with events and experiences
they associated with this obstacle; and (4) three
implementation intentions with the following questions:
(1) When and where does the obstacle occur, and what
can I do to overcome or circumvent the obstacle?; (2)
When and where is an opportunity to prevent the obstacle
from occurring, and what can I do to prevent it from
occurring?; and (3) When and where is a good
opportunity for me to act on my wish, and what would
this action be?”. Participants in the latter group were
twice as physically active as participants in the former
group (1 hour more per week) over the course of a 4month follow-up period.
Adults received information about the role fruit and
vegetables play in a healthy diet. Those in the “mentalcontrasting + implementation intentions” group also were
asked to write down “(a) their most important wish
regarding their diet that should be both challenging and
feasible (e.g., ‘eating more fruits and vegetables’); (b) the
most positive outcome of realizing their wish (e.g.,
‘greater wellbeing’) and events and experiences they
associated with this positive outcome; (c) the most
critical obstacle (e.g., ‘no fruits at work’) together with
events and experiences they associated with this obstacle;
and (d) formed three implementation intentions with the
following questions: (1) ‘When and where does the
obstacle occur, and what can I do to overcome or
circumvent the obstacle?’; (2) ‘When and where is an
opportunity to prevent the obstacle from occurring, and
what can I do to prevent it from occurring?’; and (3)
‘When and where is a good opportunity for me to act in a
goal-directed way, and what would the goal-directed
action be?’ Both groups reported greater consumption of
fruit and vegetables through four months later but only
people in the mental-contrasting + implementation
intentions group showed sustained higher intake two
years later.
Students learned (1) the tents of deliberate (or “deep”)
practice—“(a) focus on weakness, (b) get feedback, (c)

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables
accomplish my
goals?

al., 2016

through
action:
Saying-isbelieving

What is
necessary for me
to accomplish
my goals?

Destin &
Oyserman,
2010

Specific

Education

What were my
goals?

Dal Cin et al.,
2006

Specific

Health

Is this goal my
own or imposed?

Bryan,
Yeager et al.
2016

Specific

Health

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information
Prompting
new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Increasing
commitment
through
action:
Saying-isbelieving

9

concentrate 100%, and (d) repeat until mastery”—, (2)
the importance of deliberate effort in academic success
and how this is often underestimated, and (3) how
frustration and confusion is a sign that “one is engaging
in optimal practice activities using stories from other
students and by writing a letter to another student
advocating deliberate practice. As compared to students
who received standard study advice, this raised term GPA
for both 5th, 6th, and 7th grade students and college
undergraduates with lower prior achievement.
Representing career success (e.g., earnings) as dependent
on education led predominantly low-income, African
American 7th graders to plan to work harder on
homework and to be more likely to complete an extracredit assignment that night (23% vs. 3%).
Sexually active undergraduates who watched a video
about the risks of unprotected sex—and who were given
a “friendship” bracelet and told to remember the dangers
of unprotected sex when they looked at it—were more
likely to use a condom over the next 5-7 weeks during
sex than those who just watched the safe sex video or an
unrelated video. The effect was greatest when people had
sex after drinking, a state in which people are especially
responsive to situational cues.
Adolescents read about journalism exposing the
deceptive and manipulative marketing practices of food
companies and their harmful effects on society, especially
to young children and the poor (e.g., formulating foods
based on research designed to make it more addictive) as
well as stories from older students describing their
outrage about food company practices and efforts to
“fight back against the companies by buying and eating
less processed food.” They then wrote essays explaining
why they were outraged and might fight back. As
compared to a traditional public health message
(conveying scientific information about how the body
processes food, recommendations for a balanced diet,
etc.), the “exposé” message, which connected with
adolescents’ goals around autonomy and social justice,

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 10

My ability or
potential

My behavior

Self-efficacy

Bandura &
Schunk, 1981

Specific

Education

Direct
labeling, of
goals

Sense of control

Langer &
Rodin, 1976;
Rodin &
Langer, 1977

General

Health

Schulz, 1976;
Schulz &
Hanusa, 1978

Specific but
symbolic

Health

Direct
labeling, of a
situation;
Prompting
new
meanings, by
altering the
situation
Prompting
new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Detweiler et
al., 1999; see
also Rothman
et al., 1993

Specific

Health

Representation
of potential
behaviors

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

led students to choose fewer unhealthy foods in a snack
form in their homerooms a day later, representing less
carbohydrates and sugar.
7-10-year-old children behind and with little interest in
math were asked to complete instructional items with a
proximal goal (6 pages/session). As compared to students
assigned a distal goal (42 pages over 7 sessions) or no
specific goal (“as many pages…as possible”), the
proximal goal intervention increased students’ selfefficacy in math and learning.
Nursing-home residents were told of their many
responsibilities and choices and given a plant and told it
was their responsibility to take care of it. As compared to
a control-condition floor, this increased (at 3-weeks)
residents’ self-reported happiness, activity level, and
nurses’ judgment of improvement and (at 18-months)
nurses’ rating of activity level, doctors’ rating of health,
and reduced the mortality rate from 30% to 15%.
Retirement-home residents were given the opportunity to
control or to predict when a college student visitor would
come visit them over a 2-month period, or received the
same number and length of visits but without this
predictability, or no visits. At 2-months, residents in the
former conditions reported being happier and having
more “zest for life” and were rated as being healthier and
showed a smaller increase in the use of medications.
Then the visits ended. At 42-months, residents in the
former conditions were rated as having less “zest for
live” and as less healthy and had a mortality rate of 20%
as compared to 0% in the random-visit and no-visit
conditions.
Based on prospect theory, which suggests that people are
risk-averse in the context of gains, the authors theorized
that emphasizing “gains” rather than “losses” would
promote prevention behaviors like sunscreen use. Beach
goers were randomized to receive a brochure that
highlighted the benefits of using sunscreen (e.g., “Protect
yourself from the sun and you will help yourself stay
healthy”) or the potential losses of not using sunscreen
(e.g., “Expose yourself to the sun and you will risk

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 11

Feedback on
ongoing behavior

GarciaRetamero &
Cokely, 2011

Specific

Health

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

Graham et al.,
2011

Specific

Environmen
t

Zohar, 2002;

Specific

Work

Prompting
new
meanings, by
asking
leading
questions;
Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information
Prompting

becoming sick”). Whereas 71% of those in the gainframe condition redeemed a coupon to obtain a free
sample of sunscreen, only 53% of those in the loss-frame
condition did so. Additionally, those who did not intend
to use sunscreen reported greater intentions to do so in
the gain-frame than loss-frame condition.
Sexually active undergraduates read a brochure about
sexually transmitted diseases. Following prospect theory,
the authors hypothesized that (1) emphasizing gains
rather than losses in describing a prevention behavior
(condom use; e.g., “using condoms reduce[s] the chance
of…contracting STDs” versus “not using condoms
increase[s] the chance of…contracting a STD”) would
promote compliance but (2) that emphasizing losses
rather than gains in describing a detection behavior
(screening; e.g., “not conducting screening reduce[s] the
chance of receiving effective treatment” versus
“screening increase[s] the chance of receiving an
effective treatment”) would promote compliance. This
was the case. Whereas ~65% of participants reported
using condoms in every sexual encounter in the next six
weeks in the gain-frame condition, only ~35% in the lossframe condition did. For reports of making a screening
appointment with a doctor, these numbers reversed.
However, when the brochure included graphics depicting
risk information, compliance rates were high overall and
gain/loss framing did not matter.
People who reported how much they drove online every
two days for two weeks reported driving less within this
period and, after this period ended, less over the
subsequent two weeks. In addition, people who received
online feedback information about how much money (on
gasoline and maintenance) and pollution they had saved
by reducing their driving drove even less.

Providing supervisors in a regional maintenance center

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 12
see also
Zohar &
Polachek,
2014

Nature of
psychological
qualities or
states

Arousal

Category B: Selves (In General)
Education
Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

Jamieson et
al., 2010; see
also
Brady et al.,
under review;
Johns et al.,
2008
Crum et al.,
2013

Specific

General

Health and
well-being

Implicit theories
of willpower

Job et al., in
prep; see also
Haimovitz et
al., under
review

General

Selfregulation

Implicit theories
of intelligence

Aronson et al.,
2002;
Blackwell et
al., 2007;
Good et al.,

General

Education

Stress

Potential for
psychological
qualities or
states to
change/grow

new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information
Increasing
commitment
through
action:
Saying-isbelieving

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new

focused on heavy-duty equipment weekly feedback on
the cumulative frequency of subordinates’ reports of
safety-related conversations with supervisors over 8
weeks, as well as communications of the priority put on
safety by superiors, increased the frequency of safetyrelated conversations reported by subordinates and
improved workplace safety, including frequency of ear
plug use from 25% to 73%, up to 5 months after the
intervention ended as compared to a randomized control
group. In addition, whereas the microaccident rate (minor
injuries that occurred due to unsafe behavior during work
hours) increased in the control group over a three-month
assessment period, it declined in the treatment group.
Telling people preparing for the GRE that arousal
“doesn’t hurt…and can actually help performance”
improved scores on the math section of the GRE taken up
to 3 months later.

Employees of a major financial services company who
learned that stress can promote functioning and
performance reported reduced symptoms of anxiety
(headaches, insomnia) and greater improvement in “hard”
and “soft” work skills (e.g., efficiency, communication)
several days later.
College students learned that how you think about
willpower—as dependent on a limited resource or not—
matters, and that you can choose how to think about it,
and wrote a letter of advice to a person who struggles
with willpower. Among students who faced high
demands on self-control this improved self-reported
academic regulation a month later and raised end-of-term
grades.
Diverse exercises to encourage students to view
intelligence as malleable—as a quality that can grow with
effort, effective strategies, and help from others rather
than as a quality that is fixed—can raise achievement and
reduce course failures especially among initially low-

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 13

Qualities of
other
individuals

Implicit theories
of groups

2003;
Paunesku et
al., 2015;
Yeager,
Romero et al.,
2016; see also
Lin-Siegler et
al., 2016
Halperin et al.,
2011

Implicit theories
of weight

information;
Increasing
commitment
through
action:
Saying-isbelieving
General

Intergroup
relations

Burnette &
Finkel, 2012

Specific

Health

Implicit theories
of persons

Yeager et al.,
2013

General

Education
and health

Can other
people learn
and grow?

Rosenthal &
Jacobson,
1968; see also
Raudenbush,
1984

Specific

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information
Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

Increasing
commitment
through
action:
Saying-isbelieving
Category C: Other People
Education
Direct
labeling, of
other people

performing students. The exercises include college
students advocating this idea to a struggling middle
school student (Aronson et al., 2002); middle school
students who received mentorship focused on growthmindset (Good et al., 2003); a 6-session workshop for
middle school students (Blackwell et al., 2007); and
online modules for high school students (Paunesku et al.,
2015; Yeager, Romero et al., 2016).
Encouraging Israeli Jews and Palestinians to view
aggressive groups in general as capable of change led to
more positive intergroup attitudes and increased
willingness to compromise for peace.

People trying to lose weight were (1) led to view weight
as changeable with effort (implicit-theories treatment);
(2) received high quality information about scientifically
validated means to lose weight (e.g., reduced pace of
eating, mechanisms linking exercise to weight loss)
(knowledge treatment); or (3) assigned to a control
condition. Over a 12-week assessment period, both
treatments prevented weight gain observed in the control
condition. Additionally, whereas people in the knowledge
treatment and control conditions gained more weight
when they experienced more severe dieting setbacks
(e.g., overeating at a party), those in the implicit-theories
treatment lost more weight when they experienced
greater setbacks.
[see Table S3]

Telling elementary-school teachers that a test
administered at the beginning of the school year has
identified certain children as “growth spurters” led to
significantly greater intellectual growth in children, as
measured by improved intelligence-quotient scores over

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 14

Qualities of
other groups

What are the
experiences of
people in other
groups like?
How is it like
mine? How do
we relate?

Aronson et al.,
2016; see also
Hodson et al.,
2015

Specific

Intergroup
relationships

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

Broockman &
Kalla, 2016

Specific

Intergroup
relationships

Prompting
new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Cameron et al.,
2006

Specific

Intergroup
relationships

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

the school year. The greatest effects were observed for
children in first and second grades, and arise most when
the teacher expectancies are established at the outset of
the school year (Raudenbush, 1984)
In samples of (1) predominantly White second- and thirdgrade children in the United States and (2) ethnically
diverse 8-9 year-old Italian children, those who read 5-6
weekly storybooks including immigrant protagonists
(Somali or African and Chinese) and relevant cultural
information (e.g., religious holidays, food) reported
greater interest in interacting with immigrant children 2-3
weeks after the intervention ended with the greatest
effects among younger children (2nd-graders and 8 yearolds). The younger children in the US sample, also
reported less anxiety about interacting with immigrant
children up to 9-10 weeks later; the Italian sample,
however, showed the opposite pattern for anxiety.
Having a 10-minute face-to-face conversation with a
door-to-door canvasser about transgender rights,
including reflecting on their own experiences being
judged negatively for being different and how this might
offer a window into the experiences of transgender
people, reduced transphobia over 3 months and increased
support for a nondiscrimination law even after exposure
to counterarguments.
White 5-11 year-old children in England were read three
stories over two sessions, which represented close
friendships between ingroup members and refugees. The
stories emphasized the individual characteristics of
refugees (decategorization intervention), the common
ingroup identity of refugees as a member of the school
community (common ingroup identity intervention) or
both the common ingroup identity and the unique
subgroup identity of refugees (dual identity intervention).
One to two weeks later, children in all three intervention
conditions, as compared to a no-treatment control
condition, reported a greater sense of connection to
refugees and more positive attitudes toward refugees,
with the dual identity intervention the most effective.
However, there was no effect on children’s interest in

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 15

Guerra et al.,
2013

Specific

Intergroup
relationships

Prompting
new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Liebkind &
McAlister,
1999

Specific

Intergroup
relationships

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

Shook &
Fazio, 2008

Specific

Intergroup
relationships

Stathi et al.,
2014

Specific

Intergroup
relationships

Prompting
new
meanings, by
altering the
situation
Prompting
new
meanings, by
asking
leading
questions

interacting with refugees.
9-11 year-old European and African Portuguese children
worked together on a school-related activity in 45-minute
weekly sessions for a month that was identified and
functioned as either the “Portuguese team”
(recategorization condition) or the “Portuguese team with
Portuguese and African origin students” (dual identity
condition). One month after the last interaction, African
Portuguese children in the recategorization condition
exhibited less bias against European Portuguese children
as compared to both the dual identity condition and a notreatment control condition in which students did not
interact. European Portuguese children did not differ
significantly by condition, but if anything the dual
identity condition was more effective for them.
Finish middle schools were randomized to a treatment in
which students read stories of close friendships between
prototypical Finnish students and immigrant students and
how this improved Finnish students’ intergroup attitudes;
heard support from university students for positive
intergroup attitudes; and took part in brief discussion
groups about intergroup relations. This treatment
prevented a decline in students’ “tolerance” of immigrant
students observed in control-condition schools 2-3 weeks
later.
White first-year college students randomly assigned an
African American (versus White) roommate reported less
satisfaction with their roommate relationship but showed
reductions in automatic racial prejudice and intergroup
anxiety over the first academic term of college.
White 7-9 year-old children in England imagined
interacting with a different Asian child once a week for
three weeks in routine settings (park, birthday party,
beach). In each session, children received a picture of the
Asian child and were prompted to tell a story “about a
day that you might have with a new friend.” One week
later, as compared to children in a no-treatment control
condition, those who in the imagined contact condition
reported being more similar to Asian children, more
positive attitudes toward Asian children, and more

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 16

How others
view the self

Am I loved and
valued?

Marigold et
al., 2007, 2010

Specific but
symbolic

Close
relationships

Prompting
new
meanings, by
asking
leading
questions

Am I viewed as
a person with
potential?

Yeager,
PurdieVaughns et al.,
2014,
Experiments 1
and 2

Specific

Education

Prompting
new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Yeager,
PurdieVaughns et al.,
2014,
Experiment 3;
see also
Yeager,
Walton, et al.,
2016,
Experiment 3
Carrell et al.,
2010; Dee,
2004; Huang,
2009

General

Education

Increasing
commitment
through
action:
Saying-isbelieving

Specific

Education

Prompting
new
meanings, by
altering the

Am I viewed
through the lens
of a negative
stereotype?

interest in interacting with Asian children.
People were asked to recall a recent compliment from
their romantic partner and to “Explain why your partner
admired you. Describe what it meant to you and its
significance for your relationship.” As compared to
multiple control conditions, this led people with low selfesteem to feel more secure in the relationship and to
value the relationship more immediately and over the
next 2-3 weeks, to behave more positively toward their
partner as reported by the partner, to see their partner as
behaving more positively toward them, and to continue to
feel more secure in and valuing of the relationship.
Black and White 7th grade students turned in an essay, on
which their teacher provided critical feedback. When a
paper clipped note was appended to the marked-up essay
reading, “I’m giving you these comments because I have
high standards and I know that you can meet them,” this
increased the percentage of White students who chose to
revise their essay from 64% to 82%, and increased the
percentage of Black students from 27% to 64%. In
another study were a revision was required, this note
increased the quality of students’ revisions. The greatest
effects were observed for Black students who were
mistrustful of school and, among these students, halted a
2-year decline in school trust over the rest of the school
year.
High school students read stories from other students
about receiving critical feedback, which emphasized
understanding criticism as helping students achieve a
higher level and given with this purpose, and practiced
these attributions by interpreting critical feedback on
another student’s essay. This raised end-of-term core
academic grades for Black students, reducing the
achievement gap with White students by 39%, and
reduced the percentage of classes in which Black students
performed at a D or lower level from 43% to 23%.
Performing in real-world contexts with in-group teachers
and evaluators can improve performance, often especially
for women and minorities, including women’s
performance in college math and science classes with a

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 17
situation

Danaher &
Crandall, 2008

Specific

Education

Good et al.,
2008

Specific

Education

[multiple]

Specific

Education

Prompting
new
meanings, by
altering the
situation
Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information
Prompting
new
meanings, by
altering the
situation, by
providing
new
information,
or by asking
leading
questions

female professor (Carrell et al., 2010); Black and White
elementary school students’ school achievement with a
same-race teacher (Dee, 2004); and Black adults’
performance on a vocabulary quiz administered by a
Black interviewer (Huang, 2009)
High school students took the AP Calculus test with
standard demographic questions (race, gender) moved to
the end instead of immediately before the test. This raised
girls’ scores, and increased the percentage of girls who
received AP credit from 32% to 38%.
Women enrolled in demanding college calculus sequence
took a practice final exam. When this exam was
described as evaluative of calculus ability but as yielding
“no gender differences,” as compared to when it was
simply described as evaluative of ability, women and
especially White women performed significantly better.
Diverse experiments show ways to reduce stereotype
threat in laboratory settings, and to raise test performance
for students who face negative intellectual stereotypes
such as women in math and science and negatively
stereotyped racial minority students on intellectual tasks
in general. These include:
• Reflecting on individual aspects of the self (Ambady et
al., 2004; Gresky et al., 2005) or completing a valueaffirmation exercise (Martens et al., 2006)
• Learning about positive in-group role models (Marx &
Goff, 2005; Marx & Roman, 2002; McIntyre et al.,
2003)
• Being treated by a man in a way that signals that he
thinks of a woman as a partner working together on the
test (Aguilar et al., under review)
• Reflecting on characteristics shared between men and
women (Rosenthal & Crisp, 2006)
• Learning about stereotype threat and, thus, that negative
thoughts and feelings may arise from this threat not
imply a risk of poor performance (Johns et al., 2005)
Learning effective emotion reappraisal strategies, such as
to view anxiety as a potential source of strong
performance not a hindrance, or to replace feelings of

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 18

Personal
Experiences
and Contexts

Of experiences
that lack
meaning

Grant, 2008

Harackiewicz
et al., 2012

Harackiewicz
et al., 2016

Hulleman &
Harackiewcz,
2009

Jang, 2008

worry with thoughts about a neutral subject (Johns et al.,
2008; Logel et al., 2009)
Category D: Past, Ongoing, or Future Experiences
Specific
Work
Prompting
Providing employees reasons why their work was of
new
value to others improved work performance. University
meanings, by fundraisers who read stories about how their job could
providing
make a difference in the lives of scholarship recipients
new
raised more money over the next week. Lifeguards who
information
read stories about lifeguards saving swimmers
volunteered to work more hours and were rated by
supervisors as more helpful of guests over the following
month. These effects were observed above and beyond
stories that emphasized the personal benefits of the job
(e.g., skills and knowledge acquired).
Specific
Education
Prompting
Mailing brochures to parents and creating a website
new
highlighting the usefulness of math and science courses
meanings, by and how to talk with adolescents about this increased
providing
students’ enrollment in math and science courses in the
new
last two years of high school.
information
Specific
Education
Prompting
Asking students in an introduction biology course to
new
reflect on why “specific [course content] is relevant to
meanings, by your life or useful to you” raised the course grades of
asking
first-generation and racial-ethnic minority college
leading
students, reducing the achievement gap with advantaged
questions;
students by 61%. Simultaneously, a value-affirmation
Active
intervention was not effective.
reflection
exercise,
valueaffirmation
Specific
Education
Prompting
Asking 9th-grade science students who expected to
new
perform poorly how the course material might be useful
meanings, by to them or a friend or relative 3-5 times over the course of
asking
the term raised end-of-quarter interest and grades in
leading
science for students who expected to perform poorly in
questions
the course.
Specific
Education
Prompting
Teaching students training to be teachers that an
new
introductory statistics lesson helps people become more
meanings, by effective teachers increased engagement and learning in

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 19

Of how
experiences
affect the self

Of aversive
experiences

providing
new
information
Prompting
new
meanings, by
altering the
situation
Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information
Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

Benedetti et
al., 2003

Specific

Health

Crum &
Langer, 2007

Specific

Health

Kaptchuk et
al., 2010

Specific

Health

Kross et al.,
2014; see also
Kross &
Ayduk, 2011;
Kross et al.,
2005; Park et
al., 2015

Specific

Well-being

Active
reflection
exercise, on
negative
experiences

Pennebaker et
al., 1988; see
also
Pennebaker,
1997; Kirk et
al., 2011
Redelmeier et
al., 2003

Specific

Health and
well-being

Active
reflection
exercise, on
negative
experiences

Specific

Health

Prompting
new
meanings, by

the lesson.

Making the injection of drugs visible rather than invisible
to patients increased their effectiveness, including greater
reductions in pain from morphine, greater reductions in
anxiety from diazepam, and greater reductions in heart
rate from propranolol.
Telling hotel room attendants that cleaning hotel rooms
meets the Surgeon General’s recommendations for an
active lifestyle reduced attendants’ weight, systolic blood
pressure, and percent body fat and increased their job
satisfaction four weeks later.
Telling patients with irritable bowel syndrome that a pill
they are to take twice daily contains no medication (i.e.,
is a placebo) but that the placebo effect is powerful and
can lead the body to respond effectively led, as compared
to a no-pill condition, to greater improvement, and
reduced symptoms at three weeks. At this point, 59% of
treated patients, as compared to 35% of control patients,
reported adequate relief.
Asking people to write about a negative event from a
third-person perspective as if they were a fly on the wall
observing it, using a third- and specifically to describe
why the event occurred the way it did (e.g., “Greg failed
a test”), as compared to writing about the event from a
first-person perspective (e.g., “I failed a test”), made
people more likely to interpret the event in a nonpejorative way, to stop ruminating on it, and to
experience less psychological distress.
Asking people to describe their “deepest thoughts and
feelings” about “the most traumatic and upsetting
experiences of your entire life” for 20 minutes/day on
four consecutive days improved measures of immune
system function and reduced doctor visits and subject
distress over six weeks.
Based on the theory that people’s evaluations of
experiences are disproportionately shaped by the end of
experiences, modifying a colonoscopy by leaving the tip

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 20
altering the
situation

Of setbacks

Boese et al.,
2013; Hall et
al., 2004,
2006, 2007;
Haynes et al.,
2006; Menec
et al., 1994;
Perry &
Penner, 1990;
Perry et al.,
2010; Ruthig
et al., 2004

General

Education

Prompting,
by providing
new
information;
Direct
labeling, of
attributions;
Increasing
commitment
through
action:
Saying-isbelieving

Weinberg et
al., 2015

General

Health

Prompting,
by providing
new
information

of the colonoscope in patients’ rectums for up to an
additional three minutes without moving it reduced
patients’ recalled pain and, at a median of 5.3 years
follow-up, increased the likelihood patients agreed to
have another colonoscopy if needed by 41%, controlling
for medical circumstances.
Across many studies, college students were exposed to
information that failures arise from a lack of effort and
inappropriate strategies and that increasing effort and
changing strategies can improve outcomes. This
represents effort and strategies as under a person’s
control. Often this information is provided in videotaped
interviews of other students and/or of professors telling
stories from their own lives. Often it includes an explicit
discussion of attribution theory and why attributions
matter, and a direct exhortation to students to attribute
setbacks to a lack of effort (and success to ability and
effort) (e.g., Perry & Penner, 1990; Perry et al., 2010).
Some forms also incorporate writing exercises to help
students articulate the idea for themselves and relate them
to their own lives (e.g., Boese et al., 2013; Hall et al.,
2004, 2007; Haynes et al., 2006) or small-group
discussions (Boese et al., 2013; Perry et al., 2010; Ruthig,
et al., 2004). These “attributional retraining”
interventions can improve learning and performance,
especially for students who are struggling and who
otherwise tend to attribute poor performance to limited
ability (Boese et al., 2013; Menec et al., 1994; Perry &
Penner, 1990; Perry et al., 2010) or who are overly
optimistic (Haynes et al., 2006; Ruthig et al., 2004), with
improvements in GPA that can last at least a full
academic year (Hall et al., 2004; Perry et al., 2010;
Ruthig et al., 2004).
Older adults (80+) in a rehabilitation center who received
information encouraging “personally controllable
attributions for loss of function (e.g., effort invested in
exercise protocols) and discouraging maladaptive
attributions (e.g., ‘old age’)” were more motivated to
exercise, reported higher life satisfaction, and exhibited
greater function

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 21
Of challenging
life transitions

Destin &
Oyserman,
2009

Specific

Education

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information
Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

Stephens et al.,
2014

General

Education

Good et al.,
2003

General

Education

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

Wilson &
Linville, 1982,
1985

General

Education

Walton &
Cohen, 2011

General

Education,
health, and
well-being

Prompting,
by providing
new
information;
Increasing
commitment
through
action:
Saying-isbelieving
Increasing
commitment
through

Representing college as accessible by providing
information about need-based financial aid to low-income
African American and Latino 7th-grade students led
students to be more likely to plan to do their homework
that night.
A panel discussion that provided first-generation college
students information about how students’ social-class
backgrounds affect their experiences in college, including
unique challenges faced by first-generation students and
how students overcome these with time, as compared to a
panel discussion that did not link college experiences to
students’ social-class background, reduced the socialclass achievement gap in first-year GPA among students
at a selective college by 63%.
7th grade students in a rural, low-income, and
predominantly Hispanic and Black population were
matched with a college student mentor with whom they
had two in-person 90-minute meetings plus email
exchanges. In a treatment condition, the mentor shared
that many students experience difficulties in the transition
to junior high school but bounce back as they get used to
their new environment (e.g., changing classes, more
difficult subjects, many teachers not one). As compared
to a randomized control condition, girls (but not boys)
earned higher math scores on a state test while both girls
and boys earned higher reading scores.
First-year undergraduates worried about their academic
performance viewed videos of upper-year students
describing difficulties they experienced in their first year
and how these improved with time. In some cases,
students also wrote essays to high school students
describing why academic difficulties in the transition to
college are normal and temporary. This reduced
sophomore-year dropout rates (in one trial, from 25% to
5%) and raised GPA.
[see Table S3]

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 22

Social
Experiences

Interpersonal
relationships
and conflicts

action:
Saying-isbelieving
Increasing
commitment
through
action:
Saying-isbelieving
Prompting
new
meanings, by
asking
leading
questions

Yeager,
Walton, et al.,
2016,
Experiment 3

General

Education

Bugental et al.,
2002;
Bugental et al.,
2010, 2012

Specific

Parenting

Finkel et al.,
2013

Specific

Close
relationships

Active
reflection
exercise, on a
conflict

Hudley &
Graham, 1993

Specific

Peer
relationships

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

Representing college as a place where people can
maintain an interdependent self-concept—maintain
interdependent ties with people back home and join new
interdependent communities on campus—raised first-year
GPA for negatively stereotyped racial-minority students
and first-generation college students.
Over an average of 17 home visits during the baby’s first
year, paraprofessionals asked mothers demographically at
risk of committing child abuse to identify challenges in
parenting (e.g., “My baby won’t stop crying”) and kept
asking why they were having this challenge until the
mother gave a reason that did not blame themselves or
their baby. They then problem-solved with the mother to
address this problem. As compared to both visits without
this component and a no-visit condition, this reduced the
rate of child abuse during the first year from 23% to 4%,
with the greatest effect among high-risk infants (58% vs.
10%). It also improved children’s health and reduced
mothers’ depression at the child’s first birthday, and
reduced aggression and stress markers in children and
improved children’s cognitive functioning through the
age of three.
Asking married couples in three 7-minute writing
exercises over a year to consider how “a neutral third
party who wants the best for all” would think about a
conflict in their marriage and how they could take this
perspective in future conflict situations halted the typical
decline in marital satisfaction over the year.
African American 3rd through 5th grade boys in lowincome schools identified by teacher ratings and peer
nominations as aggressive completed a 12-lesson
intervention using role-playing, discussion of personal
experiences, and other experiences to encourage them (1)
to accurately understand cues provided by others in social
interactions, (2) to attribute ambiguous negative social
encounters to nonhostile intentions, and (3) to respond
appropriately. As compared to children in two control

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 23

Intergroup
relationships

LaBrie et al.,
2016; see also
Turrisi et al.,
2001, 2010

Specific

Health

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information;
Active
reflection, on

Carnes et al.,
2015

General

Intergroup
relationships

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

Devine et al.,
2012; see also
Forscher et al.,
under review

General

Intergroup
relationships

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

conditions, this intervention reduced perceptions of
hostility in hypothetical peer encounters and teacher
ratings of aggression two weeks after the intervention.
Parents of new college students learned in a 60-minute
in-person session during the summer before college
began about college drinking, including how they as a
group tend to “overestimate how accepting other parents
are of drinking,” “underestimate the extent to which other
parents speak to their children about alcohol,” and
“underestimate how much their child would drink in
college,” as well as research showing parents’ ongoing
influence on students’ drinking in college and strategies
to speak with their child about college drinking
effectively, reduced students’ reports of the extent to
which they drank in the first month of college by 30% as
compared to a randomized control group. Using a nonrandomized comparison group, Turrisi et al. (2001, 2010)
found similar reductions in first-year college student
drinking from a 35-page handbook distributed to parents.
An implicit-bias reduction program modeled on Devine
et al. (2012) but focused on gender bias was randomized
to math, science, and engineering departments. Over 3
days and 3 months, the intervention did not reduce bias
among faculty, but it did raise awareness of and
motivation to remedy bias, improved faculty members’
sense of fit and respect in the department, and, when at
least a quarter of department faculty attended the
program, increased self-reported actions to promote
gender equity. In another study this program increased
faculty hiring of women in math, science, and
engineering departments (Forscher, 2016)
Non-African American undergraduates learned about
implicit bias, its link to discrimination, and strategies to
reduce bias in daily life (e.g., recognizing and replacing
stereotypic responses, imagining counterstereotypical
outgroup members. This led to a decline in implicit
prejudice that lasted through two months and an increase
in concern about discrimination. A replication study
(Forscher et al., 2012) found no reduction in implicit
prejudice over two weeks but sustained increases in

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 24
concern about prejudice over this period. A subsample
recruited two years later showed that treated participants
were more likely to object in an online forum to an essay
endorsing racial stereotyping (79% vs. 48%).

The NonSocial World

To inform
meaning

Mallett &
Wilson, 2010

General

Intergroup
relationships

Increasing
commitment
through
action:
Saying-isbelieving

Au et al., 2008

Specific

Health

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

Gripshover &
Markman,
2013

Specific

Health

Prompting
new
meanings, by
providing
new
information

Undergraduates watched a video depicting a friendship
between a Black and a White student. Both friends
mentioned that they did not expect to become friends or
have much in common. As compared to students who just
watched the video, students who then wrote about “a time
when you didn’t think you could become friends with a
person, but were wrong for some reason” had a better
interracial interaction immediately and initiated more
interracial friendships in the next two weeks.
Teaching 4th-grade children in Hong Kong following the
2003 SARS epidemic the biological theory of germs,
challenging the traditional folk theory that being cold
causes colds, increased the percentage who washed their
hands before folding napkins for a class party from 14%
to 41%. The effects were observed above and beyond a
teacher-designed program based on publicly available
resources, which emphasized the symptoms of flus, do’s
and don’ts, etc.
Teaching preschool-aged children a theory of nutrition—
that variety is important because different foods contain
different nutrients, that nutrients are there even if you
can’t see them, and that foods within a category share
similar nutrients—led children to take more vegetables at
snack time.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 25
Table S2. Wise interventions approach #2: Interventions that address the need for self-integrity.
Threat
Addressed
Social identity
threat: Will I be
seen or treated
negatively
because of my
group identity?

Reference

Specificity of
Intervention

Cohen et al.,
2006, 2009; see
also Borman et
al., 2015; Bowen
et al., 2013;
Cook et al.,
2012; Dee,
2015; Goyer,
Garcia et al.,
under review;
Hanselman et
al., 2014;
Sherman et al.,
2013

General

Brady et al.,
2016;
Harackiewcz et
al., 2014, 2015;
Miyake et al.,
2010; Tibbetts et
al., 2016

General

Hall et al., 2014

General

Silverman &

General

Content
Change
Summary
Area
Strategy
Strategy A. Remedy threats to self-integrity
Education
Active reflection Completing several 15-20 minute writing exercises about
exercise, valueimportant values over the school year increased African
affirmation
American middle students’ course grades, reducing the racial
achievement gap by 40% (Cohen et al., 2006), and improving
grades over the next two years, especially for initially lowperforming students (Cohen et al., 2009; see also Cook et al.,
2012). Similar benefits have been found for Latino students
(Sherman et al., 2013). Moreover, six years after the original
intervention, African American students who had received the
affirmation were more likely to enroll in college (92% versus
78%; Goyer, Garcia et al., in prep). A full-district
administration found reductions in the Black-White
achievement gap (Borman et al., 2015); in one case especially
in schools in which African American students were less well
represented and where the achievement gap was highest,
where identity threat may be highest (Hanselman et al., 2014;
but see also Dee, 2015)
Education
Active reflection In college samples, value-affirmation interventions have
exercise, valueraised women’s grades in physics, eliminating gender
affirmation
differences (Miyake et al., 2010); raised grades in biology
among first-generation college student, reducing the socialclass achievement gap by 50%, as well as raising term GPA,
and increasing the percentage of first-generation students who
enrolled in the second semester of the course from 66% to
86% (Harackiewicz et al., 2014; but see Harackiewicz et al.,
2015) and caused improvements in first-generation students’
college GPA over the next three years (Tibbetts et al., 2016);
and raised GPA among Latino American students over two
years, reducing the ethnic achievement gap by 90% (Brady et
al., 2016).
Poverty
Active reflection Clients at a soup kitchen scored higher on IQ and cognitiveexercise, valuecontrol tasks and were more likely to accept information
affirmation
about public benefit programs if they first described a
personal success.
Education
Active reflection Blind students in a compensatory skill-training program made

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 26
Cohen, 2014

Stressful event:
Will this go
badly?
Self-regulation:
Can I regulate
my behavior
effectively to
accomplish
important
personal goals?
Health risk
information: Am
I doing
something that is
harming my
health?

exercise, valueaffirmation

Walton, Logel et
al., 2015

General

Education

Increasing
commitment
through action:
Saying-isbelieving
Active reflection
exercise, valueaffirmation
Active reflection
exercise, valueaffirmation

Sherman,
Bunyan, et al.,
2009
Logel & Cohen,
2012

General

Stress and health

General

Self-regulation
and health

Armitage et al.,
2011

General

Health

Active reflection
exercise, valueaffirmation and
implementation
of valueaffirmation

Harris et al.,
2007

General

Health

Active reflection
exercise, valueaffirmation

Harris et al.,
2014

General

Health

Active reflection
exercise, valueaffirmation;
Active reflection
exercise, on
goals

more progress in four courses (Braille, computers, home
management, and travel) over a month if they had completed
a value-affirmation.
Encouraging women enrolled in male-dominated engineering
majors to “keep balanced” by incorporating personal values
in their daily lives and activities (“affirmation-training”)
raised grades and eliminated gender differences in first-year
engineering performance.
Completing two value-affirmation exercises in the weeks
preceding a major test reduced levels of stress hormones as
the test approached.
Completing a value-affirmation exercise led overweight
women to lose more two-and-a-half months later, and show
evidence of enhanced self-regulation.

Adults (1) who described times they had behaved kindly
toward others or (2) who reflected on how to affirm using ifthen propositions (“If I feel threatened or anxious, then I
will…think about the things I value about myself…think
about things that are important to me…”) were more
accepting of information about the health risks of drinking
and, a month later, reported drinking less.
Smokers who first reflected on their desirable characteristics
were more accepting of information about the health risks of
smoking. They also reported greater motivation to reduce
consumption 1-week later but no change in reported
consumption.
Adults who both reflected on personal values before reading
information about the benefits of eating fruits and vegetables
and who made a plan about how to do so using an
“If…then…” template reported eating more fruit and
vegetables 7 days later; there was no benefit for either
intervention on its own. At a 3-month follow-up, both the
affirmation intervention and the implementation-intention
intervention produced independent (non-interacting) increases
in reported fruit and vegetable consumption, though the later
was marginally significant.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 27
Jessop et al.,
2014

General

Layous et al.,
2016

General

Stinson et al.,
2011

General

Thomaes et al.,
2012

General

Thomaes et al.,
2009

General

Did I work hard
at this because
it’s important to
me?

Axsom &
Cooper, 1985

Specific

Am I advocating
for something I
don’t (yet) do
myself?

Rokeach, 1971

General

Negative
relationships:
Can I get along
with important
people in my
environment?

Health

Active reflection
exercise, valueaffirmation;
Active reflection
exercise, on
goals

Adults who described times they had behaved kindly toward
others before receiving information about the health risks of a
lack of exercise reported exercising more over the next week;
however, if people also completed an implementation
intention exercise this benefit was eliminated. In a second
study focused on people who did not exercise much found no
effect of affirmation in the absence of the implementationintention exercise, and a negative effect (reduction in
exercise) in its presence.
Education
Active reflection Mostly first- and second-year college students completed a
exercise, valuevalue-affirmation or control exercise immediately before
affirmation
taking a challenging math test described as predictive of
future success. Among those who felt they did not belong in
college, the value-affirmation reversed a downward slope in
GPA through the subsequent semester.
Interpersonal
Active reflection College students who felt insecure in their personal
relationships
exercise, valuerelationships felt more secure in their relationships and
affirmation
showed more confident social behavior 2-4 weeks after a
value-affirmation, and this contributed to similar
improvements another 4 weeks later.
Prosocial
Active reflection Adolescents, especially those who were more antisocial at
behavior
exercise, valuebaseline, showed greater prosocial feelings and behavior over
affirmation
a 3-month period following a value-affirmation.
Aggression
Active reflection Narcissistic adolescents with low self-esteem who completed
exercise, valuea value-affirmation were less likely to be nominated by peers
affirmation
as aggressive in the subsequent week.
Strategy B. Leverage a potential threat of inconsistency
Health
Increasing
Overweight undergraduates were told that various perceptual
commitment
and cognitive tasks they would complete over four
through action:
experimental sessions would enhance “neuro-physiological
Effort
arousal” and help them lose weight. Those for whom the
justification
tasks required high effort (distinguishing similar limes,
reciting text as their voice echoes back) lost an average of 6
pounds a year later. By contrast, students for whom the tasks
were easy, short, and included breaks and those in a control
condition lost no weight.
Intergroup
Prompting new
Undergraduates in the 1960s were asked to rank their values
meanings, by
and typically ranked “freedom” over “equality.” Some were
providing new
told that this ranking meant that people valued freedom for
information;
themselves more than freedom for other people, and further

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 28
Increasing
commitment
through action:
Hypocrisy

Did I say I
would do it?

Son Hing et al.,
2002

Specific

Intergroup

Increasing
commitment
through action:
Hypocrisy

Stone et al.,
1994

Specific

Health

Increasing
commitment
through action:
Hypocrisy

Dholakia &
Morwitz (2002)

Specific

Business

Increasing
commitment
through action:
Commitment

Greenwald et al.
1987; see also
Nickerson &
Rogers, 2010;
Smith et al.,
2003
Gringart et al.,
2008

Specific

Civic behavior

Increasing
commitment
through action:
Commitment

Specific

Intergroup

Increasing
commitment
through action:

elaborated on this. This message led students to value
“equality” and equal rights more highly over the next 15-17
months, increased the percentage who chose to major in an
ethnic studies core 5 months later from 22% to 42%, and
increased the percentage who responded to a solicitation from
the NAACP over this period from 11% to 26%.
Undergraduates first advocated a nonprejudicial stance
toward Asians and then, in the hypocrisy condition, wrote
“about two situations in which you reacted more negatively to
an Asian person than you thought you should or treated an
Asian person in a prejudiced manner.” As compared to those
who did not complete the hypocrisy induction, people in the
hypocrisy condition with low implicit but high explicit
prejudice against Asians felt more guilt and discomfort and,
subsequently, advocated smaller cuts to the Asian Student
Association. There was no condition difference for people
low in implicit and explicit prejudice.
Sexually active undergraduates were led to feel hypocritical
about their own safe sex practice by (a) helping to create an
AIDS prevention program for high school students and (b)
reviewing circumstances in which they personally had failed
to use condoms. This led 83% of students to subsequently
purchase condoms. By contrast, just 33-50% of students who
did neither (a) nor (b) or either but not both purchased
condoms.
Customers of a financial services firm were randomized to
receive a telephone survey assessing satisfaction with the
company; 96% reported being satisfied. As compared to
customers not surveyed, this increased the percentage who
opened a new account over the next year from 13% to 51%,
and reduced unprofitability/customer from $13.80 to $1.20.
College undergraduates were called just before the 1984
Presidential election and asked if they knew where and when
to vote. Those who were also asked if they expected to vote
were more likely to vote (87% vs. 62%) (for non-replications,
see Nickerson & Rogers, 2010; Smith et al., 2003)
Australian hiring managers received letters emphasizing (1)
common stereotypes about older workers and empirically
based counter evidence and (2) information about hiring

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 29
Commitment

Does my
behavior
contradict an old
belief or
attitude?

Lewin, 1947

Specific

Civic behavior

Prompting new
meanings, by
altering the
situation
Increasing
commitment
through action:
Commitment
Increasing
commitment
through action:
Commitment

Moriatry, 1975

Specific

Crime

Shu et al., 2012

Specific

Civic behavior

Aronson &
Osherow, 1980

Specific

Education,
Intergroup
relationships

Increasing
commitment
through action:
Counterattitudinal
behavior

Brannon &
Walton, 2013

Specific but
symbolic

Intergroup
relationships

Increasing
commitment
through action:

discrimination against older workers, how this violates
national norms, and a booklet with names of hiring managers
who oppose age discrimination, and an invitation to add their
own name to this list to be distributed to the broader
community. As compared to hiring managers who received
only (1) or (2) or neither, those who received both reported
over the next few weeks expressed more positive views of
older workers, a greater preference for hiring older workers,
and being more likely to hire older workers.
[see Table S3]

Beach goers asked to watch another person’s belongings were
more likely to chase after an accomplice who attempted to
steal a radio (94% vs. 20%).
Policy owners received a car insurance form on which to
report the number of miles they had driven in the previous
year. Those for whom the signature line (“I promise that the
information I am providing is true”) was at the top rather than
the bottom disclosed having driven 10% more miles (26,098
vs. 23,671), increasing payments and promoting fairness.
Restructured newly desegregated 5th grade classrooms to
feature jigsaw groups, in which each child learns a portion of
an assignment, has to teach and learn from other students, and
then is tested on the whole. This procedure encourages
cooperation rather than competition, requires children to
behave in ways that are inconsistent with negative intergroup
attitudes, and meet’s classic conditions for successful
intergroup contact (sanctioned by authority, equal status,
intergroup cooperation, common goals) (Allport, 1954). The
procedure caused students to like each other more within and
across ethnic lines, raised students’ self-esteem, led White
and African American children (but not Latino children) to
like school more, and improved academic test performance
among African American and Latino children.
White and Asian undergraduates had a positive interaction
with a Mexican American student. When they (1) were led to
feel socially connected to this student, disposing them to

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 30
Counterattitudinal
behavior

share her interests; and (2) had the opportunity to freely work
with her to design a Mexican cultural product (a music video
for a Mexican band), giving them an opportunity to enact an
interest in Mexican culture, students showed reduced levels
of implicit prejudice against Latinos. This was mediated by
greater engagement in the Mexican cultural task. Also, an
average of 6-months later, they reported greater interest in
talking with Mexican American peers and more positive
attitudes toward Mexican immigrants.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 31
Table S3. Wise interventions approach #3: Interventions that address the need to belong.
Category

Subcategory

Social
recognition

Bolster
existing social
relationships

Encourage
prosocial
behaviors

Reflect on social
connections

Specificity of
Content
Change
Summary
Intervention
Area
Strategy
Strategy A. Satisfy or Remedy Threats to People’s Need to Belong
Motto &
Specific but
Health
Prompting new
Receiving a series of caring notes from a hospital
Bostrom,
symbolic
meanings, by
following a suicidal or depressive incident (e.g.,
2001; see also
altering the
“Dear___: It has been some time since you were
Carter et al.,
situation
at the hospital, and we hope things are going
2013
well for you. If you wish to drop us a note we
would be glad to hear from you.”) reduced
suicide rates over the next two years from 3.52%
to 1.80% (Motto & Bostrom, 2001). Another
trial found that such notes reduced psychiatric
readmissions among patients admitted following
a self-poisoning incident by a third over 5 years
(Carter et al., 2013)
Dunn et al.,
General
Well-being
Prompting new
Giving people on a college campus $5 or $20
2008
meanings, by
and asking them to spend it on other people
altering the
increased happiness at the end of the day.
situation
Otake et al.,
General
Well-being
Active
Undergraduates asked to reflect on their own
2007
reflection
kind behavior toward others every day for a
exercise, on a
week showed significant increases in happiness
positive aspect
over this period, while those in a no-treatment
of self
control group did not. Randomization was at the
class level.
Layous et al., General
Well-being; Peer
Prompting new
Encouraging 9 to 11 year-olds to perform three
2012
Relationships
meanings, by
kind acts (instead of to visit three places) per
altering the
week over 4 weeks increased well-being at the
situation
end of this period and showed a greater increase
in the number of peers who nominated them as
someone they would like to spend time with.
Lyubomirsky, General
Well-Being
Active
[see Table S1]
et al., 2011
reflection
exercise, on a
positive aspect
of self
Brummelman General
Well-being
Active
Asking adolescents several weeks before
et al., 2014
reflection
receiving final course grades to write for 15Reference

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 32
exercise, on a
positive aspect
of self

Allay social
norms that
contribute to
negative
behaviors

Value
contributions to a
group

Coch &
French, 1948

Specific

Work

Prompting new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Challenge
perceived norms
to expand the
scope of what
behavior is
acceptable

Halliwell &
Diedrichs,
2014

Specific

Health

Increasing
commitment
through action:
Saying-isbelieving

Schroeder &
Prentice,
1998; see also
DeJong et al.,
2006, 2009

Specific

Health

Prompting new
meanings, by
providing new
information

minutes about times when they had experienced
unconditional regard from peers (“who always
accept and value you, no matter how you behave
or how good you are at something”) reduced
feelings of shame among students who later
received poor grades.
Employees of a pajama factory who took part in
a group meeting discussing the need to revise the
product and endorsing this change showed more
rapid improvement in productivity, as compared
to workers who took part in a group meeting in
which they were told of the necessary changes
Adolescent girls took part in weekly 20-minute
small-group sessions for 4 weeks that described
the thin ideal for women, the costs of this,
writing a letter to a teenage girl struggling with
her body image to persuade her not to, critiquing
beauty ideals and myths (e.g., “Most models and
actresses are a healthy weight”) and role-playing
efforts to encourage a person (the proctor) to
resist severe dieting. As compared to girls in a
no-treatment control condition, those in the
treatment condition were less dissatisfied with
their bodies and less likely to internalize a thin
body ideal a week later. A month later, their
body satisfaction was more resilient to thin
ideals represented in advertisements in teen
magazines.
First-year undergraduates who took part in a
dorm discussion in which they learned how
students can be less comfortable with drinking
than they seem, as compared to students who
took part in a discussion focused on making
responsible decisions (“just say no”), reported
drinking less 4-6 months later, with the greatest
effects for students who were less comfortable
drinking than they perceived others to be and yet
feared negative evaluations from others. Thus
the intervention seemed to sever a perceived link
between drinking and social acceptance

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 33

Remedy
beliefs and
experiences
that
undermine
relationships,
belonging,
and have
downstream
effects

Strahan et al.,
2008

Specific

Health

Increasing
commitment
through action:
Saying-isbelieving

Encourage
beliefs that
people in
conflicts can
change

Yeager et al.,
2013; see also
Miu &
Yeager, 2015;
Yeager,
Johnson, et
al., 2014

General

Education and
health

Increasing
commitment
through action:
Saying-isbelieving

Remedy the
worry that,
“Maybe people
like me don’t
belong here.”

Walton &
Cohen, 2011;
see also
Brady et al.,
in prep B;

General

Education, health,
and well-being

Increasing
commitment
through action:
Saying-isbelieving

(Schroeder & Prentice, 1998). In an 18-site
randomized trial, students in institutions of
higher education randomized to a social-norms
marketing condition perceived less drinking on
campus and reported less alcohol consumption
(DeJong et al., 2006; but see DeJong et al.,
2009).
Adolescent girls took part in two 80-minute
sessions over two weeks to critique thin body
ideals, including the source of these norms in
popular media, how unrealistic they are, and how
they have changed over time, including creating
posters challenging sociocultural norms. As
compared to girls in a control condition, those in
the treatment condition were less likely a week
later to base their self-worth on their appearance,
reported being more satisfied with their bodies,
and reported less concern about others’
perceptions of their bodies.
Adolescents who learned in a 6-session
classroom workshop that people can change and,
thus, that bullies need not always be bullies and
victims need not always be victims, were less
aggressive and more prosocial following peer
ostracism one month later; three months later
victims of peer bullying were more likely to be
nominated by teachers as showing reduced
conduct problems and showed fewer depressive
symptoms. Another trial found less negative
immediate reactions to a social adversity and,
over 8 months, lower overall stress, reduced
physical illness, and better academic
achievement. A third found a 40% reduction in
clinically significant depressive symptoms at 9
months.
Students in the transition to college read stories
from ethnically diverse older students that
conveyed that it is normal to worry at first about
whether you belong in college and this improves
with time. They then wrote an essay describing

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 34
Murphy et al.,
in prep;
Walton &
Cohen, 2007;
Walton,
Logel, et al.,
2015; Yeager,
Walton, et al.,
2016

Goyer,
Cohen, et al.,
under review

General

Education

Increasing
commitment
through action:
Saying-isbelieving

how this process was true for them and delivered
this as a speech to a video camera to help future
students in their transition. This led African
American students to engage more in the
academic environment (e.g., emailing professors,
meeting with study groups) and increased their
grade-point-average over the next three years
through the end of college, reducing the
achievement gap with White students by 50%.
At this point, African American students also
reported greater confidence in their belonging,
being happier, and being healthier (Walton &
Cohen, 2011). Follow-up surveys find that the
intervention, delivered in the first year of
college, improved African American graduates’
life and career satisfaction at the age of 25-27, an
effect that was mediated by greater reported
mentorship in college (Brady et al., in prep B). In
other trials, adapted versions of the intervention
raised women’s first-year grades in maledominated engineering fields, eliminating gender
differences (Walton, Logel et al., 2015);
increased the percentage of racial minority and
first-generation students at a large, broad-access
institution who maintained continuous full-time
enrollment over two years by 9 percentage points
(Murphy et al., in prep); and, when delivered
online to full institutional cohorts prior to college
matriculation, improved first-year outcomes for
racial minority and first-generation students, for
instance increasing the percentage of African
American first-generation college student
graduates from urban charter schools who took a
full course load the first year of college from
32% to 41% (Yeager, Walton et al., 2016).
An adapted version of the social-belonging
intervention (Walton & Cohen, 2011) delivered
to African American and White students at the
outset of middle school reduced disciplinary
citations among African American boys through

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 35

Shook &
Clay, 2012

General

Education

Prompting new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Remedy
experiences that
signal
nonbelonging

Brady et al.,
in prep A

Specific

Education

Prompting new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Replace a
punitive with an
empathic
mindset about
student
misbehavior

Okonofua et
al., 2016

Specific

Education

Increasing
commitment
through action:
Saying-isbelieving

the end of high school by 64%, reducing the gap
with White boys by 83%. The intervention
seemed to cut off a cycle of mistrust and
negative interactions between African American
boys and teachers in 6th and 7th grades as
evidenced by an increasing rate of citations for
incidents requiring subjective judgment within
the school year in the control condition only.
Additionally, the intervention reduced
uncertainty about belonging over the course of
middle school for African American boys, and
protected their level of belonging and forestalled
the emergence of high levels of stereotype threat
at the end of 7th grade and into 8th grade.
Ethnic-minority first-year students at a
predominantly White university randomly
assigned a White (versus ethnic-minority)
roommate reported a greater sense of belonging
at the university over the first semester and this
mediated higher first-year GPA.
Revising the letter sent to college students to
place them on academic probation to mitigate
shame and stigma students perceived—by
framing probation as a process not a label,
communicating “you’re not the only one,”
acknowledging specific, valid reasons students
can struggle in college, and offering hope for
returning to good standing—increased the
percentage of students who returned to good
standing a year later from 26% to 43% and the
percentage who were still enrolled (had not
dropped out or been suspended) from 48% to
79%.
Two online exercises encouraging middle-school
teachers to take on an empathic rather than
punitive mindset about student misbehavior—to
understand misbehaving students’ experience
and perspective, to sustain positive relationships,
and to work with students to improve behavior—
reduced suspension rates among students by 50%

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 36

Create new
social
relationships
and groups
that leverage
behavior
change

Form teams to
support goal
pursuit

over the school year.
Strategy B. Leverage People’s Need to Belong to Motivate Positive Behavior Change
Prestwich et
Specific
Health
Prompting new
[see Table S1]
al., 2005
meanings, by
asking leading
questions

Prestwich et
al., 2012

Specific

Self-regulation
and health

Prompting new
meanings, by
asking leading
questions

Spiegel et al.,
1989

Specific

Health

Wing &
Jeffery, 1999;
see also
Leahey et al.,
2012

Specific

Self-regulation
and health

Prompting new
meanings, by
altering the
situation
Prompting new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Adults were asked to form collaborative
implementation-intentions to exercise more.
They read, “Past research suggests that despite
intending to undertake regular physical activity,
many people fail to do so. To give yourself the
best chances of succeeding, it seems that it can
be helpful to make a very specific plans with a
partner (e.g., husband, wife, girlfriend,
boyfriend, housemate, etc.) about how together
you will go about increasing the amount of
regular physical activity you do” and then
completed “If…then…we” statements. As
compared to participants in a control condition,
in a personal implementation intentions
condition, and in a partner but no
implementation intentions condition, those in the
collaborative implementation-intentions
condition engaged more frequently in physical
activity one and six months later and reported
losing more weight six months later.
Providing women with metastatic breast cancer a
weekly support group including self-hypnosis for
pain increased mean survival time from 18.9
months to 36.6 months.
People trying to lose weight were randomized to
a standard behavioral treatment (weekly group
meetings over 16 weeks) or this treatment with
social support: 4-person teams in which each
person supported the others’ efforts to lose
weight. Although all participants lost weight
over the 4-month treatment with no difference by

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 37

Facilitate
important
social
relationships

Leverage
prosocial
motivations

Facilitate
intergroup
relationships to
promote positive
intergroup
attitudes

Page-Gould,
et al., 2008

Specific but
symbolic

Intergroup
relationships

Prompting new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Learn about the
personal
qualities of other
people

Bowen et al.,
2013

Specific

Education

Prompting new
meanings, by
providing new
information

Gehlbach et
al. 2016

Specific

Education

Prompting new
meanings, by
providing new
information

Receive
expressions of
gratitude

Grant &
Gino, 2010

Specific

Work

Prompting new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Represent a
behavior as a
means to connect

Fotuhi et al.,
2014

Specific

Health

Active
reflection
exercise, goal-

condition, those who received the social support
component were more likely to maintain their
weight loss through 10 months than those who
did not.
Pairs of White and Latino undergraduates got to
know each other using a “fast friends”
procedure, asking and answering a series of
increasingly self-disclosing questions and
playing cooperative games over three sessions.
Over this period, students, especially those
higher in prejudice and in worries about
prejudice, showed strong declines in cortisol
levels, a stress hormone. Moreover, as compared
to students in same-race dyads, the intervention
led students with higher initial levels of
prejudice to initiate more cross-group
interactions in their daily lives on campus.
Providing middle-school teachers essays written
by middle-school students about their personal
values, as compared to students who wrote
similar essays but which were not provided to
their teachers, raised year-long grades among a
sample of primarily African American and lowincome students.
Providing 9th-grade teachers information about
personal views they shared with specific students
raised African American and Hispanic students’
end-of-term course grades, reducing the
achievement gap by 60%.
Having a director of annual giving thank
university fundraisers for their work (“I am very
grateful for your hard work. We sincerely
appreciate your contribution to the university”)
increased the number of calls fundraisers made
over the next week by about 50%, an effect
mediated by greater feelings of social worth
(e.g., feeling valued as a person).
With the theory that even as a standard
affirmation can open people up to threatening
health information it may also remove threat that

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 38
with valued
others

Represent a
behavior as a
means to help
others

contingent
valueaffirmation

Bryan &
Hershfield,
2012

Specific

Retirement
savings

Prompting new
meanings, by
providing new
information

Grant &
Hofmann,
2011

Specific

Health

Direct labeling,
of a situation

Yeager,
Henderson, et
al., 2014; see
also
Paunesku et
al., 2015; see

General

Education

Increasing
commitment
through action:
Saying-isbelieving

could otherwise motivate positive behavior
change, an exercise was developed that tied a
value-affirmation to quitting. Smokers reflected
on a personally important value they shared with
a close friend or family member who supported
their intention to quit. At a 6-month follow-up,
this increased the percentage of smokers who
had quit (36%), as compared to both a standard
values-affirmation (16%) and a control condition
(1%).
University staff members saving less than 10%
of their salaries for retirement were encouraged
to reflect on either their self-interest (“We urge
you to consider your long-term interest and to
start saving more now. After all, your long-term
well-being is at stake. Your decisions now will
determine how much money is available to you
when you retire.”) or their responsibility to their
future self (“We urge you to consider the
responsibility you have to yourself in retirement
and urge you to start saving more now…your
‘future self’ is completely dependent on you…”).
For people who felt psychologically close to
their retirement-age self, the social responsibility
message increased savings rates greater than the
self-interest message (0.97 percentage points vs.
0.12 percentage points). For participants who felt
distant from their retirement-age self, there was
no difference in effectiveness.
Placing signs on hospital soap dispensers to
encourage medical professionals to wash their
hands to protect their patients’ health, instead of
signs that emphasized protecting their own
health, increased soap use over a 2-week period.
High school students (1) identified a social
problem important to them, (2) reviewed stories
from other adolescents describing how an
awareness of social problems and a desire to
contribute positively to the world motivated
them to work harder in school, and (3) wrote

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 39
also Brown et
al., 2015

Leverage
descriptive
social norms

Represent what
people “like me”
do

Represent what

Bond et al.,
2012

Specific

Civic behavior

Prompting new
meanings, by
providing new
information

Lewin, 1947

Specific

Civic behavior

Prompting new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Paluck, 2009

Specific

Intergroup
relations

Prompting new
meanings, by
providing new
information

Yoshida et
al., 2012

Specific

Intergroup
relations

Prompting new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Paluck &

Specific

Peer relationships

Prompting new

their own story for future high school students
about their purposes for learning. As compared
to an active placebo control condition, this raised
GPA in math and science classes the next
academic term with the greatest effect for
initially low-performing students. It also
promoted sustained self-regulation on boring but
important foundational learning tasks.
Incorporating references to friends who have
voted on an election day get-out-the-vote
message on a social-media website (Facebook)
seen by an estimated 61 million people raised
turnout in US Congressional elections by an
estimated 340,000
Middle class, Midwestern housewives during
World War II either listened to a lecture
providing substantive information on the virtues
of “ethnic” organ meats and recipes or took part
in a small-group discussion that emphasized how
“housewives like you” can serve such meats.
Facilitating the illusion of group decision making
to make this change, the discussion ended with a
show of hands to serve organ meats. The smallgroup discussion increased the percentage of
housewives who served organ meats to their
families over the next week from 3% to 32%.
Providing villages in post-genocidal Rwanda
access to a radio soap opera that described
positive norms of intergroup relationships led
villages to be less likely to require that their
children marry within their group, to be more
willing to speak out in dissent, and to report
more empathy for other Rwandans.
Exposing people to a video depicting a racist
joke but withholding the audience’s laughter
improved implicit normative evaluations of that
group (the association between the group and
“most people like”) and reduced discrimination
against the group on a laboratory task.
High school students identified through social

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 40
attractive or
desirable people
do

Shepherd,
2012;

Paluck et al.,
2016

meanings, by
altering the
situation

Specific

Peer relationships

Prompting new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

network analyses as social referents (nominated
by many peers as high status and as friends)
were randomized to an anti-bullying intervention
in which they identified roles students can play
in harassment, wrote essays and discussed
experiences of harassment. They then read their
essays at a school assembly, performed a skit
illustrating common types of harassment and
ways to speak out against it, and created posters
of themselves wearing anti-harassment slogans.
A week later students who were more socially
connected to social referents randomized to the
treatment versus a control condition reported
seeing conflict as normal less and greater efforts
to deescalate conflicts and to stand up for peers
subject to harassment. Toward the end of the
year they were more likely to be nominated by
teachers as defending other students from
harassment and received fewer disciplinary
citations for harassment-related infractions.
Fifty-six middle schools were randomized to an
intervention in which 15% of students at each
treated school were randomized to receive an
anti-conflict norm intervention or not. The
intervention comprised every-other-week
meetings to encourage students to identify
common conflict behaviors, to oppose those
behaviors publicly, to create hashtag slogans and
online and physical posters including their own
photographs, and to distribute distinctive
wristbands to students seen mitigating conflict.
A total of 728 students received the intervention.
This reduced disciplinary problems among the
11,938 students in the treated schools over a year
by 30%. The greatest effects were observed in
schools in which more of the participating
students were influential within the school peer
network and thus positioned to alter school
norms.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 41
Represent what
people do “here”

Represent how
people are
changing
(dynamic norms)

Braga &
Bond, 2008

Specific

Criminal
behavior

Prompting new
meanings, by
altering the
situation

Goldstein et
al., 2008

Specific

Environmental
behavior

Direct labeling,
of social norms

Hallsworth et
al., 2014

Specific

Civic behavior

Direct labeling,
of social norms

Sparkman &
Walton,
under review
Experiment 3

Specific

Environmental
behavior

Direct labeling,
of social norms

Sparkman &
Walton,
under review
Experiment 4

Specific

Environmental
behavior

Direct labeling,
of social norms

Cleaning up signs of physical and social disorder
in crime hotspots in Lowell, MA (e.g., clean up
graffiti, more aggressive responses to social
disorder) reduced citizen 911 calls by 20% over
6 months as compared to standard policing.
Signs in hotel bathrooms that conveyed that most
guests in the room reused their towels at least
once increased the towel reuse rate, as compared
to a standard environmental appeal, from 37% to
49%.
In a trial of letters sent to more than 100,000
citizens delinquent in their tax payments, the
letter containing the strongest norm statement
(“Nine out of ten people in the UK pay their
taxes on time. You are currently in the very
small minority of people who have not paid us
yet”) produced an additional £1.9 million
(≈$2.73) in tax revenue among 16,515 recipients
over 23 days.
Lunch goers who learned that the number of
people who make an effort to limit their meat
consumption is rising (a “dynamic norm”) were
twice as likely to order lunch without meat as
compared to either those who learned that some
people make an effort to limit their meat
consumption or those in a control condition
(34% versus 17%).
Laundry machines in a room labeled with a
dynamic norm about water conservation
(“Stanford residents are changing: Now most use
full loads. Help Stanford conserve water!”)
showed a 28.5% reduction in usage over 3
weeks, as compared to the prior 3 weeks. By
contrast, machines in a room labeled with a static
norm (“Most Stanford residents use full loads.
Help Stanford conserve water!”) showed a
reduction of just 9.73% and those in a notreatment control room showed a reduction of
2.5%.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 42

Leverage
prescriptive
social norms

Represent norms
as a collective
goal

Howe et al.,
under review

Specific

Environmental
behavior

Direct labeling,
of social norms

Represent what
another group to
be distinguished
from does
Represent what
people should do

Berger &
Rand, 2008

Specific

Health

Prompting by
providing new
information

Allcott, 2011

Specific

Environmental
behavior

Direct labeling,
of social norms

Schultz et al.,
2007

Specific

Environmental
behavior

Direct labeling,
of social norms

Campus bathrooms randomized to include signs
indicating that most people on campus had
reduced their paper towel use and, in addition,
that invited people to “join in” and “do it
together” showed reduced paper-towel use over
two weeks and 14% less use than bathrooms
with signs that conveyed the same norm but
without this working together element.
[see Table S1]

Social-norm information provided in home
utility bills, including comparisons with average
and efficient neighbors, reduced home energy
use by 2% across nearly 600,000 households,
with the greatest reductions among high users.
Residents received handwritten information
about (1) energy use in their home in the
previous week and (2) information about how
much energy the average household in their
neighborhood had used. Some residents also
received (3) a happy face if they were using less
energy than average or a sad face if they were
using more. Among those residents who were
using less energy than others, the addition of the
happy face reduced energy use over the
subsequent three weeks.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 43
!

Supplementary References
Aguilar, L. J., Carr, P. B., & Walton, G. M. (Under review). Cues of working together reduce
stereotype threat among women.
Allcott, H. (2011). Social norms and energy conservation. Journal of Public Economics, 95,
1082-1095.
Ambady, N., Paik, S. K., Steele, J., Owen-Smith, A., & Mitchell, J. P. (2004). Deflecting
negative self-relevant stereotype activation: The effects of individuation. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 40, 401-408.
Armitage, C. J., Harris, P. R., & Arden, M. A. (2011). Evidence that self-affirmation reduces
alcohol consumption: Randomized exploratory trial with a new, brief means of selfaffirming. Health Psychology, 30, 633-641.
Aronson, E. & Osherow, N. (1980) Cooperation, prosocial behaviour, and academic
performance: Experiments in the desegregated classroom. In L, Bickerman (Ed.) Applied
Social Psychology Annual, Beverley Hills: Sage.
Aronson, J., Fried, C. B., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the effect of stereotype threat on African
American college students by shaping theories of intelligence. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 38, 113-125.
Aronson, K. M., Stefanile, C., Matera, C., Nerini, A., Grisolaghi, J., Romani, G., Massai, F.,
Antonelli, P., Ferraresi, L., & Brown, R. (2016). Telling tales in school: Extended contact
interventions in the classroom. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 46, 229-241.
Au, T. K., Chan, C. K. K., Chan T., Cheung, M. W. L., Ho, J. Y. S., & Ip, G. W. M. (2008).
Folkbiology meets microbiology: A study of conceptual and behavioral change.
Cognitive Psychology, 57, 1-19.
Axsom, D. & Cooper, J. (1985). Cognitive dissonance and psychotherapy: The role of effort
justification in inducing weight loss. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 21,
149-160.
Bandura, A., & Schunk, D. H. (1981). Cultivating competence, self-efficacy, and intrinsic
interest through proximal self-motivation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
41, 586-598.
Benedetti, F., Maggi, G., Lopiano, L. Lanotte, M., Rainero, I., Vighetti, S., Pollo, A. (2003).
Open versus hidden medical treatments: The patient’s knowledge about a therapy affects
the therapy outcome. Prevention & Treatment, Vol 6(1), No Pagination Specified Article
1a.
Berger, J. & Rand, L. (2008). Shifting signals to help health: Using identity-signaling to reduce
risky health behaviors. Behaviors,Journal of Consumer Research, 35(2), 509-518.
Blackwell, L. A., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Theories of intelligence and
achievement across the junior high school transition: A longitudinal study and an
intervention. Child Development, 78, 246-263.
Boehm, J. K., Lyubomirsky, S., & Sheldon, K. M. (2011). A longitudinal experimental study
comparing the effectiveness of happiness-enhancing strategies in Anglo Americans and
Asian Americans. Cognition & Emotion, 25, 1152-1167.
Boese, G. D. B., Stewart, T. L., Perry, R. P., & Hamm, J. M. (2013). Assisting failure-prone
individuals to navigate achievement transitions using a cognitive motivation treatment
(attributional retraining). Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 43, 1946-1955.
Bond, R. M., Fariss, C. J., Jones, J. J., Kramer, A. D. I., Marlow, C., Settle, J. E., & Fowler, J. H.
(2012). A 61-million-person experiment in social influence and political mobilization.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 44
!

Nature, 489, 295-298.
Borman, G. D., Grigg, J., & Hanselman, P. (2016). An effort to close achievement gaps at scale
through self-affirmation. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 38, 21-42.
Bowen, N. K., Wegmann, K. M., & Webber, K. C. (2013). Enhancing a brief writing
intervention to combat stereotype threat among middle-school students. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 105, 427-435.
Brady, S. T., Walton, G. M., Cohen, G. L., Fotuhi, O, Gomez, E., & Urstein, R. [in prep A].
Revising the scarlet letter of academic probation: Reframing institutional messages to
increase student success and reduce shame and stigma
Brady, S. T., Walton, G. M., Cohen, G. L., Jarvis, S. [in prep B]. Downstream consequences of a
social-belonging intervention in the transition to college.
Brady, S. T., Reeves, S L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Cook, J., Taborsky-Barba, S.,
Tomasetti, S., Davis, E., & Cohen, G. L. (2016). The psychology of the affirmed learner:
Spontaneous self-affirmation in the face of stress. Journal of Educational Psychology,
108, 353-373.
Brady, S. T., Hard, B. M., & Gross, J. J. (under review). Reappraising test anxiety increases
academic performance of first-year college students.
Braga, A. A. & Bond, B. J. (2008). Policing crime and disorder hot spots: A randomized
controlled trial. Criminology, 46, 577-607
Brannon, T. N. & Walton, G. M. (2013). Enacting cultural interests: How intergroup contact
reduces prejudice by sparking interest in an outgroup’s culture. Psychological Science,
24, 1947-1957.
Broockman, D. E. & Kalla, J. L. (2016). Durably reducing transphobia: A field experiment on
door-to-door canvassing. Science, 352, 220-224.
Brown, E. R., Smith, J. L., Thoman, D. B., Allen, J. M., & Muragishi, G. (2015). From bench to
bedside: A communal utility value intervention to enhance students’ biomedical science
motivation. Journal of Educational Psychology, 107, 1116-1135.
Brummelman, E., Thomaes, S., Walton, G. M., Poorthuis, A. M. G., Overbeek, G., Castro, B. O.,
Bushman, B. J. (2014). Unconditional regard buffers children’s negative self-feelings.
Pediatrics, 134, 1119-1126.
Bryan, C. J., & Hershfield, H. E. (2012). You owe it to yourself: Boosting retirement saving with
a responsibility-based appeal. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 141, 429432.
Bryan, C. J., Walton, G. M., Rogers, T. & Dweck, C. S. (2011). Motivating voter turnout by
invoking the self. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America, 108, 12653-12656.
Bryan, C. J., Walton, G. M., & Dweck, C. S. (2016). Psychologically authentic versus
inauthentic replication attempts. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America.
Bryan, C. J., Yeager, D. S., Hinojosa, C. P., Chabot, A., Bergen, H., Kawamura, M., & Steubing,
F. (2016). Harnessing adolescent values to motivate healthier eating. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Science. 113, 10830-10835.
Bugental, D. B., Ellerson, P. C., Lin, E. K., Rainey, B., Kokotovic, A., & O’Hara, N. (2002). A
cognitive approach to child abuse prevention. Journal of Family Psychology, 16, 243258.
Bugental, D. B., Schwartz, A., & Lynch, C. (2010). Effects of an early family intervention on

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 45
!

children’s memory: The mediating role effects of cortisol levels. Mind, Brain, and
Education, 4, 159-170.
Bugental, D. B., Corpuz, R., & Schwartz, A. (2012). Preventing children’s aggression: Outcomes
of an early intervention. Developmental Psychology, 48, 1443-1449.
Burnette, J. B., & Finkel, E. J. (2012). Buffering against weight gain following dieting setbacks:
An implicit theory intervention. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48, 721-725.
Cameron, L., Rutland, A., Brown, R., & Douch, R. (2006). Changing children's intergroup
attitudes towards refugees: testing different models of extended contact. Child
Development, 77(5), 1208-1219.
Carnes, M. L., Devine, P. G., Manwell, L. B., Byars-Winston, A., Fine, E., Ford, C. E.,
Forscher, P. S., Iaasc, C., Kaatz, A, Magua, W., Palta, M, & Sherridan, J. (2015). Effect
of an intervention to break the gender bias habit: A cluster randomized, controlled trial.
Academic Medicine, 90, 221-230.
Carrell, S. E., Page, M. P., & West, J. E. (2010). Sex and science: How professor gender
perpetuates the gender gap. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125, 1101-1144.
Carter, G. L., Clover, K., Whyte, I. M., Dawson, A. H., D’Este, C. (2013). Postcards from the
EDge: 5-year outcomes of a randomised controlled trial for hospital-treated selfpoisoning. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 202, 372-380.
Chen, P., Chavez, O., Ong, D. C., Gunderson, B. (under review) Strategic resource use for
learning: A self-administered intervention that guides effective resource use enhances
academic performance.
Christiansen, S., Oettingen, G., Dahme, B., & Klinger, R. (2010). A short goal-pursuit
intervention to improve physical capacity: A randomized clinical trial in chronic back
pain patients. Pain, 149, 444-452.
Coch L. & French, J. R. P. (1948). Overcoming resistance to change. Human Relations, 1, 512532.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., & Master, A. (2006). Reducing the racial achievement gap: A
social-psychological intervention. Science, 313, 1307-1310.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaugns, V., Apfel, N., & Brzustoski, P. (2009). Recursive
processes in self-affirmation: Intervening to close the minority achievement gap. Science,
324, 400-403.
Cohn, M. A. & Fredrickson, B. L. (2010). In search of durable positive psychology
interventions: Predictors and consequences of long-term positive behavior change.
Journal of Positive Psychology, 5, 355-366.
Cook, J. E., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (2012). Chronic threat and
contingent belonging: Protective benefits of values affirmation on identity development.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102, 479-496.
Creswell, J. D. (in press). Mindfulness interventions. Annual Review of Psychology.
Crum, A. & Langer, E. (2007). Mind-set matters: Exercise and the placebo
effect. Psychological Science, 18(2), 165-171.
Crum, A., Salovey, P. & Achor, S. (2013). Rethinking stress: The role of mindsets in
determining the stress response. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 104(4),
716-733.
Dal Cin, S., MacDonald, T. K., Fong, G. T., Zanna, M. P., & Elton-Marshall, T. E. (2006).
Remembering the message: Using a reminder cue to increase condom use following a
safer sex intervention. Health Psychology, 25, 438-443.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 46
!

Danaher, K. & Crandall, C. S. (2008). Stereotype threat in applied settings re-examined. Journal
of Applied Social Psychology, 38, 1639-1655.
Dee, T. S. (2004). Teachers, race, and student achievement in a randomized experiment. The
Review of Economics and Statistics, 86, 195-210.
Dee, T. S. (2015). Social identity and achievement gaps: Evidence from an affirmation
intervention. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 8, 149-168.
DeJong W., Schneider S.K., Towvim L.G., Murphy M.J., Doer E.E., Simonsen, N.R., Mason,
K.E., & Scribner, R. A. (2006). A multisite randomized trial of social norms marketing
campaigns to reduce college student drinking. Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs,
67, 868–879.
DeJong W., Schneider S.K., Towvim L.G., Murphy M.J., Doer E.E., Simonsen, N.R., Mason,
K.E., & Scribner, R. A. (2009). A multisite randomized trial of social norms marketing
campaigns to reduce college student drinking: A replication failure. Substance Abuse, 30,
127-140.
Destin, M., & Oyserman, D. (2009). From assets to school outcomes: How finances shape
children’s perceived possibilities and intentions. Psychological Science, 20, 414-418.
Destin, M., & Oyserman, D. (2010). Incentivizing education: Seeing schoolwork as an
investment, not a chore. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 846-849.
Detweiler, J.B., Bedell, B.T., Salovey, P., Pronin, E., & Rothman, A.J. (1999). Message framing
and sunscreen use: Gain-framed messages motivate beach-goers. Health Psychology, 18,
189-196.
Devine, P. G., Forscher, P. S., Austin, A. J., & Cox, W. T. L. (2012). Long-term reduction in
implicit race bias: A prejudice habit-breaking intervention. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 48, 1267-1278.
Dholakia U. M. & Morwitz V. G. (2002). The scope and persistence of mere measurement
effects: Evidence from a field study of customer satisfaction measurement. Journal of
Consumer Research, 29, 159-167.
Duckworth, A. L., Grant, H., Loew, B., Oettingen, & Gollwitzer, P. M. (2011). Self-regulation
strategies improve self-discipline in adolescents: Benefits of mental contrasting and
implementation intentions. Educational Psychology, 31, 17-26.
Duckworth, A. L., Kirby, T., Gollwitzer, A., & Oettingen, G. (2013). From fantasy to action:
Mental contrasting with implementation intentions (MCII) improves academic
performance in children. Social Psychological and Personality Science, 4(6), 745-753.
Dunn, E. W., Aknin, L. B., & Norton, M. I. (2008). Spending money on others promotes
happiness. Science, 319, 1687-1688.
Emmons R. A. & McCullough, M. E. (2003). Counting blessings versus burdens: An
experimental investigation of gratitude and subjective well-being in daily life. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 377-389.
Eskreis-Winkler, L., Shulman, E. P., Young, V., Tsukayama, E., Brunwasser, S. M., &
Duckworth, A. L. (2016). Using wise interventions to motivate deliberate practice.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 111, 728-744.
Eskreis-Winkler, L., Walton, G. M., Young, V., Tsukayama, E., & Duckworth, A. L. (under
review). Stepping into the shoes of an industrious other: Role-playing can increase
persistence and performance.
Finkel, E. J., Slotter, E. B., Luchies, L. B., Walton, G. M., & Gross, J. J. (2013). A brief
intervention to promote conflict reappraisal preserves marital quality over time.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 47
!

Psychological Science, 24, 1595-1601.
Forscher, P. S., Mitamura, C., Dix, E. L., Cox, W. T. L., & Devine, P. G. (under review).
Breaking the prejudice habit: Mechanisms, timecourse, and longevity.
Fotuhi, O., Logel, C., Spencer, S., Fong, G. T., & Zanna, M. P. (2014). Contingent affirmation
intervention among smokers: Directly linking affirming values to health-specific goals.
Manuscript in preparation.
Fredrickson, B. L., Cohn, M. A., Coffey, K. A., Pek, J., & Finkel, S. M. (2008). Open hearts
build lives: Positive emotions, induced through loving-kindness meditation, build
consequential personal resources. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
95,1045-1062.
Garcia-Retamero R. & Cokely, E. T. (2011). Effective communication of risks to young adults:
Using message framing and visual aids to increase condom use and STD screening.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 17, 270-287.
Gehlbach, H., Brinkworth, M. E., King, A. M., Hsu, L. M., McIntyre, J., & Rogers, T. (2016).
Creating birds of similar feathers: Leveraging similarity to improve teacher-student
relationships and academic achievement. Journal of Educational Psychology, 108, 342352.
Gerber, A. S., Huber, G. A., Biggers, D. R., & Hendry, D. J. (2016). A field experiment shows
that subtle linguistic cues might not affect voter behavior. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Science, 113, 7112-7117.
Goldstein, N. J., Cialdini, R. B., & Griskevicius, V. (2008). A room with a viewpoint: Using
social norms to motivate environmental conservation in hotels. Journal of Consumer
Research, 35, 472-482.
Good, C., Aronson, J., & Inzlicht, M. (2003). Improving adolescents’ standardized test
performance: An intervention to reduce the effects of stereotype threat. Journal of
Applied Developmental Psychology, 24, 645-622.
Good, C., Aronson, J., & Harder, J. A. (2008). Problems in the pipeline: Stereotype threat and
women’s achievement in high-level math courses. Journal of Applied Developmental
Psychology, 29, 17-28.
Goyer, J. P., Cohen, G. L., Cook, J. E., Master, A., Okonofua, J. A., Apfel, N., & Walton, G. M.
(Under review). A social-belonging intervention reduces discipline citations among
minority boys over 7 years.
Goyer, J. P., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Binning, K. R., Cook, J. E., Reeves, S. L., Apfel,
N., Taborsky-Barba, S., Sherman, D. K., & Cohen, G. L. (under review). Into swifter
currents: Self-affirmation nudges minority middle schoolers onto a college trajectory.
Graham, J., Koo, M., & Wilson, T. D. (2011). Conserving energy by inducing people to drive
less. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 41, 106-118.
Grant, A. M. (2008). The significance of task significance: Job performance effects, relational
mechanisms, and boundary conditions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 93, 108-124.
Grant, A. M., & Gino, F. 2010. A little thanks goes a long way: Explaining why gratitude
expressions motivate prosocial behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
98, 946-955.
Grant, A. M., & Hofmann, D. A. (2011). It’s not all about me: Motivating hospital hand hygiene
by focusing on patients. Psychological Science, 22, 1494-1499.
Greenwald, A. G., Carnot, C. G., Beach, R., & Young, B. (1987). Increasing voting behavior by
asking people if they expect to vote. Journal of Applied Psychology, 72, 315-318.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 48
!

Gresky, D. M., Ten Eyck, L. L., Lord, C. G., & McIntyre, R. B. (2005). Effects of salient
multiple identities on women’s performance under mathematics stereotype threat. Sex
Roles, 53, 703-716.
Gringart, E., Helmes, E., & Speelman, C. (2008). Harnessing cognitive dissonance to promote
positive attitudes toward older workers in Australia. Journal of Applied Social
Psychology, 38, 751-778,
Gripshover S. J. & Markman, E. M. (2013). Teaching young children a theory of nutrition:
Conceptual change and the potential for increased vegetable consumption. Psychological
Science, 24, 1541-1553.
Guerra, R., Rebelo, M., Monteiro, M. B., & Gaertner, S. (2013). Translating recategorization
strategies into an antibias educational intervention. Journal of Applied Social Psychology,
43, 14-23.
Haimovitz, K., Dweck, C. S., & Walton, G. M. (under review). Implicit theories of willpower
encourage children to generate self-control strategies.
Hall, C. C., Zhao, J., & Shafir, E. (2014). Self-affirmation among the poor: Cognitive and
behavioral implications. Psychological Science, 25, 619-625.
Hall, N. C., Hladkyj, S., Perry, R. P., & Ruthig, J. C. (2004). The role of attributional retraining
and elaborative learning in college students’ academic development. Journal of Social
Psychology, 144, 591-612.
Hall, N. C., Perry, R. P., Chipperfield, J. G., Clifton, R. A., & Haynes, T. L. (2006). Enhancing
primary and secondary control in achievement settings through writing-based
attributional retraining. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 25, 361-391.
Hall, N. C., Perry, R. P., Goetz, T., Ruthig, J. C., Stupnisky, R. H., & Newall, N. E. (2007).
Attributional retraining and elaborative learning: Improving academic development
through writing-based interventions. Learning and Individual Differences, 17, 280-290.
Halliwell E. & Diedrichs, P. C. (2014). Testing a dissonance body image intervention among
young girls. Health Psychology, 33, 201-204.
Hallsworth M, List J, Metcalfe R, Vlaev I. (2014). The behavioralist as tax collector: Using
natural field experiments to enhance tax compliance. Working Paper 20007, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. http://www.nber.org/papers/w20007.
Halperin, E., Russell, A. G., Trzesniewski, K. H., Gross, J. J. & Dweck, C. S. (2011). Promoting
the Middle East peace process by changing beliefs about group malleability. Science,
333, 1767-1769.
Hanselman, P., Bruch, S.K., Gamoran, A., & Borman, G.D. (2014). Threat in context: School
moderation of the impact of social identity threat on racial/ethnic achievement gaps.
Sociology of Education, 87, 106-124
Harackiewicz, J.M., Canning, E.A., Tibbetts, Y., Giffen, C.J., Blair, S.S., Rouse, D.I., & Hyde,
J.S. (2014). Closing the social class achievement gap for first-generation students in
undergraduate biology. Journal of Educational Psychology, 106, 375-389.
Harackiewicz, J.M., Canning, E.A., Tibbetts, Y., Priniski, S.J., & Hyde, J.S. (2016). Closing
achievement gaps with a utility-value intervention: Disentangling race and social
class. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 111, 745-765.
Harackiewicz, J.M., Rozek, C.R., Hulleman, C.S., & Hyde, J.S. (2012) Helping parents to
motivate adolescents in mathematics and science: An experimental test of a utility-value
intervention. Psychological Science, 23, 899-906.
Harris, P. R., Brearley, I., Sheeran, P., Barker, M., Klein, W. M. P., Creswell, J. D., Levine, J.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 49
!

M., & Bond, R. (2014) Combining self-affirmation with implementation intentions to
promote fruit and vegetable consumption. Health Psychology, 33, 729-736.
Harris, P. R., Mayle, K., Mabbott, L., & Napper, L. (2007). Self-affirmation reduces smokers’
defensiveness to graphic on-pack cigarette warning labels. Health Psychology, 26, 437446.
Haynes, T. L., Ruthig, J. C., Perry, R. P., Stupnisky, R. H., & Hall, N. C. (2006). Reducing the
academic risks of over-optimism: The longitudinal effects of attributional retraining on
cognition and achievement. Research in Higher Education, 47, 755–779.
Hodson, G., Dube, B., & Choma, B. L. (2015). Can (elaborated) imagined contact interventions
reduce prejudice among those higher in intergroup disgust sensitivity (ITG-DS)? Journal
of Applied Social Psychology, 45, 123-131.
Howe, L. C., Carr, P. B., & Walton, G. M. (Under review). Making common cause: The feeling
of working together facilitates normative behavior.
Huang, M-H. (2009). Race of the interviewer and the black-white test score gap. Social Science
Research, 38, 29-38.
Hudley, C., & Graham, S. (1993). An attributional intervention with African American boys
labeled as aggressive. Child Development, 64, 124-138.
Hulleman, C.S. & Harackiewicz, J.M. (2009). Promoting interest and performance in high school
science classes, Science, 326, 1410-1412.
Hülsheger, U. R., Alberts, H. J. E. M., Feinholdt, A., Lang, J. W. B. (2012). Benefits of
mindfulness at work: The role of mindfulness in emotion regulation, emotional
exhaustion, and job satisfaction. Journal of Applied Psychology, 98, 310-325.
Hülsheger, U. R., Lang, J. W. B., Schewe, A. F., & Zijlstra, F. (2015). When regulating emotions
at work pays off: A diary and an intervention study on emotion regulation and customer
tips in service jobs. Journal of Applied Psychology,100, 263-277.
Jamieson, J.P., Mendes, W.B., Blackstock, E., & Schmader, T. (2010). Turning the knots in your
stomach into bows: Reappraising arousal improves performance on the GRE. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 208-212.
Jang, H. (2008). Supporting students’ motivation, engagement, and learning during an
uninteresting activity. Journal of Educational Psychology, 100, 798-811.
Jessop, D. C., Sparks, P., Buckland, N., Harris, P. R., & Churchill, S. (2014). Combining selfaffirmation and implementation intentions: Evidence of detrimental effects on behavioral
outcomes. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 47, 137-147.
Job, V. Flueckiger, L., Bernecker, K., Lieb, R. & Mata, J. (2016). An implicit theories about
willpower intervention helps students to deal with demands: Effects on academic selfregulation and grades. Manuscript in preparation.
Johns, J., Inzlicht, M., & Schmader, T. (2008). Stereotype threat and executive resource
depletion: Examining the influence of emotion regulation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 137, 691-705.
Johns, M., Schmader, T., & Martens, A. (2005). Knowing is half the battle: Teaching stereotype
threat as a means of improving women’s math performance. Psychological Science, 16,
175-179.
Kaptchuk T.J., Friedlander E., Kelley J.M., Sanchez M.N., Kokkotou E., Singer J.P.,
Kowalczykowski M., Miller F.G., Kirsch I., Lembo A.J. (2010. Placebo without
deception: A randomized controlled trial in irritable bowel syndrome. PLoS One, 5,
e15591.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 50
!

Kirk, B. A., Schutte, N. S., Hine, D. W. (2011). The effect of an expressive-writing intervention
for employees on emotional sefl-efficacy, emotional intelligence, affect, and workplace
incivility. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 41, 179-195.
Kross, E., & Ayduk, O. (2011). Making meaning out of negative experiences by self-distancing.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 20, 187-191.
Kross, E., Ayduk, O., & Mischel, W. (2005). When asking “why” does not hurt: Distinguishing
rumination from reflective processing of negative emotions. Psychological Science, 16,
709-715.
Kross, E., Bruehlman-Senecal, E., Park. J., Burson, A., Shablack, H., Bremner, R., Moser, J., &
Ayduk, O. (2014). Self-talk as a regulatory mechanism: How you do it matters. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 106, 304-324.
LaBrie, J. W., Earle, A. M., Boyle, S. C., Hummer, J. F., Montes, K., Turrisi, R., & Napper, L.
E. (2016). A parent-based intervention reduces heavy episodic drinking among first-year
college students. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 30, 523-535.
Langer E. J. & Rodin, J. (1976). The effects of choice and enhanced personal responsibility for
the aged: A field experiment in an institutional setting. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 34, 191-198.
Layous, K., Nelson, S. K., & Lyubomirsky, S. (2013). What is the optimal way to deliver a
positive activity intervention? The case of writing about one’s best possible
selves. Journal of Happiness Studies, 14, 635-654.
Layous, K., Nelson, S. K., Oberle, E., Schonert-Reichl, K., & Lyubomirsky, S. (2012). Kindness
counts: Prompting prosocial behavior in preadolescents boosts peer acceptance and wellbeing. PLOS ONE, 7, e51380.
Layous, K., Davis, E. M., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Cook, J. E., & Cohen, G. L. (2016).
Feeling left out, but affirmed: Protecting against the negative effects of low belonging in
college. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology.
Leahey, T. M., Kumar, R., Weinberg, B. M., & Wing, R. R. (2012). Teammates and social
influence affect weight loss outcomes in a team-based weight loss competition. Obesity,
20, 1413-1418.
Leventhal, H., Singer, R., & Jones, S. (1965). Effects of fear and specificity of recommendation
upon attitudes and behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2, 20-29.
Lewin, K. (1947). Group decision and social change. In T. M. Newcombe & E. L. Hartley (Eds.),
Readings in social psychology (pp. 459- 473). New York: Henry Holt.
Liebkind K. & McAlister, A. L. (1999). Extended contact through peer modeling to promote
tolerance in Finland. European Journal of Social Psychology, 29, 765-780.
Lin-Siegler, X. D., Ahn, J., Chen, J., A. Fang & Luna-Lucero, M. (in press). Even Einstein
struggled: Effects of learning about great scientists’ struggles on high school students’
motivation to learn science. Journal of Educational Psychology, 108, 314-328.
Logel, C. & Cohen, G. L. (2012). The role of the self in physical health: Testing the effect of a
values-affirmation intervention on weight loss. Psychological Science, 23, 53-55.
Logel, C., Iserman, E. C., Davies, P. G., Quinn, D. M., & Spencer, S. J. (2009). The perils of
double consciousness: The role of thought suppression in stereotype threat. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 45, 299-312.
Lyubomirsky, S., Dickerhoof, R., Boehm, J. K., & Sheldon, K. M. (2011).Becoming happier
takes both a will and a proper way: An experimental longitudinal intervention to boost
well-being. Emotion, 11, 391-402.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 51
!

Lyubomirsky, S., Sheldon, K. M., & Schkade, D. (2005). Pursuing happiness: The architecture
of sustainable change. Review of General Psychology, 9, 111-131.
Mallett, R. K., & Wilson, T. D. (2010). Increasing positive intergroup contact. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 382-387.
Marigold, D. C., Holmes, J. G., & Ross, M. (2007). More than words: Reframing compliments
from romantic partners fosters security in low self-esteem individuals. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 232–248.
Marigold D. C., Holmes J.G., Ross, M. (2010). Fostering relationship resilience: An intervention
for low self-esteem individuals. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 624–
630.
Martens, A., Johns, M., Greenberg, J., & Schimel, J. (2006). Combating stereotype threat: The
effect of self-affirmation on women’s intellectual performance. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 42, 236-243.
Marx, D. M. & Goff, P. A. (2005). Clearing the air: The effect of experimenter race on target’s test
performance and subjective experience. British Journal of Social Psychology, 44, 645-657.
Marx, D. M. & Roman, J. S. (2002). Female role models: Protecting women’s math test
performance. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 1183-1193.
McIntyre, R. B., Paulson, R. M., & Lord, C. G. (2003). Alleviating women’s mathematics
stereotype threat through salience of group achievements. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 39, 83-90.
Menec, V. H., Perry, R, P., Struthers, C. W., Schonwetter, D. J., Hechter, F. J., & Eichholz, B. L.
(1994). Assisting at-risk college students with attributional retraining and effective
teaching. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 24, 675-701.
Milkman, K., Beshears, J., Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., & Madrian, B. C. (2011). Using
implementation intentions prompts to enhance influenza vaccination rates. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Science, 108, 10415-10420.
Miller, R. L., Brickman, P., & Bolen, D. (1975). Attribution versus persuasion as a means for
modifying behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 31, 430-441
Miu, A. & Yeager, D. S. (2015). Preventing symptoms of depression by teaching adolescents
that people can change: Effects of a brief incremental theory of personality intervention
at 9-month follow-up. Clinical Psychological Science, 3(5), 726-743.
Miyake, A., Smith-Kost, L. E., Finkelstein, N. D., Pollock, S. J., Cohen, G. L., & Ito, T. A.
(2010). Reducing the gender achievement gap in college science: A classroom study of
values affirmation. Science, 330, 1234-1237.
Moriatry, T. (1975). Crime, commitment, and the responsive bystander: Two field experiments.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 31, 370-376.
Morisano, D., Hirsh, J. B., Peterson, J. B., Pihl, R. O., & Shore, B. M. (2010). Setting,
elaborating, and reflecting on personal goals improves academic performance. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 95, 255-264.
Motto, J. A. & Bostrom, A. G. (2001). A randomized controlled trial of postcrisis suicide
prevention. Psychiatric Services, 52, 828-833.
Murphy, M.C., Carter E.R., Emerson, K.T.U., Gopalan, M., Walton, G., & Bottoms, B. (in prep).
Testing a social belonging intervention in a broad access university setting: Effects on
persistence and achievement of ethnic minority and first-generation college students.
Nickerson, D.W. & Rogers, T. (2010). Do you have a voting plan? Implementation intentions,
voter turnout, and organic plan-making. Psychological Science, 21, 194-199.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 52
!

Otake, K., Shimai, S., Tanaka-Matsumi, J., Otsui, K., & Fredrickson, B. L. (2007). Happy people
become happier through kindness: A counting kindnesses intervention. Journal of
Happiness Studies, 7, 361-375.
Okonofua, J. A. Paunesku, D., & Walton, G. M. (2016). Brief intervention to encourage
empathic discipline cuts suspension rates in half among adolescents. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 113, 5221-5226.
Oyserman, D., Bybee, D. & Terry, K. (2006). Possible selves and academic outcomes: How and
when possible selves impel action. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91,
188-204.
Oyserman, D., Terry, K., & Bybee, D. (2002). A possible selves intervention to enhance school
involvement. Journal of Adolescence, 24, 313-326.
Page-Gould, E., Mendoza-Denton, R., & Tropp, L. R. (2008). With a little help from my crossgroup friend: Reducing anxiety in intergroup contexts through cross-group friendship.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 95, 1080–1094.
Paluck, E.L. (2009). Reducing intergroup prejudice and conflict using the media: A field
experiment in Rwanda. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96, 574-587.
Paluck, E.L., & Shepherd, H. (2012). The salience of social referents: A field experiment on
collective norms and harassment behavior in a school social network. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 103, 899-915.
Paluck, E.L., Shepherd, H., & Aronow, P. (2016). Changing climates of conflict: A social
network experiment in 56 schools. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
113(3), 566–571, doi: 10.1073/pnas.1514483113.
Park, J., Ayduk, O., & Kross, E. (2015). Stepping back to move forward: Expressive writing
promotes self-distancing. Emotion, 16, 349-364.
Paunesku, D., Walton, G. M., Romero, C. L., Smith, E. N., Yeager, D. S., & Dweck, C. S.
(2015). Mindset interventions are a scalable treatment for academic underperformance.
Psychological Science, 26, 784-793.
Pennebaker, J.W. (1997). Writing about emotional experiences as a therapeutic process.
Psychological Science, 8, 162-166.
Pennebaker, J.W., Kiecolt-Glaser, J., & Glaser, R. (1988). Disclosure of traumas and immune
function: Health implications for psychotherapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 56, 239-245.
Perry R. P. & Penner, K. S. (1990). Enhancing academic achievement in college students
through attributional retraining and instruction. Journal of Educational Psychology, 82,
262-271.
Perry, R. P., Stupnisky, R. H., Hall, N. C., Chipperfield, J. G., & Weiner, B. (2010). Bad starts
and better finishes: Attributional retraining and initial performance in competitive
achievement settings. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 29(6), 668-700.
Pham, L. B., & Taylor, S. E. (1999). From thought to action: Effects of process-versus outcomebased mental simulations on performance. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 25, 250-260.
Prestwich A., Conner M.T., Lawton R.J., Bailey W., Litman J., Molyneaux V. (2005). Individual
and collaborative implementation intentions and the promotion of breast selfexamination. Psychology and Health, 20(6), 743-760.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 53
!

Prestwich A., Ayres K., Lawton R. (2008). Crossing two types of implementation intentions with
a protection motivation intervention for the reduction of saturated fat intake: A
randomized trial. Social Science and Medicine, 67(10), 1550-1558.
Prestwich A., Perugini M., Hurling R. (2010). Can implementation intentions and text messages
promote brisk walking? A randomized trial. Health Psychology, 29(1), 40-49.
Prestwich A., Conner M.T., Lawton R.J., Ward J.K., Ayres K., McEachan R.R.C. (2012).
Randomized controlled trial of collaborative implementation intentions targeting working
adults’ physical activity. Health Psychology, 31(4), 486-495.
Ramirez, G., & Beilock, S. L. (2011). Writing about testing worries boosts exam performance in
the classroom. Science, 331, 211-213.
Raudenbush, S.W. (1984). Magnitude of teacher expectancy effects on Pupil IQ as a function of
the credibility of expectancy induction: A synthesis of findings from 18 experiments.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 76(1), 85-97.
Redelmeier D.A., Katz, J., & Kahneman, D. (2003). Memories of colonoscopy: A randomized
trial. Pain, 104, 187-194.
Rodin, J. & Langer, E. J. (1977). Long-term effects of a control-relevant intervention with the
institutionalized aged. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35, 897-902
Rokeach, M. (1971). Long-range experimental modification of values, attitudes, and behavior.
American Psychologist, 26, 453-459.
Rosenthal, H. E. S. & Crisp, R. J. (2006). Reducing stereotype threat by blurring intergroup
boundaries. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 32, 501-511.
Rosenthal, R. & Jacobson, L. (1968). Pygmalion in the Classroom. New York: Holt, Rinehart &
Winston.
Rothman, A.J., Salovey, P., Antone, C., Keough, K., & Martin C.D. (1993). The influence of
message framing on intentions to perform health behaviors. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 29, 408-433.
Ruthig, J. C., Perry, R. P., Hall, N. C., & Hladkyj, S. (2004). Optimism and attributional
retraining: Longitudinal effects on academic achievement, test anxiety, and voluntary
course withdrawal in college students. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 34, 709730.
Schroeder, C. M. & Prentice, D. A. (1998). Exposing pluralistic ignorance to reduce alcohol use
among college students. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 28, 2150-2180.
Schultz, P. W., Nolan, J. M., Cialdini, R. B., Goldstein, N. J., & Griskevicius, V. (2007). The
constructive, destructive, and reconstructive power of social norms. Psychological
Science, 18, 429-434.
Schulz, R. (1976). Effects of control and predictability on the physical and psychological wellbeing of the institutionalized aged. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 33,
563-573.
Schulz, R., & Hanusa, B. H. (1978). Long-term effects of control and predictability-enhancing
interventions: Findings and ethical issues. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
36(11), 1194.
Seligman, M. E P, Steen, T., Park, N., & Peterson, C. (2005). Positive psychology progress:
Empirical validation of interventions. American Psychologist, 60, 410-421.
Sheldon, K. M., & Lyubomirsky, S. (2006a). How to increase and sustain positive emotion: The
effects of expressing gratitude and visualizing best possible selves. The Journal of
Positive Psychology, 1, 73-82.

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 54
!

Sherman, D. K., Bunyan, D. P., Creswell, J. D., & Jaremka, L. M. (2009). Psychological
vulnerability and stress: The effects of self-affirmation on sympathetic nervous system
responses to naturalistic stressors. Health Psychology, 28, 554-562.
Sherman, D. K., Gangi, C., & White, M. L. (2010). Embodied cognition and health persuasion:
Facilitating intention-behavior consistency via motor manipulations. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 461-464.
Sherman, D. K., Hartson, K. A., Binning, K. R., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., TaborskyBarba, S., Tomassetti, S., Nussbaum, A. D., & Cohen, G. L. (2013). Deflecting the
trajectory and changing the narrative: How self-affirmation affects academic performance
and motivation under identity threat. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 104,
591-618.
Sherman, L. W., Smith, D. A., Schmidt, J. D., & Rogan, D. P. (1992). Crime, punishment, and
stake in conformity: Legal and informal control of domestic violence. American
Sociological Review, 57, 680-690.
Shook, N. & Clay, R. (2012). Interracial roommate relationships: A mechanism for promoting a
sense of belonging at university and academic performance. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 48(5), 1168-1172.
Shook, N. J., & Fazio, R. H. (2008). Interracial roommate relationships: An experimental test of
the contact hypothesis. Psychological Science, 19, 717–723.
Shu, L. L., Mazar, N., Gino, F., Ariely, D., & Bazerman, M. H. (2012). Signing at the beginning
makes ethics salient and decreases dishonest self-reports in comparison to signing at the
end. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 109, 15197-15200.
Silverman A. M. & Cohen, G. L. (2014). Stereotypes as stumbling-blocks: How coping with
stereotype threat affects life outcomes for people with physical disabilities. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 40, 1330-1340.
Smith, J.K., Gerber, A.S., & Orlich, A. (2003). Self-prophecy effects and voter turnout: An
experimental replication. Political Psychology, 24, 593–604.
Son Hing L. S., Li, W., & Zanna, M. P. (2002). Inducing hypocrisy to reduce prejudicial
responses among aversive racists. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 71-78.
Sparkman, G. & Walton, G. M. (under review). I’ll have what she’s going to have: Dynamic
norms promote beneficial counternormative behavior.
Spiegel, D., Bloom, J. R., Kraemer, H. C., & Gottheil, E. (1989). Effect of psychosocial
treatment on survival of patients with metastatic breast cancer. Lancet, 2, 888-891.
Stadler, G., Oettingen, G., & Gollwitzer, P. M. (2009). Physical activity in women: Effects of a
self-regulation intervention. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 36, 29-34.
Stadler, G., Oettingen, G., & Gollwitzer, P. M. (2010). Intervention effects of information and
self-regulation on eating fruits and vegetables over two years. Health Psychology,
29, 274-283.
Stathi, S., Cameron, L., Hartley, B., & Bradford, S. (2014). Imagined contact as a prejudicereduction intervention in schools: The underlying role of similarity and attitudes. Journal
of Applied Social Psychology, 44, 536-546.
Stephens, N. M., Hamedani, M. G., & Destin, M. (2014). Closing the social-class achievement
gap: A difference-education intervention improves first-generation students’ academic
performance and all students’ college transition. Psychological Science, 25, 943-953.
Stinson, D.A., Logel, C., Shepherd, S., & Zanna, M.P. (2011) Rewriting the self-fulfilling
prophecy of social rejection: Self-affirmation improves relational security and social

Wise Interventions: Supplementary Tables 55
!

behavior up to 2 months later. Psychological Science, 22, 1145-1149.
Stone, J., Aronson, E., Crain, A. L., Winslow, M. P., & Fried, C. B. (1994). Inducing hypocrisy
as a means of encouraging young adults to use condoms. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 20(1), 116-128.
Strahan, E. J., Lafrance, A., Wilson, A. E., Ethier, N., Spencer, S. J., & Zanna, M. P. (2008).
Victoria’s dirty secret: How sociocultural norms influence adolescent girls and women.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 34, 288-301.
Thomaes, S., Bushman, B. J., Orobio de Castro, B., Cohen, G., & Denissen, J. J. A.
(2009). Reducing narcissistic aggression by buttressing self-esteem: An experimental
field study. Psychological Science, 20, 1536-1542.
Thomaes, S., Bushman, B. J., Orobio de Castro, B., & Reijntjes, A. (2012). Arousing “gentle
passions” in young adolescents: Sustained experimental effects of value-affirmations on
prosocial feelings and behaviors. Developmental Psychology, 48, 103-110.
Tibbetts, Y., Harackiewicz, J. M., Canning, E. A., Boston, J. S., Priniski, S. J., & Hyde, J. S.
(2016). Affirming independence: Exploring mechanisms underlying a values affirmation
intervention for first-generation students. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
110, 635-659.
Turrisi, R., Abar, C., Mallett, K. A., & Jaccard, J. (2010). An examination of the mediational
effects of cognitive and attitudinal factors on a parent intervention to reduce college
drinking. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 40(10), 2500-2526.
Turrisi, R., Jaccard, J., Taki, R., Dunnam, H., & Grimes, J. (2001). Examination of the shortterm efficacy of a parent intervention to reduce college student drinking
tendencies. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors: Special Issue on Understanding Binge
Drinking, 15(4), 366-372.
Walton, G. M. & Cohen, G. L. (2007). A question of belonging: Race, social fit, and
achievement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 82-96.
Walton, G. M. & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A brief social-belonging intervention improves academic
and health outcomes of minority students. Science, 331, 1447-1451.
Walton, G. M., Logel, C., Peach, J., Spencer, S, & Zanna, M. P. (2015). Two brief interventions
to mitigate a “chilly climate” transform women’s experience, relationships, and
achievement in engineering. Journal of Educational Psychology, 107, 468-485.
Weinberg, L. E., Hall, N. C., & Sverdlik, A. (2015). Attributional retraining and physical
rehabilitation in later life: Intervention effects on motivation, mobility, and well-being.
Physical & Occupational Therapy in Geriatrics, 33(4), 294-302.
Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. (1982). Improving the academic performance of college
freshmen: Attribution therapy revisited. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
42, 367-376.
Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. (1985). Improving the performance of college freshmen using
attributional techniques. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 287-293.
Wing R. R. & Jeffery, R. W. (1999). Benefits of recruiting participants with friends and
increasing social support for weight loss and maintenance. Journal of Counseling and
Clinical Psychology, 67, 132-138.
Yeager, D. S., Henderson, M., D’Mello, S., Paunesku, D. Walton, G. M., Spitzer, B. J., &
Duckworth, A. L. (2014). Boring but important: A self-transcendent purpose for learning
fosters academic self-regulation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 107, 559580.

