512856

research-article2014

CDPXXX10.1177/0963721413512856WaltonWise Psychological Interventions

The New Science of Wise Psychological
Interventions

Current Directions in Psychological
Science
2014, Vol. 23(1) 73­–82
© The Author(s) 2014
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0963721413512856
cdps.sagepub.com

Gregory M. Walton
Stanford University

Abstract
Citizens complete a survey the day before a major election; a change in the survey items’ grammatical structure increases
turnout by 11 percentage points. People answer a single question; their romantic relationships improve over several
weeks. At-risk students complete a 1-hour reading-and-writing exercise; their grades rise and their health improves
for the next 3 years. Each statement may sound outlandish—more science fiction than science. Yet each represents
the results of a recent study in psychological science (respectively, Bryan, Walton, Rogers, & Dweck, 2011; Marigold,
Holmes, & Ross, 2007, 2010; Walton & Cohen, 2011). These studies have shown, more than one might have thought,
that specific psychological processes contribute to major social problems. These processes act as levers in complex
systems that give rise to social problems. Precise interventions that alter them—what I call “wise interventions”—can
produce significant benefits and do so over time. What are wise interventions? How do they work? And how can they
help solve social problems?
Keywords
intervention, health, education, close relationships, prejudice
When you imagine a “psychological intervention,” you
might think of something dramatic (like a family challenging an alcoholic to stop drinking) or multifaceted
and expensive (like an after-school program for at-risk
youth). One of the most exciting developments in psychological science in recent years, however, is the emergence of a new class of interventions, which are more
ordinary, briefer, and more precise. These interventions
are much like everyday experiences. They aim, simply, to
alter a specific way in which people think or feel in the
normal course of their lives to help them flourish. We do
this every day. Whenever a person tries to hold his or her
temper in a fight or to encourage a child to work harder
in school, they are trying to change how a person thinks
or feels to produce a positive end. Intervention studies
formalize strategies, rooted in laboratory research and
social-psychological theory, and subject them to rigorous,
field-experimental tests (see Tables 1–5 for samples of
intervention studies on civic behavior, close relationships, education, health, and intergroup relationships).
I call these wise interventions; they are wise to specific
underlying psychological processes that contribute to
social problems or prevent people from flourishing. In a
wise intervention, the most important question is What is

CORRECTED VERSION

the psychological process at hand? Many other interventions, even if they involve psychology, do not take as
their primary target a change in a specific psychological
process. The term wise comes from gay culture in the
1950s, in which it described straight people who understood the full humanity of gay people despite the overwhelming homophobia of the time (Goffman, 1963).
Steele (1997) adopted the term to advocate for “wise
schooling”—schooling that is sensitive to the experiences
of diverse students and that defuses processes such as
stereotype threat. Drawing on this tradition, a wise intervention depends on a precise understanding of people’s
psychological reality—what it is like to be them and how
they construe themselves and their social world. In creating a wise intervention, researchers identify an aspect of
people’s psychology that harms their outcomes and aim
to change this process.
Wise interventions draw on a long tradition of research
(e.g., Dimidjian et al., 2006; Lewin, 1952; McCord, 1978).
Corresponding Author:
Gregory M. Walton, Department of Psychology, Stanford University,
Jordan Hall, Building 420, 450 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305
E-mail: gwalton@stanford.edu

Walton

74	
Table 1.  A Sample of Wise Interventions: Civic Behavior
Intervention

Intervention condition

Control condition

Noun/Verb (Bryan, The day before elections, Survey items were
Walton, Rogers, &
eligible voters
framed using verbs
Dweck, 2011)
responded to survey
(e.g., “How important
items framed using
is it to you to vote
nouns (e.g., “How
. . . ?”).
important is it to
you to be a voter in
tomorrow’s election?”).
Social norms (Braga Randomly assigned crime Other crime hot spots
& Bond, 2008; see
hot spots were cleaned
had routine policing
also Goldstein,
up (e.g., vacant lots
(areas unidentified to
Cialdini, &
secured, street lighting
police captains).
Griskevicius, 2008)
improved) and social
disorder was reduced
(e.g., more public
drinkers arrested).

But they are novel in that they are psychologically precise,
often brief, and often aim to alter self-reinforcing processes
that unfold over time and, thus, to improve people’s outcomes in diverse circumstances and long into the future.
By changing the self over time, many wise interventions
go beyond simple “nudges”—changes to a specific situation or decision framework to encourage better behavior
in that context (Thaler & Sunstein, 2008). Wise interventions are special remedies for social problems and afford
important implications for theory. How do wise interventions work? The research presented here reviews their
foundations and the lessons and opportunities they provide for research and application.

Wise Interventions Are Psychologically
Precise
A wise intervention begins with a specific, well-founded
psychological theory. This theoretical precision allows
researchers to create a precise tool, often instantiated in
a brief exercise, to change a specific psychological process in a real-world setting. This psychological precision
reflects the same values psychologists cultivate in laboratory research—keen insight into basic processes and
methodological precision to isolate these processes. Wise
interventions export this precision in theory and methodology to field settings. Consistent with the Lewinian mantra, “There is nothing so practical as a good theory,” a
precise psychological theory allows researchers to construct strikingly “small” interventions that simultaneously
test this theory and seek to bring about positive change.
The interventions reviewed in Tables 1 through 5 are
diverse. But each articulates and targets a specific psychological process.

CORRECTED VERSION

Psychological process
Noun wording
represents voting as
an opportunity to
become a valued kind
of person—a “voter.”
—not an errand to be
accomplished.

Major outcome
An increase in voter
turnout of 11
percentage points as
assessed by official
records.

Signs of disorder
Treated hot spots had
communicate that rule
20% fewer citizen 911
breaking is acceptable,
calls during the next
which increases
6 months (e.g., 34%
criminality.
fewer assaults and 11%
fewer larcenies/thefts)
and fewer observations
of disorder, with no
increase in crime in
adjacent areas.

Consider Bryan, Walton, Rogers, and Dweck’s (2011)
intervention to increase voter turnout. Relying on research
that showed that people treat noun wording (e.g., I am a
chocolate eater vs. I eat chocolate a lot) as conveying
abstract meaning about a person, Bryan et al. hypothesized that nouns represent a potential future behavior as
an opportunity to become a certain kind of person.
Would a grammatical structure that portrays voting as an
opportunity to become “a voter” motivate higher turnout?
To test this hypothesis, Bryan et al. (p. 12655) manipulated 10 survey items completed by potential voters the
day before two major elections. In one condition, items
used nouns to refer to voting (e.g., “How important is it
to you to be a voter in tomorrow’s election?”). In the
other condition, items used verbs to refer to voting (e.g.,
“How important is it to you to vote in tomorrow’s election?”). Results showed that the intervention led to one of
the largest increases in turnout ever observed in a randomized experiment—an increase of 11 percentage
points for participants in the noun condition compared
with participants in the verb condition, as assessed by
state records.
Can precise interventions improve outcomes in arguably more complex contexts, such as relationships?
Marigold, Holmes, and Ross (2007, 2010) theorized that
people with low self-esteem, who tend to question their
worth, often dismiss compliments from romantic partners
as not having important meaning. To induce people with
low self-esteem to truly accept a compliment, Marigold
et al. (2007) asked participants to think of a compliment
from their romantic partner and to “explain why your
partner admired you. Describe what it meant to you and
its significance for your relationship” (p. 235). This stimulus prompt, compared with a stimulus prompt that asked

Wise Psychological Interventions	

75

Table 2.  A Sample of Wise Interventions: Close Relationships
Intervention
Abstract reframing
of a compliment
(Marigold,
Holmes, & Ross,
2007, 2010)

Intervention condition

Control condition

Psychological process

Major outcome

People with low selfPeople described the
People with low selfesteem wrote about
context in which
esteem tend to
a compliment their
their partner had
question their worth
romantic partner had
complimented them or
and, thus, dismiss
recently given them
“whether your partner
compliments; the
and “why your partner
admired you. . . .”
intervention leads
admired you . . . [and]
people to see a
what it meant to you
compliment as having
and its significance for
an important meaning.
your relationship.”

Cognitive retraining In up to 20 visits during
of problems
the child’s 1st year,
in parenting
interviewers asked
(Bugental et al.,
at-risk mothers about
2002)
problems with their
child and possible
causes of problems
until the mother gave
a non-self-blaming
and non-child-blaming
reason. They then
asked mothers for
possible solutions.
Third-person
Every 4 months for 1
perspective on
year, couples wrote
marital conflicts
about how “a neutral
(Finkel, Slotter,
third party who wants
Luchies, Walton,
the best for all” would
& Gross, 2013)
view a conflict in their
marriage and how
they could take this
perspective.

No visits or similar
visits but without the
cognitive-retraining
component.

Couples reported on
conflicts but did
not complete the
third-person writing
exercise.

participants to describe the circumstances of the compliment, led participants with low self-esteem to feel more
secure in their relationship immediately and several
weeks thereafter. This feeling of security is essential in
close relationships; it mitigates the fears of rejection that
can cause people to withdraw from relationships and
behave negatively toward their partner (Murray, Holmes,
& Collins, 2006). Consistent with this theorizing, during
this several-week period, reports from participants indicated that they valued their relationship more, behaved
more positively toward their partners (as reported by
partners), and saw their partners as behaving more positively toward them. The intervention changed the interplay of feelings and behavior between couples to improve
their relationships.
The significance of a precise psychological understanding means that an inaccurate psychological understanding
can lead would-be interveners astray. An important insight
in the Marigold et al. (2007) intervention is that people

CORRECTED VERSION

People with low selfesteem valued their
relationships more and
felt more secure in
them immediately and
several weeks later.
They also behaved
more positively toward
their partners (partner
reported) and saw their
partners as behaving
more positively toward
them.
Questions prompt
The treatment reduced
mothers to explain
the percentage of
and resolve problems
infants abused during
without blaming the
the 1st year from
self or child, and,
approximately 25% to
thus, to feel more
4%; effects were largest
empowered as parents.
among high-risk (e.g.,
premature) infants.
The treatment also
improved child health
and reduced mother
depression.

A third-person
perspective may
prevent reciprocal
patterns of negative
affect between
couples, making
conflicts less
distressing.

Control-condition couples
continued to decline
in marital quality
(e.g., satisfaction,
love, intimacy, trust,
passion). Treatmentcondition couples
maintained their
marital quality during
the year.

with low self-esteem tend to default to negative views of
the self. As a consequence, in this intervention, the
researchers invited participants to articulate why a compliment has an important meaning; they did not ask participants whether the compliment has this meaning. When
Marigold et al. tested this prompt instead—“Explain
whether you think what your partner said indicated that
he/she admired you. Consider whether it was meaningful
to you and significant for your relationship,” (p. 242)—
people with low self-esteem essentially wrote that the
compliment did not have a larger meaning and the experience produced no benefits. Or consider a growth mind-set
of intelligence intervention. This intervention conveys
that intelligence is not fixed but can expand with effort
and help from others; it can help struggling students perform better in school for months after the intervention
(Blackwell, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2007). But if misunderstood, a growth-mind-set message could be confused
with the lay belief that students should be praised for their

Walton

76	
Table 3.  A Sample of Wise Interventions: Education
Intervention

Intervention condition

Expectancy value
Ninth graders wrote
(Hulleman &
brief essays every
Harackiewicz, 2009;
3 to 4 weeks that
see also Harackiewicz,
described the
Rozek, Hulleman, &
relevance of their
Hyde, 2012)
science coursework
to their lives.

Control condition
Students summarized
the week’s science
topic.

Growth mind-set of
Eighth-grade students
Students learned about
intelligence (Blackwell,
learned in eight
the relationship
Trzesniewski, &
classroom workshops
between brain
Dweck, 2007; see
that intelligence is
regions and brain
also J. Aronson,
malleable and can
functions.
Fried, & Good, 2002;
grow like a muscle
Good, Aronson, &
with hard work and
Inzlicht, 2003; Yeager,
help from others.
Trzesniewski, &
Dweck, 2013)
Social belonging (Walton First-year college
Students learned about
& Cohen, 2011; see
students learned that
unrelated aspects
also Walton, Logel,
all students worry
of the transition to
Peach, Spencer, &
at first about their
college.
Zanna, 2013; Wilson,
belonging in college
Damiani, & Shelton,
but that, over time,
2002; Yeager et al., in
everyone comes to
press)
feel at home.
Value affirmation (Cohen, Seventh graders
Garcia, Purdiecompleted several
Vaughns, Apfel, &
in-class exercises in
Brzustoski, 2009; see
which they wrote
also Miyake et al.,
about why their most
2010; Sherman et al.,
important values
2013)
(e.g., relationships
with friends and
family) were
important to them.

Students wrote
about why values
unimportant to them
might matter to
someone else.

existing intelligence (“You’re so smart!”). It is ironic that
this can induce a fixed mind-set about intelligence, which
undermines motivation when students struggle (Mueller &
Dweck, 1998). Wise interventions depend on wise theories
of psychological processes. With a precise, well-founded
theory, even brief exercises can produce significant
benefits.

Wise Interventions Target Recursive
Processes to Cause Lasting Change
Wise interventions can improve outcomes for years.
Finkel, Slotter, Luchies, Walton, and Gross (2013) showed
that three 7-minute perspective-taking exercises improved
couples’ marriages over the course of a year. Several

CORRECTED VERSION

Psychological process

Major outcome

Making science
The intervention raised
personally relevant
science grades
increases students’
among students who
engagement with
expected to perform
course material,
poorly.
especially among
students who expect
to perform poorly
and who otherwise
may not have a
reason to work hard.
Students with a growth The control group
mind-set interpret
continued to show
academic challenges
a decline in math
as opportunities to
grades, whereas
learn, not as evidence
the treatment group
of fixed inability, and
showed a rebound.
respond by trying
harder, not by giving
up.
The treatment leads
African American
students to attribute
students earned
daily struggles to the
higher grades during
normal difficulties
the next 3 years,
of the transition
halving the racialto college, not to
achievement gap, and
evidence they do not
reported better health
belong in school in
3 years later.
general.
Writing about important Initially low-performing
values bolsters
African American
students’ sense of
students earned
self-integrity in the
higher core academic
face of threat and
grades during the
prevents threat and
next 2 years.
poor performance
from recurring in a
negative recursive
cycle.

studies have shown that brief exercises, lasting an hour
or less, can raise ethnic-minority students’ school achievement for as long as 3 years later (Cohen, Garcia, PurdieVaughns, Apfel, & Brzustoski, 2009; Sherman et al., 2013;
Walton & Cohen, 2011).
These interventions can seem magical (Yeager &
Walton, 2011). To understand them, it is essential that
one consider how interventions change not a moment in
time (“a snapshot”) but a process that unfolds over time
(“a movie”; Kenthirarajah & Walton, 2013). In a relationship, every interaction builds on the previous interaction.
By targeting psychological processes that contribute to
recursive dynamics that compound with time, wise interventions can improve downstream consequences (Garcia
& Cohen, 2013). Consider two examples.

Wise Psychological Interventions	

77

Table 4.  A Sample of Wise Interventions: Health
Intervention

Intervention condition

Control condition

Psychological process

Major outcome

Sense of control (Langer Nursing home residents
& Rodin, 1976; Rodin & were reminded
Langer, 1977; see also
of their many
Schulz, 1976; Schulz &
responsibilities and
Hanusa, 1978)
choices, chose a
plant to take care of,
were encouraged to
choose when to go
to movies, and so
forth.

Residents were
reminded of the
staff’s responsibility
for them, received
a plant and were
told a nurse would
take care of it, were
assigned a night to
go to movies, and so
forth.

In institutionalized
settings, people lose
a sense of control
over their daily lives;
reintroducing a sense
of control promotes
health and wellbeing.

Social connection
People admitted to
(Carter, Clover, Whyte,
hospitals for selfDawson, & D’Este,
poisoning received
2013; see also Motto &
eight postcards
Bostrom, 2001)
during the following
year expressing the
hospital’s concern
and care.
Value affirmation (Logel Undergraduate women,
& Cohen, 2012; see
half of whom were
also Sherman, Bunyah,
overweight, wrote
Creswell, & Jaremka,
about why their most
2009)
important values
were important to
them.

Treatment as usual (i.e., Postcards communicate
no postcards).
the hospital’s
ongoing concern and
care for the patient.

Three weeks later,
residents reported
being happier and
more active, were
judged more alert
by interviewers and
more improved by
nurses, and spent
more time visiting
patients and talking
with staff; 18 months
later they were
rated more active by
nurses and healthier
by doctors and
suffered a lower
mortality rate (15%
vs. 30%).
During the 5 years after
discharge, patients
had nearly 50% fewer
readmissions for selfpoisoning.

Women wrote
about why values
unimportant to them
might matter to
someone else.

Writing about trauma
Undergraduates
Students wrote about
(Pennebaker, Kiecoldwrote about “the
neutral topics (e.g.,
Glaser, & Glaser, 1988)
most traumatic and
daily plans).
upsetting experiences
of your entire life”
for 20 minutes per
day for 4 days.

Finkel et al. (2013) surveyed couples every 4 months
for 2 years about their marriages. During the 2nd year,
couples randomized to the perspective-taking intervention were asked, in addition, how “a neutral third party
who wants the best for all” would view a conflict in their
marriage and how they could adopt this perspective in
future conflicts (Finkel et al., 2013, p. 1597). This exercise
was designed to forestall the reverberation of negative
affect that can occur between couples in conflicts, in

CORRECTED VERSION

Writing about important Two-and-a-half
values bolsters
months later,
people’s sense of
treatment-condition
self-integrity, reduces
women weighed
stress (a major cause
approximately
of weight gain), and
6 pounds less,
helps people sustain
had smaller waist
self-control in the
circumferences,
face of temptations.
and ate fewer
cookies after having
previously exerted
self-control.
Writing encourages
The treatment
people to
improved immune
confront traumatic
system function and
experiences, which
reduced doctor visits
reduces inhibition
during the next 6
and helps people
weeks.
find meaning in the
trauma.

which each person gets angry in turn. During the intervention year, the marital quality of couples in the control
condition continued to decline—these couples’ levels of
love, satisfaction, intimacy, trust, and passion fell. But
these indices stabilized among couples in the perspectivetaking condition.
What would this experience be like for a couple?
Suppose you and your spouse complete the perspectivetaking exercise. This may help you step back in a

Walton

78	
Table 5.  A Sample of Wise Interventions: Intergroup Relationships
Intervention

Intervention condition

Control condition

Enacting cultural
Asian and White
Students were either not
interests (Brannon
students were led to
led to feel socially
& Walton, 2013)
feel socially connected
connected to the
to a Mexican
Mexican American
American peer with
peer, thought the
whom they freely
activity was unrelated
took part in a Mexican
to Mexican culture,
cultural activity.
or thought they had
to do the Mexican
cultural activity.

Fast friends (PageGould, MendozaDenton, & Tropp,
2008)

During three sessions,
Same-race dyads
Latino/White
completed the same
dyads exchanged
exercises.
increasingly selfdisclosing questions
(e.g., “Who is the
most important person
in your life?”) and
completed cooperative
activities.

Jigsaw classroom
(E. Aronson &
Osherow, 1980)

Individual grade-school
Students studied alone
children were each
and participated in
given a portion of a
class on their own.
topic to study, taught
this part to peers in
a jigsaw group, and
were later tested on
the whole topic.
Social network
High school students
Wait list control.
(Paluck, 2011; see
took a weekly
also Bond et al.,
antiprejudice class that
2012)
encouraged students
to intervene with
peers when needed.

Value confrontation
(Rokeach, 1971)

Students ranked 18
values, typically
ranking “freedom”
higher than “equality.”
They were told this
meant they “care a
great deal about their
own freedom but are
indifferent to other
people’s freedom.”

CORRECTED VERSION

Students only completed
the attitude and value
scales.

Psychological process
A social connection
can spark interest
in another person’s
culture. Freely
enacting this
cultural interest feels
inconsistent with
prejudice, thereby
motivating prejudice
reduction.

Major outcome

Participants showed
reduced implicit
prejudice against
Latinos immediately.
Six months later,
they reported
greater interest in
interacting with
Mexican Americans,
including about
racially sensitive topics
(e.g., undocumented
Mexican immigrants).
A close cross-group
Participants, especially
friendship can
those high in
disconfirm negative
prejudice or sensitivity
expectations
to race-based
about intergroup
rejection, showed
interactions.
reduced stress
(cortisol) during
the three sessions
and initiated more
daily intergroup
interactions.
Jigsaw groups reduce
Students liked each
competition and
other more within and
facilitate cooperative,
across group lines
equal-status intergroup
and had higher selfcontact.
esteem, and ethnicminority students
learned more over
several weeks.
Antiprejudice attitudes
Five months later,
can spread through
participants were
social networks to
more likely to be
affect friends and
nominated as standing
peers.
up for others;
their friends and
acquaintances were
more likely to sign a
gay rights petition.
Making people aware
Students were more
of inconsistency in
likely to respond to a
their values creates
solicitation from the
self-dissatisfaction,
National Association
which drives personal
for the Advancement
change.
of Colored People and
to enroll in an ethnic
studies program 3 to
5 months later and
expressed greater
support for “equal
rights for Negroes”
through 15 to 17
months later.

Wise Psychological Interventions	
subsequent conflict—you see the conflict from a broader
perspective, so you get less angry. Now each of you is
dealing with a better-disposed spouse. If the interaction
goes better and you problem solve more effectively, you
may be better prepared for the next conflict. You still
have a conflict, but it is less distressing. When an intervention changes a recursive process, it effectively puts
people in a new situation. Indeed, the intervention did
not reduce conflicts. But it did reduce the distress couples reported in conflicts, and this result mediated the
stabilization in marital quality.
Wise interventions can also change recursive dynamics that begin with the psychology of individuals. Walton
and Cohen’s (2011) social-belonging intervention aimed
to forestall minority students’ worries that experiences
such as being left out or criticized mean, in general, that
they do not belong in school. The intervention gives students an alternative narrative for understanding negative
experiences—namely that worries about belonging are
normal in the transition to a new school but dissipate
with time. Learning and reflecting on this information in
a 1-hour exercise improved African American college students’ grades over a 3-year period, halving the racialachievement gap, and led them to report being happier
and healthier at the end of college.
How could this work? Imagine you are a freshman
worried about whether you belong in college. Learning
that such worries are common and improve with time
may take the edge off negative experiences. Indeed, in
the Walton and Cohen (2011) study, daily-diary measures
showed that minority students in the intervention condition no longer saw daily slights as if they portended a
global lack of belonging; this change in social construal
mediated the 3-year improvement in grades. If everyday
encounters feel less threatening, perhaps students can
interact with others in more positive ways and build better relationships. Indeed, one social-belonging intervention helped women in male-dominated engineering
majors form more friendships with male engineers
(Walton, Logel, Peach, Spencer, & Zanna, 2013). These
women are now in a different situation—they are embedded in a social network in engineering. As these psychological and social processes build over time, they position
students to thrive.
Wise interventions can change how people interact
with one another in ways that improve their circumstances and propel effects forward in time. In these interventions, real-world factors, such as friendships in school,
do not function only as “noise” that causes effects to
decay. They also serve as proximal outcomes that facilitate longer-term effects. An important implication is that
wise interventions are most likely to cause long-term
gains in inherently recursive contexts—such as relationships and school, contexts in which positive experiences
facilitate later positive outcomes. Another implication is

CORRECTED VERSION

79
that wise interventions can amplify their effects over time
if a recursive process “snowballs.” Indeed, the perspective-taking and social-belonging interventions both generated the largest benefits at the most distal time point
assessed.
These interventions used reading-and-writing exercises to change people’s psychology directly. They
encouraged people to respond to ongoing experiences
in more adaptive ways to remake their worlds. Many
other interventions, however, introduce a new experience to people’s lives (e.g., a tutoring program). Such
experiences change people’s psychology only indirectly;
they can thus be less effective (even when they provide
substantive resources; McCord, 1978). Moreover, relying
on a new experience to change psychology can make an
intervention vulnerable if that experience changes. Schulz
(1976) tested whether being able to control or predict
visits from a friendly college student would bolster a
sense of control among elderly nursing home residents
and, thus, improve their health and well-being. During a
2-month period, residents received visits they could control or predict, yoked random visits, or no visits. At the
end of this period, residents in the conditions in which
they could control or predict visits used fewer medications, were rated as healthier and as having more “zest
for life,” and reported being happier. However, tragically,
during the course of the next 42 months, these residents
showed a precipitous decline in their health and wellbeing and even had marginally higher mortality rates
than did “random-visit” and “no-visit” residents (Schulz &
Hanusa, 1978). The ability to control or predict visits
from college students presumably bolstered a sense of
control while the visits lasted. However, this change in
psychology was identified entirely with the visits. When
the visits ended, this may have confirmed the very lack of
control residents had in their lives, thereby undermining
their outcomes. A more robust strategy is to encourage
people to construe their lives broadly as full of control,
not just with a specific experience. One such intervention
improved nursing home residents’ health and well-being
during an 18-month period, which reduced mortality
rates by 50% (Rodin & Langer, 1977).

Wise Interventions Are Context
Dependent—Not Silver Bullets
Because wise interventions target specific psychological
processes and recursive dynamics, they will not always
produce the same effects. They must be wise to the population and context in at least three ways. First, a wise
intervention will be effective only if the process it targets
matters in the setting at hand. If people with high selfesteem readily accept compliments (as they do), interventions that address self-esteem will not improve their
relationships.

Walton

80	
Second, wise interventions will be effective only if
they change the targeted psychological process. To be
maximally effective in different contexts, interventions
may need to be adapted, for instance, to illustrate the
message in the local setting. In addition, rather than a
passive exposure, many interventions use active exercises to drive home key ideas. For example, recipients
may describe themselves or aspects of their lives in a
specific way (Bryan et al., 2011; Cohen et al., 2009; Finkel
et al., 2013; Marigold et al., 2007, 2010). Or they may
complete “saying-is-believing” exercises in which they
use their own experience to advocate for the idea conveyed in the intervention to other people (Walton &
Cohen, 2011). This technique is powerful and persuasive:
It encourages recipients to author the intervention message and to view their experience through its lens without feeling controlling or stigmatizing.
Third, wise interventions will affect long-term outcomes only if they alter critical recursive processes. For
instance, brief value-affirmation interventions delivered
early in the school year can prevent downward cycles of
psychological threat and poor performance among ethnic-minority adolescents for years; if delivered after such
cycles are established, the same intervention is less effective (Cook, Purdie-Vaughns, Garcia, & Cohen, 2012).
Relatedly, interventions will affect long-term outcomes
only if the context provides appropriate affordances. If a
social-belonging intervention generates lasting gains by
helping students to form better relationships, its effectiveness will depend on the possibility of forming these ties.
In addition, psychological interventions can be necessary
but insufficient. Removing psychological barriers to
learning will benefit only those students with access to
adequate learning opportunities.

Conclusion
Wise interventions provide psychologists an enormous
opportunity. They allow us to test how specific psychological processes contribute to specific social problems,
how to change these processes in field settings, and how
a change in psychology unfolds over time in interaction
with the context. Addressing these questions will help us
create distinctly psychological theories of and solutions
to social problems. The far-reaching effects of wise interventions suggest that psychological processes often act
as key levers in complex systems that give rise to social
problems. The development of precise theories of how
psychological processes contribute to these systems provides psychologists opportunities to collaborate with
practitioners in local settings, with other social scientists,
and with policymakers. It will also push us to “scale up”

CORRECTED VERSION

psychological interventions to large samples (e.g., using
the Internet, see http://www.perts.net) and, in doing so,
to contribute to large-scale social change.
Social problems are complex and multicaused. But
nearly every problem involves psychology. As psychologists, it is our job to identify those elements of a social
problem—whether global warming, conflict, crime, poverty, racism, or low achievement—that are psychological
and develop ways to address them.
Recommended Reading
Dweck, C. S. (2006). Mindset: The new psychology of success.
New York, NY: Random House. A comprehensive overview
of people’s implicit theories about the malleability of human
qualities, such as intelligence, with applications to interventions in diverse areas.
Paluck, E. L., & Cialdini, R. B. (in press). Field research methods. In H. Reis & C. Judd (Eds.), Handbook of research
methods in social and personality psychology (2nd ed.).
New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. A compelling
discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of field
research, including intervention field experiments, for the
development of psychological theory.
Rokeach, M. (1971). (See References). A little-known historical
classic; one of the first papers to develop a brief psychological intervention and to test its effects over an extended
period of time.
Wilson, T. D. (2011). Redirect: The surprising new science of
psychological change. New York, NY: Little Brown. A comprehensive review of psychological interventions in diverse
areas, from behavior problems to racial prejudice to school
achievement, with a focus on interventions that change
people’s implicit stories about who they are and where
they are going.
Yeager, D. S. & Walton, G. M. (2011). (See References). An
accessible review of brief social-psychological interventions in education, especially growth-mind-set, attributional-retraining, value-affirmation, and social-belonging
interventions, including the psychological process each targets, how they cause change over time, and how they may
be scaled to more students.

Author Contributions
G. M. Walton is the sole author of this article and is responsible
for its content.

Acknowledgments
I thank Lauren Aguilar, Chris Bryan, Angela Duckworth, Carol
Dweck, Sam Erman, Eli Finkel, James Gross, Bridgette Hard,
and David Yeager for helpful comments.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author declared that he had no conflicts of interest with
respect to his authorship or the publication of this article.

Wise Psychological Interventions	
References
Aronson, E., & Osherow, N. (1980). Cooperation, prosocial
behaviour, and academic performance: Experiments in the
desegregated classroom. In L. Bickerman (Ed.), Applied
social psychology annual (pp. 163–196). Beverley Hills,
CA: Sage.
Aronson, J., Fried, C. B., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the effect
of stereotype threat on African American college students
by shaping theories of intelligence. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 38, 113–125.
Blackwell, L. A., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007).
Theories of intelligence and achievement across the junior
high school transition: A longitudinal study and an intervention. Child Development, 78, 246–263.
Bond, R. M., Fariss, C. J., Jones, J. J., Kramer, A. D. I., Marlow,
C., Settle, J. E., & Fowler, J. H. (2012). A 61-million-person
experiment in social influence and political mobilization.
Nature, 489, 295–298.
Braga, A. A., & Bond, B. J. (2008). Policing crime and disorder
hot spots: A randomized controlled trial. Criminology, 46,
577–607.
Brannon, T. N., & Walton, G. M. (2013). Enacting cultural interests: How intergroup contact reduces prejudice by sparking
interest in an out-group’s culture. Psychological Science,
24, 1947–1957.
Bryan, C. J., Walton, G. M., Rogers, T., & Dweck, C. S. (2011).
Motivating voter turnout by invoking the self. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 108, 12653–
12656.
Bugental, D. B., Ellerson, P. C., Lin, E. K., Rainey, B., Kokotovic,
A., & O’Hara, N. (2002). A cognitive approach to child abuse
prevention. Journal of Family Psychology, 16, 243–258.
Carter, G. L., Clover, K., Whyte, I. M., Dawson, A. H., & D’Este,
C. (2013). Postcards from the EDge: 5-year outcomes of
a randomised controlled trial for hospital-treated selfpoisoning. British Journal of Psychiatry, 202, 372–380.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Apfel, N., &
Brzustoski, P. (2009). Recursive processes in self-affirmation: Intervening to close the minority achievement gap.
Science, 324, 400–403.
Cook, J. E., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L.
(2012). Chronic threat and contingent belonging: Protective
benefits of values affirmation on identity development.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102, 479–496.
Dimidjian, S., Hollon, S. D., Dobson, K. S., Schmaling, K. B.,
Kohlenberg, R. J., Addis, M. E., . . . Jacobson, N. S. (2006).
Randomized trial of behavioral activation, cognitive therapy, and antidepressant medication in the acute treatment
of adults with major depression. Journal of Counseling and
Clinical Psychology, 74, 658–670.
Finkel, E. J., Slotter, E. B., Luchies, L. B., Walton, G. M., & Gross,
J. J. (2013). A brief intervention to promote conflict reappraisal preserves marital quality over time. Psychological
Science, 24, 1595–1601.
Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (2013). A social psychological perspective on educational intervention. In E. Shafir (Ed.),
Behavioral foundations of policy (pp. 329–350). New York,
NY: Russell Sage.

CORRECTED VERSION

81
Goffman, E. (1963). Stigma: Notes on the management of spoiled
identity. New York, NY: Touchstone.
Goldstein, N. J., Cialdini, R. B., & Griskevicius, V. (2008). A
room with a viewpoint: Using social norms to motivate
environmental conservation in hotels. Journal of Consumer
Research, 35, 472–482.
Good, C., Aronson, J., & Inzlicht, M. (2003). Improving adolescents’ standardized test performance: An intervention to
reduce the effects of stereotype threat. Journal of Applied
Developmental Psychology, 24, 645–662.
Harackiewicz, J. M., Rozek, C. R., Hulleman, C. S., & Hyde, J.
S. (2012). Helping parents to motivate adolescents in mathematics and science: An experimental test of a utility-value
intervention. Psychological Science, 23, 899–906.
Hulleman, C. S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2009). Promoting
interest and performance in high school science classes.
Science, 326, 1410–1412.
Kenthirarajah, T., & Walton, G. M. (2013). Movie interventions:
A field-theory model of how brief social-psychological interventions cause enduring effects. Manuscript submitted for
publication.
Langer, E. J., & Rodin, J. (1976). The effects of choice and
enhanced personal responsibility for the aged: A field
experiment in an institutional setting. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 34, 191–198.
Lewin, K. (1952). Group decision and social change. In
G. Swanson, T. Newcombe, & E. Hartley (Eds.), Readings
in social psychology (pp. 459–473). New York, NY: Henry
Holt.
Logel, C., & Cohen, G. L. (2012). The role of the self in physical
health: Testing the effect of a values-affirmation intervention on weight loss. Psychological Science, 23, 53–55.
Marigold, D. C., Holmes, J. G., & Ross, M. (2007). More than
words: Reframing compliments from romantic partners
fosters security in low self-esteem individuals. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 232–248.
Marigold, D. C., Holmes, J. G., & Ross, M. (2010). Fostering
relationship resilience: An intervention for low self-esteem
individuals. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46,
624–630.
McCord, J. (1978). A thirty-year follow-up of treatment effects.
American Psychologist, 33, 284–289.
Miyake, A., Smith-Kost, L. E., Finkelstein, N. D., Pollock, S.
J., Cohen, G. L., & Ito, T. A. (2010). Reducing the gender
achievement gap in college science: A classroom study of
values affirmation. Science, 330, 1234–1237.
Motto, J. A., & Bostrom, A. G. (2001). A randomized controlled
trial of postcrisis suicide prevention. Psychiatric Services,
52, 828–833.
Mueller, C. M., & Dweck, C. S. (1998). Intelligence praise
can undermine motivation and performance. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 33–52.
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., & Collins, N. L. (2006). Optimizing
assurance: The risk regulation system in relationships.
Psychological Bulletin, 132, 664–666.
Page-Gould, E., Mendoza-Denton, R., & Tropp, L. R. (2008). With
a little help from my cross-group friend: Reducing anxiety in
intergroup contexts through cross-group friendship. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 95, 1080–1094.

82	
Paluck, E. L. (2011). Peer pressure against prejudice: A high
school field experiment examining social network change.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 47, 350–358.
Pennebaker, J. W., Kiecold-Glaser, J. K., & Glaser, R. (1988).
Disclosure of traumas and immune function: Health implications for psychotherapy. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 56, 239–245.
Rodin, J., & Langer, E. J. (1977). Long-term effects of a controlrelevant intervention with the institutionalized aged.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35, 897–902.
Rokeach, M. (1971). Long-range experimental modification of
values, attitudes, and behavior. American Psychologist, 26,
453–459.
Schulz, R. (1976). Effects of control and predictability on the
physical and psychological well-being of the institutionalized aged. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 33,
563–573.
Schulz, R., & Hanusa, B. H. (1978). Long-term effects of control
and predictability-enhancing interventions: Findings and
ethical issues. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
36, 1194–1201.
Sherman, D. K., Bunyah, D. P., Creswell, J. D., & Jaremka, L. M.
(2009). Psychological vulnerability and stress: The effects of
self-affirmation on sympathetic nervous system responses
to naturalistic stressors. Health Psychology, 28, 554–562.
Sherman, D. K., Hartson, K. A., Binning, K. R., Purdie-Vaughns,
V., Garcia, J., Taborsky-Barba, S., . . . Cohen, G. L. (2013).
Deflecting the trajectory and changing the narrative:
How self-affirmation affects academic performance and
motivation under identity threat. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 104, 591–618.

CORRECTED VERSION

Walton
Steele, C. M. (1997). A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape
intellectual identity and performance. American Psychologist,
52, 613–629.
Thaler, R. H., & Sunstein, C. R. (2008). Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth, and happiness. New York, NY:
Penguin Books.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A brief social-belonging
intervention improves academic and health outcomes
among minority students. Science, 331, 1447–1451.
Walton, G. M., Logel, C., Peach, J., Spencer, S., & Zanna, M. P.
(2013). Two brief social-psychological interventions transform women’s experience, relationships, and achievement
in engineering. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Wilson, T. D., Damiani, M., & Shelton, N. (2002). Improving
the academic performance of college students with brief
attributional interventions. In J. Aronson (Ed.), Improving
academic achievement: Impact of psychological factors
on education (pp. 88–108). San Diego, CA: Academic
Press.
Yeager, D. S., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., Apfel, N.,
Brzustoski, P., Master, A., . . . Cohen, G. L. (in press).
Breaking the cycle of mistrust: Wise interventions to provide critical feedback across the racial divide. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General.
Yeager, D. S., Trzesniewski, K., & Dweck, C. S. (2013). An
implicit theories of personality intervention reduces adolescent aggression in response to victimization and exclusion.
Child Development, 84, 970–988.
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological
interventions in education: They’re not magic. Review of
Educational Research, 81, 267–301.

