Child Development, xxxx 2013, Volume 00, Number 0, Pages 1–17

Implicit Theories of Personality and Attributions of Hostile Intent:
A Meta-Analysis, an Experiment, and a Longitudinal Intervention
David S. Yeager

Adriana S. Miu

University of Texas at Austin

Emory University

Joseph Powers and Carol S. Dweck
Stanford University

Past research has shown that hostile schemas and adverse experiences predict the hostile attributional bias.
This research proposes that seemingly nonhostile beliefs (implicit theories about the malleability of personality) may also play a role in shaping it. Study 1 meta-analytically summarized 11 original tests of this hypothesis (N = 1,659), and showed that among diverse adolescents aged 13–16 a ﬁxed or entity theory about
personality traits predicted greater hostile attributional biases, which mediated an effect on aggressive desires.
Study 2 experimentally changed adolescents’ implicit theories toward a malleable or incremental view and
showed a reduction in hostile intent attributions. Study 3 delivered an incremental theory intervention that
reduced hostile intent attributions and aggressive desires over an 8-month period.

The hostile attributional bias is the tendency to interpret ambiguous provocation as intentional, that is,
to view others’ negative actions toward you as purposeful and hostile when their intention is unclear
(Dodge, 1980, 2006). For example, imagine an adolescent who is walking down the hallway in his
school. A peer runs down the hallway, knocking
him over and spilling his books on the ﬂoor, causing other peers to laugh (Dodge, 2006, p. 791). Was
this done on purpose or was it an accident? What
would the student do in response?
Over a hundred studies have demonstrated that
a hostile attributional bias is a predictor of the
desire to enact reactive aggression. This has been
shown in response to hypothetical scenarios, laboratory provocations, and provocations in real-world
settings (Dodge, 2006; Dodge, Coie, & Lynam,
2006). Research has also shown that changing this
hostile bias toward more of a benign attribution of
intent can reduce children’s and adolescents’ reactive aggression (e.g., Hudley & Graham, 1993; for a
Support for this research was provided by the Spencer Foundation and the Thrive Foundation for Youth. The authors are
grateful to the students and teachers who participated in this
research and to April House, April Scott, Kerry Morrissey, Shannon Morrissey, Ahmad Saleh, Shannon Brady, Cary Catching,
Liz Chamberlain, Brian Spitzer, Kali Trzesniewski, Michelle Harris, Jessica Reed, and Rebecca Johnson for their assistance conducting this research.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to
David Yeager, 108 E. Dean Keeton Stop A8000, Austin, TX 787121043. Electronic mail may be sent to yeager@psy.utexas.edu.

meta-analysis, see Wilson & Lipsey, 2006). Combined, these constitute some of the most robust,
generative, and important ﬁndings in all of developmental psychology. Indeed, this research has provided leverage for understanding and addressing
peer aggression, one of the most pressing problems
facing today’s youth.
But where does the hostile attributional bias
come from? Dodge (2006) has theorized that past
hostile experiences, such as abuse or long-term
exposure to violent contexts, can lead to hostile
schemas that produce a heightened vigilance to
peer hostility and therefore promote hostile intent
attributions. Although such hostile experiences and
schemas are undoubtedly inﬂuential, we propose
that a hostile attributional bias can also emerge
from more seemingly nonhostile sources, such as
an implicit theory about whether people’s traits are
ﬁxed and unchangeable. More speciﬁcally, we propose that adolescents who hold an entity theory of
personality—the idea that people’s traits cannot
change (Dweck, Chiu, & Hong, 1995; Erdley &
Dweck, 1993; Yeager, Trzesniewski, Tirri, Nokelainen, & Dweck, 2011)—will be more likely to attribute ambiguous provocations to a peer’s hostile
intent and, because of this, to express a greater
© 2013 The Authors
Child Development © 2013 Society for Research in Child Development, Inc.
All rights reserved. 0009-3920/2013/xxxx-xxxx
DOI: 10.1111/cdev.12062

2

Yeager, Miu, Powers, and Dweck

desire for aggressive revenge. This is because those
with more of an entity theory see people’s good
and bad behaviors as emanating from enduring
traits rather than being a product of circumstances
(Erdley & Dweck, 1993; see also Chiu, Hong, &
Dweck, 1997; Levy & Dweck, 1999), and so they
may then be more likely to conclude that a peer
who upset them is a bad person who upset them
on purpose. If this were true, then one method for
reducing attributions of hostile intent might be to
change adolescents’ implicit theories toward more
of a malleable or incremental view of personality
traits.
To test these proposals, we conducted the present research. Study 1 was a meta-analysis of 11 original correlational tests of the hypothesis that an
entity theory would predict greater attributions of
hostile intent following both imagined and experienced provocations. Study 1 also explored whether
these increased hostile attributions might statistically mediate the effect of an entity theory on the
desire to respond aggressively. Study 2 addressed
the causal role of implicit theories. It experimentally
changed adolescents’ theories toward an incremental view and observed differences in attributions of
hostile intent. Study 3 extended this by conducting
a longitudinal experiment that measured the effects
of an incremental theory intervention on hostile
attributions and a desire for vengeance over an 8month period.
Schemas That Shape Hostile Attributional Biases
As noted, Dodge (2006) has argued that attributions of hostile intent are a function of hostile schemas that result in part from negative life events
and that hostile attributional tendencies mediate the
impact of these negative schemas on behavior. For
instance, research has documented that socialization
from parents who, themselves, have hostile attributional tendencies can predict children’s increased
hostile attributional styles (MacBrayer, Milich, &
Hundley, 2003), as can frequent experiences of peer
victimization (Yeung & Leadbeater, 2007), or the
experience of abuse during childhood (Dodge,
Bates, & Pettit, 1990; see Dodge, 2006, for a review).
Relatedly, other research has shown that hostile
“schemas”—such as the chronic accessibility of hostile thoughts—can predict attributions of hostile
intent and because of this predict aggressive desires
or behavior (Burks, Laird, Dodge, Pettit, & Bates,
1999; Dodge, Laird, Lochman, & Zelli, 2002; see
Dodge, 2006, for a review). Overall, this is important evidence that hostile experiences and schemas

might produce hostile attributional tendencies.
However, how complete is this explanation of the
origins of the hostile attributional bias?
Implicit Theories
We propose that other, seemingly nonhostile
schemas—ones that may or may not arise from hostile experiences and are distinct from overall negative views about the social world—could also
contribute to hostile intent attributions. Speciﬁcally,
we argue that implicit theories of personality,
which involve a theory about the ﬁxedness versus
malleability of personality traits, can promote hostile intent attributions when adolescents are confronted with peer provocations of ambiguous
intent.
Implicit theories are core beliefs about the malleability of people’s traits, and they frame people’s
interpretations of events in their social worlds. As a
result, they play a role in shaping judgments and
reactions to other people’s behaviors (Chiu et al.,
1997; Erdley & Dweck, 1993; Yeager et al., 2011).
For instance, adults with more of an entity theory
often interpret minor behaviors as having a stronger positive or negative valence (Hong, Chiu,
Dweck, & Sacks, 1997) and as more indicative of
underlying moral character (Chiu et al., 1997), compared to adults with more of an incremental theory.
Past research is consistent in showing that an entity
theory about personality creates a psychological
world in which people’s global character can be
judged as good or bad from even thin slices of
behavior.
Building on this research, we propose that
although an entity theory of personality itself does
not necessarily arise from hostile inﬂuences, it can
nevertheless create a psychological preparedness
toward hostile judgments of others. Consistent with
this prediction, Erdley and Dweck (1993, Study 2)
found that fourth- and ﬁfth-grade students who
held more of an entity theory viewed a peer’s antisocial behavior as arising from the peer’s underlying, stable, and deﬁcient traits. They then
displayed less empathy for the peer and prescribed
more punishment for him or her. Moreover, when
later confronted with positive behaviors performed
by the peer—thus providing participants with an
opportunity to view the peer’s previous antisocial
behavior as due to circumstances rather than traits—
those with more of an entity theory maintained their
global negative trait judgments of the antisocial peer.
More recently, Yeager et al. (2011) examined the
effect of implicit theories of personality on high

Implicit Theories and Hostile Intent Attributions

school students’ responses to personal experiences
of peer conﬂict. They showed that those with more
of an entity theory were more likely to attribute
instances of victimization directed at them to a
peer’s personal qualities. This characterological
attribution mediated an effect on a greater desire to
“get back at,” “hurt,” or “punish” the transgressing
peer. Next, Yeager et al. (2011) used a brief experiment to change adolescents’ implicit theories
toward more of an incremental view, and showed
that the incremental theory reduced the belief that a
hypothetical peer who bullied them had negative
personal qualities. This, in turn, reduced the desire
for revenge.
Although instructive, this past research did not
investigate the role of implicit theories in shaping
the interpretation of negative events in which the
intent of an anonymous peer was ambiguous—
which is the critical test of an attributional bias (cf.
Dodge, 1980). The Yeager et al. (2011) scenarios
involved peers who explicitly and unambiguously
were bullying the participants repeatedly on purpose. Thus, it is currently unknown whether implicit theories of personality would predict the hostile
attributional bias. Moreover, both the Erdley and
Dweck (1993) and the Yeager et al. (2011) research
relied on hypothetical scenarios and did not measure attributions following actual experiences of
peer conﬂict. Therefore, the present studies extended
past research by testing whether implicit theories
might predict attributions of hostile intent following
ambiguous provocations from unknown peers in
hypothetical scenarios and in controlled behavioral
experiences of peer exclusion.
The Origins of Implicit Theories
Although the developmental origins of an entity
theory are not fully known, some past research supports the notion that entity theories can result from
nonhostile or even positive inﬂuences, and yet
nonetheless predict negative attributions and reactions. In analogous past experiments on implicit
theories of intelligence, positive, well-intentioned
praise for being “smart” could induce an entity
theory of intelligence (Mueller & Dweck, 1998).
Moreover, Dweck et al. (1995) reported that a ﬁxed
or entity theory about intelligence is not simply the
residue of poor academic performance. Many highachieving students hold an entity theory about their
academic ability, yet those with more of an entity
theory of academic ability, regardless of their actual
levels of ability, tend to respond more negatively in
the face of academic challenges, for example, by

3

blaming their failures on themselves, lying about
low grades, considering cheating, or giving up
(Blackwell, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2007; Mueller
& Dweck, 1998; for an overview, see Dweck, 2006).
More directly relevant to the present research, Chiu
et al. (1997, Study 5) changed participants’ implicit
theories of personality with a brief scientiﬁc article
summarizing longitudinal studies that either
showed that people’s traits become set, like plaster
(in an entity theory condition) or that they can be
molded, like clay, throughout life (in an incremental
theory condition). This brief article led participants
to adopt entity versus incremental frameworks
when judging others. Hence, past research is suggestive that implicit theories can arise even from
positive or nonhostile inﬂuences (such as scientiﬁc
information) and are not only the product of hostile
experiences. Building on this past research, we propose that adolescents who have learned more of
an entity theory of personality, regardless of the
frequency of past negative events or their overall
negative schemas about people, will respond to
ambiguous peer conﬂicts with a different pattern of
attributions and behavioral desires than those who
have learned more of an incremental theory.
The Present Research
Study 1 reports 11 original correlations that were
collected from eight independent samples of adolescents. Five of these samples included one test of the
relation between implicit theories and the hostile
attributional bias, and three included two tests
employing measures collected at different times.
These 11 tests of our hypothesis employed various
questions, stimuli (e.g., scenarios and behavioral
provocations), and lengths of time between measurements, and they were aggregated into a single
effect size estimate using meta-analytic methods, to
facilitate more general conclusions. In addition, to
test for whether implicit theories would predict
attributions among adolescents from relatively hostile as well as relatively nonhostile contexts, Study
1 included samples from both lower violence and
higher violence neighborhoods. Last, Study 1 metaanalytically summarized tests of whether attributions of hostile intent mediated the effect of implicit
theories on aggressive desires.
Study 2 was an experiment designed to test the
causal effect of implicit theories on hostile attributional biases. In it we changed implicit theories
toward more of a malleable or incremental view of
personality and then measured short-term changes
in attributions of hostile intent. As in Study 1, this

4

Yeager, Miu, Powers, and Dweck

experiment was conducted in two contexts with
highly different levels of neighborhood violence, to
demonstrate the generality of this process. Finally,
Study 3 was a longitudinal experiment that administered a brief (two class session) incremental theory
intervention and measured attributions of hostile
intent and vengeful desires 8 months later.

Study 1

low socioeconomic status, and came from neighborhoods with violence rates above the national average, according to federal statistics (United States
Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2011). In the remaining two samples the
majority of students came from middle- or highincome families and lived in neighborhoods with
violence rates below the national average. Response
rates in all studies were over 75%. Parental consent
and student assent were obtained for all participants.

Method
Participants

Procedure

Participants were students in Grades 8, 9, and 10
from eight independent samples coming from six
different schools in the United States (samples collected from the same schools included different students surveyed in different years; N = 1,128 unique
participants provided a total of N = 1,659 observations). See Table 1 for a summary of sample characteristics. Some of these studies were conducted
expressly to test the present hypotheses, and others
were designed to test additional hypotheses that
will be included in future research articles. However, critically, all the samples included here were
administered measures of implicit theories and
attributions of hostile intent, and none of the relations between these variables have been reported in
another research article.
In the aggregate, 49% of participants were
female. Twelve percent self-identiﬁed as Black or
African American, 17% as White, 26% as Asian,
42% as Hispanic or Latino, and the rest as another
race or ethnicity. Schools were located in New York
City or the San Francisco Bay Area. In six of the
eight samples, the majority of students at the school
received free or reduced-price lunch, an indicator of

In all studies, students completed activities and
questions as a class on computers in a school computer lab during school hours. The session was
administered by a trained research assistant who
led students to work quietly and privately for the
roughly 30 min required. Four of the studies
included an ambiguous provocation that students
believed was a real interaction with another student
(described below). In each case, students were thoroughly debriefed after the experience. At the end of
all of the studies, students were thanked for their
participation and were told how their responses
would be used to advance science and help future
students like themselves.

Measures
Entity Theory
Participants in all studies answered ﬁve questions measuring an entity theory of personality
traits relevant to peer conﬂicts in high school. These
questions were developed and used in past research
(Yeager et al., 2011). Participants were asked to

Table 1
Samples Summarized Meta-Analytically in Study 1
Sample
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

N
39
128
179
204
36
305
211
26

Grade level
9th
9th–10th
9th–10th
9th
9th
9th
9th
8th

Location

% female

% Black

% White

% Asian

% Hispanic or Latino

New York, NY
Bay Area, CA
Bay Area, CA
New York, NY
Bay Area, CA
Bay Area, CA
Bay Area, CA
Bay Area, CA

63
49
53
51
46
45
49
51

36
28
9
22
3
2
5
3

8
4
13
12
50
35
4
7

28
30
9
26
41
46
6
10

28
38
58
35
6
15
80
80

Note. Participants could indicate as many races or ethnicities as they wished, or none at all, and therefore row percentages need not
add up to 100%. Samples 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, and 8 were collected from schools located in neighborhoods with higher levels of poverty and
violence, whereas samples 5 and 6 were located in upper-middle-class neighborhoods with lower levels of poverty and violence.

Implicit Theories and Hostile Intent Attributions

agree or disagree with statements such as “Bullies
and victims are types of people that really can’t be
changed” (1 = strongly disagree, 6 = strongly agree;
below we report analyses showing that implicit theories are distinct from overall negative schemas
about people). These items were internally consistent across studies: as ranged from .66 to .83.
Attributions of Hostile Intent
In each of the tests of our hypothesis, one of two
different ambiguous provocations was used to
evoke attributions of hostile intent. One was a
hypothetical scenario and one was a behavioral
experience of social exclusion. Following the design
employed in past demonstrations of an attributional
bias (e.g., Dodge, 1980), in each of these provocations the identity of the peer was unknown to the
participant. Indeed, a crucial precondition for a test
of an attributional bias is to examine person perceptions in the absence of any previous knowledge
about the character of the provoking peer.
Hypothetical scenario. Seven tests of our hypothesis employed an ambiguous scenario. This was a
paradigmatic scenario used to illustrate the hostile
attributional bias and was based on an example
described by Dodge (2006, p. 791):
Imagine that you were walking in a crowded
hallway at school and everybody was rushing to
get to the next class so they wouldn’t be late.
While you were looking the other way, you and
another student bumped into each other (pretty
hard), so it hurt your shoulder and you dropped
the books that you were carrying. The other student paused brieﬂy, looked at you quickly, and
then turned away and hurried to class.
A pilot experiment showed that this stimulus
was, in fact, ambiguous with regard to hostile
intent (see online Supporting Information).
Cyberball exclusion. In four tests of our hypothesis,
students experienced a standardized (but short-lived
and harmless) instance of social exclusion during
an online game of catch (“Cyberball”) with two
“peers” purportedly from their secondary school
but located in another room (Williams, 2009; Williams, Yeager, Cheung, & Choi, 2012). In reality,
there were no other human players and the game
was programmed so that the computer players
threw the ball to the participant twice at the outset
and then threw it exclusively to each other. From
the perspective of the participant, the hostility of
the other player’s intentions was highly ambiguous.

5

Participants did not communicate with the excluders before, during, or after the game and were
aware that the other players did not know their
identity. In this way, participants were provided no
clues as to the identities or intentions of the peers
who excluded them, producing a great deal of latitude for them to ﬁll in the details (cf. Heider &
Simmel, 1944). Note that a strength of this method
is that it more narrowly isolates attributions of
hostile intent. Indeed, even when students believed
that the Cyberball exclusion was done on purpose,
not all of these students believed that it was done
on purpose in order to be mean. In a pilot study, we
interviewed participants about their impression of
the other players’ motives following Cyberball. In
this pilot, roughly half of students interpreted
Cyberball exclusion as arising from hostile intent,
saying “they were trying to make me feel bad by
leaving me out.” Yet other students thought the
exclusion arose from a joke that was not intended
to be malicious, from a computer malfunction, or
because the other players did not understand the
rules of the game. Hence, even when students
believed that the peers meant to exclude them,
there was variation in whether those intentions
were attributed to hostility. In sum, exclusion via
Cyberball allowed for important variety in our
tests of the relation between implicit theories and
attributions of hostile intent.
Measures of intent following the provocations. After
reading the scenario or experiencing peer exclusion,
participants rated attributions of hostile intent.
These questions varied across studies to reduce the
possibility that the results were an artifact of a
certain question type (see see online Supporting
Information Table S1 for more detail).
In two of the tests of the hypothesis that
employed the ambiguous scenario, participants
rated how much they thought “this person bumped
into you on purpose or on accident” on a 5-point
scale (1 = a complete accident, 5 = completely on
purpose). In the ﬁve remaining tests that employed
the scenario, participants rated on a 7-point scale
how much they thought “They were being mean to
me on purpose” and “They were trying to be mean
to me” (1 = not at all, 7 = an extreme amount), and
these two questions were combined by taking their
unweighted average (as > .8 across studies). These
items were modeled after commonly used measures
of the hostile attributional bias (Pettit, Lansford,
Malone, Dodge, & Bates, 2010).
In the four tests of our hypothesis that employed
a behavioral experience of Cyberball exclusion, participants answered two items such as “They were

6

Yeager, Miu, Powers, and Dweck

being mean to me on purpose” (1 = Not at all,
7 = An extreme amount). These two questions were
combined into a single measure (as > .8 across
studies).
Aggressive Desires
Seven tests of our hypothesis measured a type of
aggressive desire following the ambiguous provocation.
Desire for vengeance. In ﬁve tests of the hypothesis, a desire for vengeance was measured following
the provocation. Participants rated how much they
felt like “hurting,” “punishing,” or “getting back at”
the peer in the ambiguous provocation scenario
(1 = not at all, 7 = an extreme amount; items were averaged, as > .8 across studies). In past research, the
desire for vengeance was strongly correlated (r = .50)
with self-report measures of real-world reactive
aggressive behavior (Yeager et al., 2011, Study 1).
Desire to use vengeance for emotion regulation.
Recent theories of aggressive behavior have noted
the importance of anticipated positive emotional
states following aggression as a precursor for
aggressive behaviors (for a review, see Baumeister,
Vohs, DeWall, & Zhang, 2007; see also Yeager et al.,
2011, Study 3). Therefore, to broaden the scope of
our measures of aggressive desires, in two tests of
our hypothesis a desire to use vengeance for emotion regulation was measured (note that the “desire
for vengeance” was not measured in these two samples). Participants rated ﬁve items such as “It would
make me feel better to think about hurting them
back” and “All I would have to do is imagine myself
taking revenge and I would feel better” (1 = strongly
disagree, 7 = strongly agree). These ﬁve items were
averaged, with higher values corresponding to a
greater desire for vengeance (as > .8 across studies).
Peer Victimization
Students in nine of our tests were asked to report
levels of peer victimization by answering four items
(including how often they have “been hit, slapped,
or pushed” or “been excluded or left out by other
students” in the “past month or so”), each on a
5-point scale from 0 = never to 4 = very often. These
items were averaged, a = .79, with higher values
corresponding to more victimization.
Analysis Plan
This study utilizes a method employed in recent
investigations that have conducted a set of original

studies and then summarized them using the statistical method of meta-analysis to reach more general
conclusions about the phenomenon under study
(e.g., Yeager & Krosnick, 2011, 2012). Our analyses
were performed in the following manner. First,
ordinary least squares regressions were conducted
for each of the key hypotheses (e.g., an entity theory predicting attributions of hostile intent). (Individual unstandardized regression coefﬁcients from
these models are presented in the online Supporting
Information Table S1.) All variables in the study
were recoded to range continuously from 0 to 1.
The indirect or mediated effects and their 95% conﬁdence intervals were estimated using bootstrapping methods in the Mediation package in R (Imai,
Keele, & Tingley, 2010; Imai, Keele, Tingley, &
Yamamoto, 2011; R Development Core Team, 2008).
The variance statistics for these indirect effects was
approximated by dividing the range of the 95%
conﬁdence interval by 4 and then squaring. Next,
effect sizes (r) and variances were calculated for
each of these tests using the corresponding t statistics (for the a, b, and c effects) or variances (for the
ab, or indirect, effects). Finally, these effect sizes
were aggregated in separate random-effects metaanalyses, estimated by the metafor package in R
(Viechtbauer, 2010).
This meta-analytic procedure is desirable for several reasons. First, it guards against publication bias—
or the tendency to report only studies that had
signiﬁcant effects consistent with hypotheses
(Schooler, 2011). Second, it guards against “researcher
degrees of freedom”—or idiosyncratic decisions
about how to conduct an analysis so as to maximize the signiﬁcance in a given study, such as
which items to drop from aggregate scales or which
control variables to include (Simmons, Nelson, &
Simonsohn, 2011). Third, it guards against artifactual ﬁndings by allowing for tests of homogeneity
of effect sizes across different measures, methods,
and populations. Given that the hostile attributional
bias is one of the most frequently studied constructs
in the psychology of aggression, we believed that
any claim about the potential origins of this highly
important construct should overcome each of these
potential criticisms. Therefore, our meta-analyses
include all tests that we have conducted of the key
hypotheses, even ones that did not reach statistical
signiﬁcance. No study we have run was excluded,
and, as noted, these studies employed different
methods to allow for more general conclusions.
Relatedly, we present statistics supporting the idea
that no studies were withheld (i.e., we test for
“publication bias”). Next, in every case we made

Implicit Theories and Hostile Intent Attributions

the same decision about control variables across
analyses (e.g., we do not include any, except in
supplemental analyses testing a speciﬁc hypothesis
about a potential confounding variable, peer victimization; note that conducting analyses without control variables that reduce error variance in the key
dependent variable most likely makes our effect
size estimates more conservative). Finally, we made
a priori and consistent decisions about the composition of each of the scales employed in our research.

Results and Discussion
Does an Entity Theory Predict Attributions of Hostile
Intent?
An entity theory signiﬁcantly predicted attributions of hostile intent across 11 tests (N = 1,659),
meta-analytic r = .18, Z = 7.80, p < .0001. The funnel
plot of effect sizes (a test for publication bias) was
not asymmetric, Kendall’s τ = .38, p > .10, adding
support to our disclosure that no test was withheld
from our meta-analysis. Differences in samples or
procedures did not affect our key result: test of
homogeneity, Q(10) = 15.54, p > .10. For instance,
implicit theories signiﬁcantly predicted hostile intent
attributions when both were measured on the same
day, when attributions were measured after 3
weeks, and when attributions were measured after
1.5 years (see online). The ﬁnding of nonsigniﬁcant
heterogeneity was supported by planned tests of
moderation by ambiguous provocation stimulus
(hypothetical scenario vs. Cyberball), Q(1) = .002,
p = .97, and by sample composition (samples with
higher neighborhood violence vs. samples with
lower neighborhood violence), Q(1) = .001, p = .96.
Next, classic investigations of the hostile attributional bias have focused on boys only (Dodge,
1980; Hudley & Graham, 1993). We therefore metaanalyzed Sex 9 Implicit Theories interactions from
each of the 11 regressions predicting hostile intent
and found no signiﬁcant moderation by sex, metaanalytic r = .01, Z = .31, p = .75.
Some research has found that peer victimization
predicts greater hostile attributional biases (e.g.,
Yeung & Leadbeater, 2007). Yet when we reconducted our meta-analysis controlling for adolescents’ reported frequency of victimization, our
results were unchanged, r = .17, Z = 6.36, p < .0001.
We have claimed that the seemingly nonhostile
implicit theories of personality traits are distinct
from explicitly hostile schemas; that is, believing
that bad traits cannot change is not the same as

7

believing that people in general are bad. However,
we have not yet presented evidence testing this
proposition. Therefore, we conducted an additional
study with Grade 9 students at the same school
that provided Sample 6 in the present meta-analysis
(see Table 1), N = 212. We measured overall negative schemas about people (three items, e.g., “Overall, how mean and hostile are people in school,”
“Overall, how much are people in your school out
to get you”; 1 = not at all, 5 = an extreme amount;
a > .8), in addition to an entity theory of personality, attributions of intent, and frequency of peer
victimization. An entity theory predicted greater
attributions of hostile intent when controlling for
these hostile schemas and for frequency of peer
victimization, r = .19, p < .01. Moreover, an entity
theory predicted hostile intent attributions even
among the subset of 97 students who reported largely nonhostile schemas (i.e., average of not at all
on the 5-point hostile schema measure), r = .20,
p < .05, again controlling for victimization. Thus,
implicit theories are distinct from hostile schemas.
Our studies revealed that the size of the effect of
an entity theory on attributions of hostile intent was
consistent but modest, roughly r = .18. How does
this result compare to extant theories of the origins
of the hostile attributional bias? To address this, we
compared our study’s effect size with the effects
highlighted in Dodge’s (2006) authoritative summary of hostile schemas and experiences that predict a hostile attributional bias (Burks et al., 1999;
Dodge et al., 1990; Dodge et al., 2002, MacBrayer
et al., 2003; Yeung & Leadbeater, 2007; —the latter
was substituted for Graham & Juvonen, 1998,
which was cited by Dodge, 2006, but did not report
the necessary effect size). This set of studies was
chosen by Dodge (2006) as representative of the
documented precursors of an attributional bias. Our
calculation showed that the effect of hostile inﬂuences on the attributional bias in past research ranged from r = .08 to r = .34, with a meta-analytic
average of r = .189, Z = 5.05, N = 1,362 (for hostile
schemas: r = .20; for hostile experiences: r = .17,
moderator Q(1) = .12, ns). Notably, this average
effect was not signiﬁcantly different from the effect
of implicit theories found in our studies, moderation test p > .50. Also note that the past studies
summarized by Dodge only included published
studies with signiﬁcant effects and likely constitutes
an upward bound on the average size of the effect.
If we restricted our meta-analysis of the studies we
conducted to only those that yielded a signiﬁcant
effect, we would obtain an effect of r = .25, which is
slightly larger than past studies of hostile schemas

8

Yeager, Miu, Powers, and Dweck

and experiences summarized by Dodge (2006).
Hence, the relation between seemingly nonhostile
implicit theories and the hostile attributional bias is
comparable to prominent examples of the relation
between this bias and hostile schemas and
experiences.
Do an Entity Theory and Attributions of Hostile Intent
Predict More Aggressive Reactions?
In 7 of our 11 tests (N = 1,102), we measured
aggressive desires following an ambiguous provocation. In these 7 tests, there was a signiﬁcant metaanalytic average effect of an entity theory on hostile
intent (a paths), r = .20, Z = 6.79, p < .0001, and on
aggressive desires (c paths), r = .23, Z = 6.61,
p < .0001 (effects shown in Figure 1). In addition,
conceptually replicating much past research, there
was a signiﬁcant effect of hostile intent on aggressive desires (b paths), r = .51, Z = 11.63, p < .0001.
Did Hostile Intent Attributions Mediate the Relation
Between an Entity Theory and Aggressive Desires?
On average, there was a signiﬁcant indirect (ab)
effect leading from an entity theory to aggressive
desires through hostile intent, r = .09, Z = 4.29,
p < .0001 (see Figure 1), and this was homogeneous
across the studies, Q(6) = 6.98, p = .32. For ﬁve of
the seven tests the effect of implicit theories was
reduced to nonsigniﬁcance when controlling for
intent. The average size of this indirect effect corresponds to a weighted average of 41% of the direct
(c) effect of an entity theory on aggressive desires.
This shows that a signiﬁcant and substantial proportion of the effect of an entity theory on aggressive

a

=
:r
th
Pa

,Z
.2

9
.7
=6

,p

1
00
<.

Hostile
Intent

b

Pa
th
:

r=

.5
1

,Z

=1

1.
63

,p

<.
00
1

desires was accounted for by the relation between
an entity theory and hostile intent attributions.
In sum, our ﬁndings are consistent with Dodge’s
(2006) claim that schemas will predict aggression
mediated through attributions of hostile intent. However, it extends this past theory by showing that a
seemingly nonhostile schema about the ﬁxedness of
traits can produce hostile intent attributions at, statistically, the same level that more explicitly hostile
schemas and experiences have in past research. As a
side note, our study was a methodological advance
because it was, to our knowledge, the ﬁrst or one of
the ﬁrst to meta-analyze mediation effects.

Study 2
Study 1 showed that adolescents who held more of
an entity theory of personality were more likely to
interpret ambiguous provocations from unknown
peers as arising from hostile intent. In turn, they
exhibited more aggressive desires. Study 1 was limited, however, in that it did not address the causal
direction of the relation between implicit theories
and attributions of hostile intent. Therefore, in
Study 2 we conducted an experiment that changed
adolescents’ implicit theories and then assessed the
effect of this change on their attributions.
As in Study 1, we intentionally included samples of
adolescents from different environments, each with
dramatically different levels of neighborhood hostility. The ﬁrst sample lived and attended school in an
urban section of Oakland, California. According FBI
ofﬁcial statistics (United States Department of Justice,
Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2011), in 2010, the
year of our study, Oakland had the fourth highest per
capita violent crime rate in the nation, with one violent crime for every 65 residents. The second sample
lived and attended school in a medium-sized city in
Georgia that had a much lower rate, at one violent
crime for every 250 residents, which is almost exactly
the national average. We predicted that changes in
implicit theories could affect attributions in both hostile contexts and in more nonhostile contexts.

c Path: r=.23, Z=6.61, p<.001

Entity
Theory

ab (Indirect) Path: r=.09, Z=4.22, p<.001

Aggressive
Desires

Figure 1. Meta-analytic summary of direct and indirect correlational effects of an entity (ﬁxed) theory of personality on aggressive desires, mediated by attributions of hostile intent (Study 1;
N = 1,102). r = meta-analytic correlation coefﬁcient. The metaanalysis of a paths depicted in Figure 1 includes only the subset
of studies that also measured aggressive desires and so it differs
from the meta-analytic a path reported in the text that included
all studies measuring implicit theories and hostile intent.

Method
Participants
Sample 1 (N = 20) was a racially diverse sample
of ninth-grade students from primarily low-income
households in Oakland, California. Seven percent
self-identiﬁed as White, 32% as Hispanic or Latino,
2% as Asian, and 38% as African American, while

Implicit Theories and Hostile Intent Attributions

the rest marked “Other.” Sixty-seven percent were
female. Sample 2 (N = 43) consisted of primarily
White, non-Hispanic seventh-grade students from
mid- to high-income families in a medium-sized city
in Georgia. Sixty-ﬁve percent self-identiﬁed as White,
3% as Hispanic or Latino, 3% as Asian, 5% as African
American, and the rest marked “Other.” Sixty-seven
percent were female. Participants came from studies
that were conducted only for the present purposes.
Procedure
Experimental manipulation. The incremental theory of personality manipulation was adapted from
previous investigations that have changed implicit
theories in this age group (Yeager et al., 2011;
Yeager, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, in press). The
treatment activity, which lasted roughly 15 min on
average, had three parts: (a) a brief and factually
accurate scientiﬁc article that described neuroscientiﬁc studies showing that people’s behaviors are
controlled by thoughts and feelings in their brains,
which have the constant potential for plasticity; (b)
notes from upperclassmen who described how they
endorsed a malleable view of people’s characteristics; and (c) an exercise in which students wrote
notes to future students drawing on scientiﬁc information to describe the malleability of people’s traits
(i.e., “self-persuasion”; Aronson, 1999; see Walton
& Cohen, 2011; Yeager & Walton, 2011). Importantly, nothing in the manipulation addressed attributions of hostile intent, and no emotions or
behaviors were explicitly endorsed. Moreover, the
intervention did not say that people would change,
only that there is the potential for change (indeed, a
content analysis of students’ writing samples found
almost no instances of saying that peers will
change, and numerous instances of saying that they
might or might not change).
A control group completed a parallel writing activity that emphasized the malleability of academic skills
such as study skills. This comparison group was used
to control for the possibility that simply receiving a
message about malleability or growth could have led
to our ﬁndings. Therefore, the present positive, hopeful control group constituted a rigorous test.

Measures
Tests of Equivalence of Manipulations
To show that the manipulations were parallel, we
compared the experimental and control manipulations
in terms of features unrelated to the experimental

9

message. That is, after completing the activities, participants were asked to rate how much they “enjoyed,”
“understood,” “tried their hardest to read,” and
“agreed with” the manipulation on a 5-point scale
(1 = not at all, 5 = a great deal).
Implicit Theories of Personality
To check the predicted effect of the manipulation
on changes in implicit theories, we measured an
entity theory as in Study 1.
Attributions of Hostile Intent
Participants read the same ambiguous provocation scenario described in Study 1. As in Study 1,
after reading the scenario participants rated on a
7-point scale how much they thought, “They were
being mean to me on purpose” and “They were trying to be mean to me” (1 = not at all, 7 = an extreme
amount), and these two questions were combined
by averaging them (as > .8 in both samples).
Reactions to Ambiguous Provocation
To provide a richer picture of the different psychologies evidenced by those who learned the
incremental theory of personality—one that was not
constrained or contaminated by the limited, negative choices offered by the desire for vengeance rating-scale measure used in Study 1—we asked
participants to write a free-response description of
their reactions to the scenario (answering the question: “How would you feel?”). Their responses were
reliably coded for positive, neutral, or negative
reactions toward the offending peer. Speciﬁcally,
each student’s entire open-ended response was
coded for the presence of statements that fell into
the positive or negative categories (percent agreement for each category > 92%; Krippendorff’s
alphas for each category = .86, .90) by two independent coders who were blind to hypotheses and
experimental condition. A detailed codebook and
procedure description is available on request. Some
participants’ responses were coded as negative
(24%) because they included at least one statement
that expressed negative emotions or desired behaviors toward the transgressor, such as anger or a
desire for revenge (e.g., they felt “like punching
them”) and contained no positive statements. Next,
some participants’ responses were coded as positive
(35%) because they involved positive reactions
toward the transgressor, such as trying to understand, empathize with, or prosocially confront the

10

Yeager, Miu, Powers, and Dweck

transgressor (e.g., “At least they thought about
helping me, but I guess they didn’t want to [be]
late”), and contained no negative statements. Some
participants’ responses did not include any statements that could be classiﬁed as positive or negative with regard to the transgressor and so they
were classiﬁed as neutral (35%; i.e., “I would ignore
it”; this also included negative responses that were
not directed toward the transgressor, e.g., “I would
be frustrated”). Last, some participants’ responses
were classiﬁed as ambivalent (6%) because their
responses had been coded as including both positive statements and negative statements. For analyses, participants’ responses were given ordered
categories such that higher values corresponded to
more negative statements (1 = negative: participant
wrote at least one negative statement and no positive statements, 0 = participant’s response was neutral or ambivalent, 1 = positive: participant wrote at
least one positive statement and no negative statements; see the Method section of Study 3 for validity evidence).

Results and Discussion
We conducted analyses using least squares and
ordered logistic regressions. No result was signiﬁcantly moderated by sample (all Sample 9 Condition
interaction, ts < 1, ps > .35) and so the subsamples
were combined for all analyses. As in Study 1, no
Sex 9 Condition interactions were found (ts < 1, ps >
.35). Regression models included a dummy variable
indicating sample, however, to account for variance
due to sample (models that did not control for sample
produced identical statistical signiﬁcance). Note that
all analyses were also rerun when controlling for
reported levels of peer victimization (see Study 1
for measures). As in Study 1, this had no effect on
any of our conclusions. Therefore, we report the
more parsimonious models that did not control for
victimization.

Preliminary Analyses
The experimental and control groups were
equivalent on preexperimental variables (sex, race,
and peer victimization; all ps > .30). Participants
rated the treatment and control group activities
equally in terms of enjoyment, ability to understand
the message, effort put forth in reading the message, and agreement with the message, all ts < 1.1,
ps > .30. Last, and most critically, the experimental
manipulation led to a lower belief in an entity

theory about people’s traits compared to the control
group, (control: M = 0.43, SD = 0.21; treatment:
M = 0.31, SD = 0.19), t(62) = 2.33, p = .02, d = .59.
Did the Incremental Theory of Personality Reduce
Attributions of Hostile Intent?
The experimental group, which learned a theory
that personality traits have the potential for change,
exhibited fewer attributions of hostile intent following
the ambiguous provocation scenario (control: M =
0.37, SD = 0.24; treatment: M = 0.22, SD = 0.18), t(62)
= 2.81, p = .007, d = .71. As noted, the treatment
effect was statistically the same size across the two
samples: Sample 1, t(19) = 1.85, p = .08, d = .84;
Sample 2, t(42) = 2.15, p = .04, d = .66; Sample 9
Condition interaction, t(59) = 0.87, p = 0.39.
Does an Incremental Theory of Personality Change
Responses to Ambiguous Provocations?
In an ordered logistic regression predicting negative versus positive reactions to the ambiguous
provocation scenario, the experimental condition
showed a lower probability of negative reactions
and a greater probability of positive reactions,
unstandardized logistic b = 1.05, SE = 0.49,
Z = 2.14, p = .03 (see Figure 2a). More concretely,
the experimental group was half as likely to spontaneously describe retaliatory aggression such as “I
would be [angry] and say foul stuff and probably
hit the person.” Instead of anger or aggression, the
experimental group was more likely to say they
would understand the peer’s actions, such as
“Everyone’s trying to get to class and so am I, no
one wants to be late, I would of [sic] done the
same.”
Test of Mediation
We next tested whether the changes in reactions
to the ambiguous provocation were mediated by
changes in attributions of hostile intent. In an
ordered logistic regression, attributions of hostile
intent predicted more negative and fewer positive
reactions to the provocation, b = 3.22, SE = 1.30,
Z = 2.49, p = .01. Next, in a model with both attributions of intent and experimental condition, intent
remained signiﬁcant, b = 2.70, SE = 1.34, Z = 2.01,
p = .04, but the experimental condition dropped to
nonsigniﬁcance, b = .75, SE = 0.52, Z = 1.45,
p = .15. In a causal mediation analysis (Imai et al.,
2010; Imai et al., 2011), the indirect effect of condition on the polytomous outcome mediated through

Implicit Theories and Hostile Intent Attributions
(b)
70%

70%

(a)

60%
40%

50%

Ordered Logistic p = .004

23%

42%

Positive

43%

42%

Neutral or Ambivalent

34%

16%

Negative

0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

Percent of Participants

50%

Ordered Logistic p = .03

10%
0%

Control (Malleability of Athletic Skills)
Experimental (Malleability of Personality)

30%

60%

Control (Malleability of Study Skills)
Experimental (Malleability of Personality)

20%

Percent of Participants

11

Responses to Ambiguous Pro vocation
(Study 2)

5%

22%

Positive

35%

44%

Neutral or Ambivalent

59%

34%

Negative

Responses to Ambiguous Pro vocation
(Study 3)

Figure 2. Effect of incremental (malleable) theory of personality manipulation on open-ended responses to an ambiguous peer provocation.
Positive = understanding or prosocial responses to the peer’s provocation; Negative = angry or vengeful responses to the peer’s provocation; Neutral or ambivalent = other responses or participants who mentioned both a positive and a negative response. Values are raw, unadjusted percentages. (a) Study 2, N = 63, a short-term (one class-session) experiment; (b) Study 3, N = 78, a longitudinal (8-month) intervention.

attributions of hostile intent was signiﬁcantly different from zero, indirect effect = .06 (Quasi-Bayesian 95% CI [ 1.65, .001]). Hence, it was in part by
reducing attributions of hostile intent that the incremental theory of personality manipulation reduced
negative reactions to the ambiguous provocation
scenario.

Study 3
Study 2 showed that changing implicit theories
toward more of an incremental view could reduce
attributions of hostile intent assessed a short time
later in an urban context and in a suburban context. However, an important question is whether
an incremental theory intervention can change
attributions of hostile intent and aggressive desires
over longer periods of time. As a ﬁrst test of this
possibility, we took advantage of an ongoing longitudinal experiment that was examining the
impact of an implicit theories intervention (nearly
identical to Study 2’s manipulation) on several
outcomes over the 1st year of high school. On the
ﬁnal survey for this study, we were able to
administer the ambiguous provocation scenario
employed in Study 2 and we assessed the effect of
an incremental theory on hostile intent and vengeful desires.

Method
Participants
The experiment was conducted with all ninthgrade students enrolled in Algebra 1 at a secondary
school in the San Francisco Bay Area (N = 82; all
students assented, and all but 4 participants provided
complete data, leaving N = 78 for analysis). Parental
consent and student assent were obtained for all participants. The student body was largely White or
Asian and relatively afﬂuent (44% White, 44% Asian
American, 12% Latino). As noted, this sample will
provide data to test other hypotheses, but, critically,
the data presented were collected expressly for this
study and have not appeared in any other manuscript. Next, although this suburban sample may have
been predicted to experience less of an attributional
bias based on past theory (Dodge, 2006), recall that
Studies 1 and 2 found the effect of implicit theories on
hostile intent attributions did not vary in strength
across urban and suburban samples, making this an
informative sample in which to conduct a ﬁrst test of
whether an implicit theories manipulation can produce lasting effects in at least one setting.
Procedure
Surveys were administered at baseline, during the
2nd week of school and again 2 days postintervention

12

Yeager, Miu, Powers, and Dweck

The same measure to assess students’ beliefs in
an entity theory of personality (described in Study
1) was administered 1 week preintervention, 2 days
postintervention, and on the year-end survey (for
analyses of the latter, see online Supporting Information).

said the peer was not at all being mean on purpose
and hence showed a completely nonhostile attribution—62%—is comparable with and not signiﬁcantly different from answers provided on an
identical measure by Study 1’s participants (e.g.,
the largely low-income, racial minority Sample 7
reported in Study 1, had a nonhostile attribution
rate of 54%). In this study, when the control and
treatment groups were combined, the posttreatment
attributional measure was highly skewed, with 71%
of students choosing the lowest point on the scale,
indicating that they believed the peer’s negative
action was completely accidental. Due to skew, we
dichotomized the hostile intent postexperimental
outcome such that a score of 0 indicated that a student perceived no hostile intent whatsoever (i.e.,
average of not at all mean on purpose) and a score
of 1 indicated a student perceived at least some
hostile intent (average greater than not at all; note
that Study 1’s and 2’s results were unchanged
when we reanalyzed them with a dichotomized
hostile intent variable).
Next, so as to test the potential causal relation suggested by the correlational tests in Study 1, we administered the Study 1 rating scale measure of a desire for
vengeance following the ambiguous hypothetical
provocation (asking, e.g., how much they would feel
like “hurting,” “getting back at,” or “punishing” the
transgressor; see Yeager et al., 2011, for validity data).
This continuous measure had high internal consistency reliability (a = .81) and was not skewed.
At the same time, we sought to replicate longitudinally Study 2’s effect of an incremental theory
manipulation on open-ended reactions to the provocation scenario. Therefore, we again asked participants to write free responses about how they would
feel after the provocation, and two independent coders (blind to condition and hypotheses) followed our
extensive coding process to reliably categorize the
free responses as positive, negative, or neutral or
ambivalent (percent agreement for each > 92%; Krippendorff’s as = .84, .84). In support of the validity
of this measure, it was signiﬁcantly correlated with
ratings of a desire for vengeance, r = .30, p = .009.

Attributions of Hostile Intent and Desire for Vengeance

Results and Discussion

Eight months after the intervention, we measured hostile intent attributions following the same
hypothetical scenario employed in Studies 1 and 2
(i.e., depicting an ambiguously intended collision
with a peer in the hallway). We note that although
the present sample was a relatively afﬂuent one,
the percent of students in the control group who

To reduce error variance, regressions in Study 3
included dummy variables for participant race, participant gender, and classroom, while also controlling for
baseline entity theories. These reduced the standard
errors associated with treatment effects, although models that did not control for any covariates produced a
virtually identical overall pattern of results.

(to obtain manipulation checks), as well as 8 months
later, in the last month of school (to measure the key
dependent variables). The intervention procedure
was as follows: During the 1st week of school,
Algebra 1 teachers gave an overview to both the
treatment and control groups of how the brain
changes and learns, and this provided background
for both the treatment and control messages. About
2 weeks later, students received envelopes (randomly assigned within classes) containing either a
treatment activity or a control activity, which they
completed silently during class time. The treatment
activity was identical to the treatment activity
described in Study 2 (i.e., it involved reading a
scientiﬁc article that summarized neuroscientiﬁc
information, reading quotes from upperclassmen,
and writing a persuasive message to future students
endorsing the incremental theory). Recall that this
activity made no mention of intent in general and
more speciﬁcally it did not address accidental
or ambiguous actions. Instead, it focused on the
function and malleability of the brain and the implications of this for understanding people’s character
traits.
The control activity was nearly identical to the
control activity employed in Study 2, except that it
endorsed a different malleable theory: one about
athletic skills, rather than study skills, which was
used in Study 2. This was done because an additional objective of this study (to be reported in
another manuscript) was to investigate the effect of
the intervention on academic performance, and so a
nonacademic control group was required.

Measures
Implicit Theories of Personality

Implicit Theories and Hostile Intent Attributions

Preliminary Analyses
Randomization was effective. There were no
baseline differences between the groups in terms of
gender, race, mother’s education, primary language
at home, eighth-grade math and English achievement, eighth-grade absences, belief in an entity
theory of personality, or peer exclusion or victimization (statistical tests available on request). Also, as
predicted, the incremental theory intervention led
students to express less of a belief in an entity theory of
personal traits (control M [covariate adjusted] = 2.86,
SD = 1.20; treatment M = 2.39, SD = 1.09), t(76) =
2.05, p = .04, d = .39, controlling for baseline levels.
Thus, our experiment constituted a fair test of whether
implicit theories could change attributions of hostile
intent.
Did the Intervention Affect Reactions to an Ambiguous
Provocation 8 Months Postintervention?
Experimental group participants, who learned
during the 1st month of school that people have the
potential to change, were signiﬁcantly less likely to
attribute a hypothetical peer’s negative action to hostile intent at the end of the school year, 8 months
later (control = 38%; experimental = 22%; percentages are raw, unadjusted values), unstandardized
logistic b = 1.13, SE = 0.56, Z = 1.99, p = .047.
Next, and perhaps more importantly, experimental
group participants also showed greatly lower ratings
of a desire for revenge 8 months later compared to
the control group, unstandardized b = .09,
SE = 0.03, t(76) = 2.72, p = .008, d = .62.
We predicted that the intervention would have
these effects because it led participants to hold less
of an entity theory compared to the control group,
and this is what a mediational analysis showed. An
entity theory of personality measured 1–2 days
postintervention predicted greater attributions of
hostile intent and desire for vengeance 8 months
postintervention, r = .25, p = .03, and r = .35,
p = .001, respectively. Crucially, the treatment effect
on immediate changes in an entity theory (1–2 days
postintervention) statistically mediated the longitudinal treatment effect on both attributions and
desire for vengeance 8 months postintervention,
indirect b = .03 (95% CI [ .09, .001]), indirect
b = .02 (95% CI [ .05, .001]), respectively, and
in both cases the treatment effect on these dependent variables was reduced to nonsigniﬁcance
when accounting for immediate change in entity
theories. This mediational result supports our claim
that it was the immediate difference in implicit the-

13

ories produced by the intervention that led to longterm effects on hostile intent attributions and a
desire for vengeance.
Did Attributions of Hostile Intent Mediate the
Intervention’s Effects on the Desire for Vengeance?
Next, we sought to replicate Study 1’s ﬁnding
that the effect of implicit theories on attributions of
hostile intent would mediate the relation with the
desire for vengeance. As expected, attributions of
intent were highly signiﬁcantly correlated with
higher ratings of a desire for vengeance, r = .41,
p < .001. In a formal test of mediation, there was a
signiﬁcant indirect effect of the intervention on ratings of vengeance mediated by attributions of intent
b = .03 (95% CI [ .08, .005]), and this amounted
to roughly 32% of the effect of the intervention on
vengeance. In this model, the intervention effect on
vengeance was reduced to marginal signiﬁcance,
b = .06, t(76) = 1.931, p = .058. Hence, a signiﬁcant proportion of the relation between the incremental theory intervention and ratings of a desire
for vengeance was accounted for by the reduction
in attributions of hostile intent.
Replication of Effect on Open-Ended Comments
Finally, we sought to replicate Study 2’s effect on
open-ended-positive and -negative reactions to the
provocation scenario. This analysis showed that the
experimental group students wrote more positive and
fewer negative free responses than control students at
the end of the year, ordered logistic b = 1.47,
SE = 0.51, t(76) = 2.93, p = .004. More concretely,
the experimental group was 43% less likely to write
negative, angry responses to the scenario 8 months
postintervention (control = 59%; experimental = 34%;
see Figure 2b), such as “I would be extremely angry”
or “I would call him names.” And the intervention
group was more than 4 times more likely to write
positive, understanding responses 8 months postintervention (control = 5%; experimental = 22%; see
Figure 2b), such as “I would ﬁrst expect them to say
sorry and I myself would say sorry to them. I would
not be that mad because they were in a hurry to get to
class and we were in a hurry.”
Summary
In sum, Study 3 provided causal evidence for
Study 1’s correlational relation between implicit
theories and ratings of a desire for vengeance, mediated by the hostile attributional bias. In addition,

14

Yeager, Miu, Powers, and Dweck

Study 3 replicated the experimental ﬁndings in
Study 2 over an entire school year and in doing so
provided early evidence for a new method to supplement existing strategies to reduce attributions of
hostile intent in real-world settings.

General Discussion
As we noted at the outset, the hostile attributional
bias (Dodge, 1980, 2006) has been one of the most
generative and inﬂuential constructs in the study of
reactive aggression, and its discovery has led to
many successful interventions that reduce youth
aggression in real-world settings (Wilson & Lipsey,
2006). Yet to more effectively prevent the development of this attributional bias—and to more effectively reduce it throughout the life span—we require
a fuller picture of its origins. Although past research
has shown that negative experiences (such as abuse
or victimization) and hostile schemas (such as the
chronic accessibility of aggressive thoughts) can predict the hostile attributional bias, we sought to
expand the theoretical account of its development in
adolescence to include beliefs that need not have
arisen from negative or hostile inﬂuences. Speciﬁcally, we proposed that implicit theories of personality—underlying beliefs about whether personality
traits are ﬁxed or are malleable—could shape adolescents’ patterns of attributions following ambiguous
provocations and predict their aggressive reactions.
In a meta-analytic summary of 11 original correlational tests of the hypothesis, in an experiment replicated in two independent samples, and in a
longitudinal intervention, we found support for this
proposal. Study 1’s tests showed that an entity theory
of personality predicted attributions of hostile intent
nearly as strongly as (and not signiﬁcantly different
from) the more hostile schemas and experiences that
have been highlighted in summaries of past research
(Dodge, 2006). An entity theory predicted hostile
intent attributions even when controlling for adolescents’ past experiences with peer victimization,
suggesting that this link was not due to a shared relation with peer victimization. Study 1 also showed that
implicit theories predicted hostile attributions
equally for males and females, for students from
communities with higher levels of violence and
from communities with lower levels of violence, and
even for students who reported a complete absence
of hostile schemas about people in general.
In Study 2 we addressed the causal question
more directly by showing that experimentally
changing implicit theories toward more of an

incremental view could substantially reduce attributions of hostile intent during the same testing
session. This was true both in a suburban neighborhood with low levels of violence and in an urban
neighborhood with higher levels of violence. This
suggests that even in generally nonhostile environments an incremental theory of personality can
ameliorate an attributional precursor to aggressive
behavior, and it shows that even in a context with
higher levels of violence adolescents’ hostile intent
attributions could be changed. Study 3 extended
this research by showing that an incremental theory, learned in only two class sessions at the beginning of the school year, could produce more benign
intent attributions 8 months postintervention, and,
because of this, greatly reduce the desire for
revenge at the end of the school year. Note that
Study 3 was only an initial test of this intervention
in a high-income suburban school, and it will be
important to continue to examine its effects on
actual aggressive behavior among students from
more hostile neighborhoods in the future (although
see Yeager et al., in press). Nevertheless, as Figure 2b
shows, even the relatively afﬂuent sample in Study
3 showed substantial negative responses to the
provocation scenario, suggesting that interventions
may be beneﬁcial for such samples.
Because entity beliefs about traits can increase
the probability of aggressive responses to provocations, it is possible that even adolescents who live
in largely nonhostile environments, but nevertheless
learn that traits are ﬁxed, can have a latent vulnerability that leads them to desire violent revenge
toward peers who transgress against them. Of
course, this desire for revenge may remain latent as
long as adolescents successfully employ self-regulation skills to restrain their desires (DeWall &
Anderson, 2011). Yet this hidden propensity for
aggressive fantasies is alarming because it may go
unaddressed. The present ﬁndings might lead us to
think more broadly about the factors that contribute
to youth aggression and about methods to prevent
it, even in populations not typically thought of as
“at risk” for hostile attributional biases.
We also hope our ﬁndings will lead the ﬁeld to
think carefully about the messages that we as a
society convey to students about the ﬁxedness of
people’s character traits. New research might examine what messages parents, media, teachers, and
caregivers give to children and adolescents about
the nature of traits, and might test whether changing those messages might promote greater resilience
over time. For instance, in an effort to boost selfesteem, parents or teachers may use ﬁxed labels to

Implicit Theories and Hostile Intent Attributions

comfort socially excluded teens (e.g., “don’t worry,
you’re a good person”) and to describe aggressive
peers (e.g., “they’re bad people” or “they’re evil”)
so as to ward off victims’ self-blaming attributions.
These messages, although designed to be helpful,
may actually be fostering more vengeful responses
to future social conﬂicts by leading students to live
in an entity theory framework (cf. Mueller &
Dweck, 1998; Rattan, Good, & Dweck, 2012, for
analogous research in the academic domain).
Hence, by directing future research toward understanding the seemingly nonhostile or purportedly
positive messages from parents or educators, we
may uncover unexpected psychological causes of
aggression.
What might be some ways of comforting children and adolescents without implying that the
aggressor is someone who is inherently bad and
cannot change? Research has not conclusively
answered this question. However, based on the
present ﬁndings we propose that it could be helpful
to emphasize that people do not bully others
because they are unchangeably “bad,” but because
of their thoughts and feelings—thoughts and feelings that live in the brain and that have the potential to change. For instance, a child could be
reminded that some peers bully others because they
are insecure about their social status and see
bullying as a way to climb the social hierarchy. In
fact, compelling research demonstrates that these
insecurities produce bullying (Cohen & Prinstein,
2006; Faris & Felmlee, 2011). More research is
needed to arrive at effective methods for deﬂecting
self-blaming attributions and acknowledging the
injustice of peer aggression without incurring the
cost of promoting an entity theory of traits.
Next, although we have focused on the pathway
from implicit theories to aggression through hostile
intent attributions, we do not believe that these hostile attributions are the only mediator between
implicit theories and aggression. Our past research
and theory suggests that those with more of an
entity theory, in addition to the transgressorfocused attributions and emotions, also experience
more negative self-focused emotions and attributions. For instance, in the face of social adversity,
those with more of an entity theory are more likely
to think that perhaps they are not likable people
(Erdley et al., 1997), to say they felt bad about
themselves (Yeager et al., 2011, Study 1), and to
report feeling more ashamed (Yeager et al., 2011,
Study 3). Yeager et al. (2011) showed that these
negative feelings about the self, in turn, led to a

15

desire for vengeance, an effect that was independent of negative attributions about the transgressor.
Thus, we view implicit theories as a broad construct
that can have multiple pathways to aggression.
The present research may have implications for
practice. Although past research has consistently
shown that a hostile attributional bias can predict
vengeful responses among older adolescents in
middle school and high school (a conclusion supported by the present studies as well), past interventions designed to change this bias have been
less consistently successful in reducing aggression
in older age groups than among younger, elementary school-aged children (e.g., Metropolitan Area
Child Study Research Group, 2002; for a meta-analysis, see Wilson & Lipsey, 2006). Future research
can determine whether our implicit theories intervention can serve as a helpful addition to socialinformation processing interventions for adolescents.
Limitations
A notable limitation of this research, like much
of the research on the hostile attributional bias, is
that it relied on self-report measures of attributions
and aggressive desires. Because these attributions
are a subjective interpretation of an ambiguous
stimulus, self-report is the preferred method to elicit
them (e.g., Dodge, 1980, Study 2), and it often
yields useful predictors of aggressive behavior
(e.g., Pettit et al., 2010). Nevertheless, it will be
important to continue to document the impact of
implicit theories of personality on the behavioral
consequences of these attributions. Interestingly,
some research is beginning to ﬁnd that changes in
implicit theories can result in differences in behavioral aggression among low-income students
attending an urban public high school (Yeager
et al., in press). Hence, we think the results shown
here for self-reported desire for vengeance are
likely to be found in future analyses of behavioral
aggression.
Next, the conclusions of the present research are
limited to judgments of peers about whom an adolescent has no prior information. As noted, this was
done to replicate the procedures used in classic
studies (e.g., Dodge, 1980). However, attributions of
intent can differ when considering peers about
whom one already feels positively or negatively
(Peets, Hodges, Kikas, & Salmivalli, 2007). Therefore, future studies might vary the participants’
prior knowledge of the provoking peer and assess
differential effects of implicit theories.

16

Yeager, Miu, Powers, and Dweck

Conclusion
Social-cognitive theories of aggression have typically assumed that aggressive behavior comes from
aggressive inputs. This assumption dates from the
earliest social learning theories (Bandura, Ross, &
Ross, 1961), which emphasized viewing and internalizing aggressive behavior, to the contemporary
social information processing and general aggression models (Anderson & Bushman, 2001; Bushman
& Huesmann, 2010; DeWall and Anderson, 2011;
Dodge et al., 2006), which have highlighted aggressive inputs such as hostile environments, aggressive
scripts, and violent media. As noted, we do not
debate these ﬁndings, but we also believe it is critical to understand that aggressive behaviors come
from aggressive interpretations of social stimuli.
These interpretations can arise from a variety of
inputs, perhaps even well-intentioned, seemingly
helpful messages from valued caregivers who convey an entity theory of traits. When we shift our
perspective to focus on overall mindsets that give
rise to aggressive interpretations and on the messages that reinforce them, then we may be able to
more fully map out the range of experiences and
messages that can prepare adolescents to respond
resiliently to life’s social adversities.
References
Anderson, C. A., & Bushman, B. J. (2001). Effects of violent video games on aggressive behavior, aggressive
cognition, aggressive affect, physiological arousal, and
prosocial behavior: A meta-analytic review of the scientiﬁc literature. Psychological Science, 12, 353–359.
Aronson, E. (1999). The power of self-persuasion. American Psychologist, 54, 875–884.
Aronson, J., Fried, C., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the
effects of stereotype threat on African American college
students by shaping theories of intelligence. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 113–125.
Bandura, A., Ross, D., & Ross, A. (1961). Transmission of
aggression through imitation of aggressive models.
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 63, 575–582.
Baumeister, R. F., Vohs, K. D., DeWall, C. N., & Zhang,
L. (2007). How emotion shapes behavior: Feedback,
anticipation, and reﬂection, rather than direct causation.
Personality and Social Psychology Review, 11, 167–203.
Blackwell, L. S., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007).
Implicit theories of intelligence predict achievement
across an adolescent transition: A longitudinal study and
an intervention. Child Development, 78, 246–263.
Burks, S. V., Laird, R. D., Dodge, K. A., Pettit, G. S., &
Bates, J. E. (1999). Knowledge structures, social information processing, and children’s aggressive behavior.
Social Development, 8, 220–236.

Bushman, B. J., & Huesmann, L. R. (2010). Aggression. In
S. T. Fiske, D. T. Gilbert, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of
social psychology (5th ed., pp. 833–863). New York: Wiley.
Chiu, C., Hong, Y., & Dweck, C. S. (1997). Lay dispositionism and implicit theories of personality. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 19–30.
Cohen, G. L., & Prinstein, M. J. (2006). Peer contagion of
aggression and health-risk behavior among adolescent
males: An experimental investigation of effects on public conduct and private attitudes. Child Development, 77,
967–983.
DeWall, C. N., & Anderson, C. A. (2011). The general
aggression model. In M. Mikulincer & P. R. Shaver
(Eds.), Understanding and reducing aggression, violence,
and their consequences (pp. 15–33). Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Dodge, K. A. (1980). Social cognition and children’s
aggressive behavior. Child Development, 51, 162–170.
Dodge, K. A. (2006). Translational science in action: Hostile
attributional style and the development of aggressive
behavior problems. Development and Psychopathology, 18,
791–814.
Dodge, K. A., Bates, J. E., & Pettit, G. S. (1990). Mechanisms in the cycle of violence. Science, 250, 1678–1683.
Dodge, K. A., Coie, J. D., & Lynam, D. (2006). Aggression
and antisocial behavior in youth. In W. Damon, (Series
Ed.) & N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and personality development (6th ed., pp. 719–788). New York: Wiley.
Dodge, K. A., Laird, R., Lochman, J. E., & Zelli, A. (2002).
Multidimensional latent-construct analysis of children’s
social information processing patterns: Correlations
with aggressive behavior problems. Psychological Assessment, 14, 60–73.
Dweck, C. S. (2006). Mindset: The new psychology of success.
New York: Random House.
Dweck, C. S., Chiu, C., & Hong, Y. (1995). Implicit theories and their role in judgments and reactions: A world
from two perspectives. Psychological Inquiry, 6, 267–285.
Erdley, C., Cain, K., Loomis, C., Dumas-Hines, F., &
Dweck, C. S. (1997). The relations among children’s
social goals, implicit personality theories and response
to social failure. Developmental Psychology, 33, 263–272.
Erdley, C. A., & Dweck, C. S. (1993). Children’s implicit
personality theories as predictors of their social judgments. Child Development, 64, 863–878.
Faris, R., & Felmlee, D. (2011). Status struggles: Network
centrality and gender segregation in same- and cross-gender aggression. American Sociological Review, 76, 48–73.
Graham, S., & Juvonen, J. (1998). Self-blame and peer victimization in middle school: An attributional analysis.
Developmental Psychology, 34, 587–599.
Heider, F., & Simmel, M. (1944). An experimental study
of apparent behavior. American Journal of Psychology, 57,
243–259.
Hong, Y., Chiu, C., Dweck, C. S., & Sacks, R. (1997). Implicit theories and evaluative processes in person cognition.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 33, 296–323.

Implicit Theories and Hostile Intent Attributions
Hudley, C., & Graham, S. (1993). An attributional intervention to reduce peer-directed aggression among African-American boys. Child Development, 64, 124–138.
Imai, K., Keele, L., & Tingley, D. (2010). A general
approach to causal mediation analysis. Psychological
Methods, 15, 309–334.
Imai, K., Keele, L., Tingley, D., & Yamamoto, T. (2011).
Unpacking the black box of causality: Learning about
causal mechanisms from experimental and observational
studies. American Political Science Review, 105, 765–789.
Levy, S. R., & Dweck, C. S. (1999). The impact of children’s static versus dynamic conceptions of people on
stereotype formation. Child Development, 70, 1163–1180.
MacBrayer, E. K., Milich, R., & Hundley, M. (2003). Attributional biases in aggressive children and their mothers. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 112, 698–708.
Mueller, C. M., & Dweck, C. S. (1998). Praise for intelligence can undermine children’s motivation and performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75,
33–52.
Peets, K., Hodges, E. V. E., Kikas, E., & Salmivalli, C.
(2007). Hostile attributions and behavioral strategies in
children: Does relationship type matter? Developmental
Psychology, 43, 889–900.
Pettit, G. S., Lansford, J. E., Malone, P. S., Dodge, K. A.,
& Bates, J. E. (2010). Domain speciﬁcity in relationship
history, social-information processing, and violent
behavior in early adulthood. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 98, 190–200.
R Development Core Team. (2008). R: A language and
environment for statistical computing. Vienna: R Foundation for Statistical Computing.
Rattan, A., Good, C., & Dweck, C. S. (2012). “It’s ok—
Not everyone can be good at math”: Instructors with
an entity theory comfort (and demotivate) students.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48, 731–737.
Schooler, J. (2011). Unpublished results hide the decline
effect. Nature, 470, 437.
Simmons, J. P., Nelson, L. D., & Simonsohn, U. (2011). Falsepositive psychology. Psychological Science, 22, 1359–1366.
United States Department of Justice, Federal Bureau
of Investigation. (2011). Crime in the United States, 2010.
Retrieved January 22, 2012, from http://www.fbi.gov/
about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-in-the-u.s/2010/crime-in-the-u.s.
-2010/violent-crime/violent-crime
Viechtbauer, W. (2010). Conducting meta-analyses in R
with the metafor package. Journal of Statistical Software,
36, 1–48.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A brief socialbelonging intervention improves academic and health

17

outcomes of minority students. Science, 331, 1447–
1451.
Williams, K. D. (2009). Ostracism: A temporal need-threat
model. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 41,
275–314.
Williams, K. S., Yeager, D. S., Cheung, C. K. T., & Choi,
W. (2012). Cyberball (version 4.0) [Software]. Retrieved
January 10, 2012, from https://cyberball.wikispaces.com
Wilson, S. J., & Lipsey, M. W. (2006). The effects of school-based
social information processing interventions on aggressive
behavior, Part I: Universal programs. A Campbell Collaboration Systematic Review. Retrieved January 10, 2012, from
www.campbellcollaboration.org/lib/download/73/
Yeager, D. S., & Krosnick, J. (2011). Does mentioning
“some people” and “other people” in a survey question
increase the accuracy of adolescents’ self-reports? Developmental Psychology, 47, 1674–1679.
Yeager, D. S., & Krosnick, J. (2012). Does mentioning
“some people” and “other people” in an attitude question improve measurement quality? Public Opinion
Quarterly, 76, 131–141.
Yeager, D. S., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (in
press). An implicit theories of personality intervention
reduces adolescent aggression in response to victimization and exclusion. Child Development.
Yeager, D. S., Trzesniewski, K. H., Tirri, K., Nokelainen,
P., & Dweck, C. S. (2011). Adolescents’ implicit theories
predict desire for vengeance after peer conﬂicts: Correlational and experimental evidence. Developmental Psychology, 47, 1090–1107.
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. (2011). Social-psychological
interventions in education: They’re not magic. Review of
Educational Research, 81, 267–301.
Yeung, R. S., & Leadbeater, B. J. (2007). Does hostile attributional bias for relational provocations mediate the
short-term association between relational victimization
and aggression in preadolescence? Journal of Youth and
Adolescence, 36, 973.

Supporting Information
Additional supporting information may be found in
the online version of this article at the publisher’s
website:
Table S1. Summary of Correlational Relationships Between Implicit Theories, Attributions of
Hostile Intent, and Aggressive Desires Across Eight
Samples and Eleven Studies (Study 1).

