APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
2014, Vol. 106, No. 6, 000

© 2014 American Psychological Association
0022-3514/14/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/a0036335

The Far-Reaching Effects of Believing People Can Change: Implicit
Theories of Personality Shape Stress, Health, and Achievement
During Adolescence
AQ: au
AQ: 1

David Scott Yeager

Rebecca Johnson

University of Texas at Austin

National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Brian James Spitzer

AQ:2, 3

Kali H. Trzesniewski

New York University

University of California, Davis

Joseph Powers and Carol S. Dweck
Stanford University

The belief that personality is fixed (an entity theory of personality) can give rise to negative reactions to social
adversities. Three studies showed that when social adversity is common—at the transition to high school—an
entity theory can affect overall stress, health, and achievement. Study 1 showed that an entity theory of
personality, measured during the 1st month of 9th grade, predicted more negative immediate reactions to
social adversity and, at the end of the year, greater stress, poorer health, and lower grades in school. Studies
2 and 3, both experiments, tested a brief intervention that taught a malleable (incremental) theory of
personality—the belief that people can change. The incremental theory group showed less negative reactions
to an immediate experience of social adversity and, 8 months later, reported lower overall stress and physical
illness. They also achieved better academic performance over the year. Discussion centers on the power of
targeted psychological interventions to effect far-reaching and long-term change by shifting interpretations of
recurring adversities during developmental transitions.
Keywords: implicit theories, stress, health, ostracism, psychological interventions
Supplemental materials: http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0036335.supp

Future (Gale, Canton, & Zemeckis, 1985) depict teens as indelibly
marked as “losers,” “jocks,” or “bullies”—labels that are thought
to haunt them or buoy them throughout high school and into
adulthood. Contemporary news outlets reinforce this belief. For
instance, Newsweek Magazine stated that “the labels we get as
teenagers shape the rest of our lives” (Dailey, 2010, p. 1), while
New York Magazine explained “why you never truly leave high
school” (Senior, 2013, p. 1). Are these beliefs innocuous or could
they be harmful? It is possible that if a teen believed that social
attributes were set for life in high school, their worries about these
attributes, whether founded or unfounded, could have negative
long-term consequences. And perhaps these consequences could
extend beyond their social lives into other domains, such as overall
life stress, physical health or academic achievement.
Past research has shown that implicit theories of personality—
beliefs about whether people’s attributes are fixed or are malleable— have domain-specific effects (e.g., Chiu, Dweck, Tong, &
Fu, 1997; Chiu, Hong, & Dweck, 1997; Yeager, Trzesniewski, &
Dweck, 2013; Yeager, Trzesniewski, Tirri, Nokelainen, & Dweck,
2011; see Molden & Dweck, 2006; also see Finkel, Burnette, &
Scissors, 2007; Knee, 1998). Across a variety of situations and
populations, those who hold more of an entity theory of personality—the belief that personal characteristics are fixed—show more
negative reactions to social adversities such as exclusion (see

In America, the high school years are often thought of as a time
when a person’s social standing becomes set for life. Iconic films
such as The Breakfast Club (Tanen & Hughes, 1985) or Back to the

David Scott Yeager, Department of Psychology, University of Texas at
Austin; Rebecca Johnson, Department of Bioethics, National Institutes of
AQ: 31 Health, Bethesda, Maryland; Brian James Spitzer, Steinhardt School of Culture, Education, and Human Development, New York University; Kali H.
Trzesniewski, Department of Human Development, University of California,
Davis; Joseph Powers, Graduate School of Education, Stanford University;
AQ: 32 Carol S. Dweck, Department of Psychology, Stanford University.
Support for the conduct and reporting of this research was provided by the
Thrive Foundation for Youth, the Spencer Foundation, and the Raikes Foundation. We thank the students and teachers involved in this research for their
cooperation. We also thank Cary Catching, April House, Ahmad Saleh,
Jennifer McDonald, Kerry Morrissey, Shannon Morrissey, April Scott, Hector
Villalpando, Adriana Miu, Terry Yu, and Alexandria Ordway for their help
collecting data and Greg Walton, Geoff Cohen, and members of the DweckWalton lab for their extensive comments. All remaining errors are the authors’
own. The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to David
Scott Yeager, 108 East Dean Keeton Stop A8000, Austin, TX 78712-1043.
E-mail: dyeager@utexas.edu
1

AQ: 4

AQ: 5

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

2

YEAGER ET AL.

Yeager & Dweck, 2012). For instance, children and adolescents
with more of an entity theory react to social exclusion by feeling
worse about themselves (Yeager et al., 2011; see also Rudolph,
2010) and making more self-blaming attributions, such as “maybe
I’m not a likable person” (Erdley, Cain, Loomis, Dumas-Hines, &
Dweck, 1997). Furthermore, experimental manipulations have
shown this is a causal process. Teaching an incremental theory of
personality—the belief that people have the potential to change—
reduces negative reactions to social adversity, including shame and
aggressive retaliation (Yeager, Miu, Powers, & Dweck, 2013;
Yeager et al., 2011). Overall, this research has found consistent
effects of implicit theories of personality on relevant measures of
hostile social cognition and behavior.
However, the full importance of these findings has not yet been
determined because it is not known how far-reaching these effects
might be. It is possible that implicit theories—involving beliefs
about whether people’s attributes are fixed or are malleable—
could cause more global, long-term patterns of adjustment in areas
that on their surface have very little to do with perceptions of
personality traits. We suggest that implicit theories may create an
interpretive framework that, during times of social difficulty, could
have consequences for diverse domains of functioning. For instance, the transition to high school is laden with social adversities
such as peer exclusion (Barber & Olsen, 2004; Crosnoe, 2011),
and it is also a time during which stress increases while health and
achievement decline (Benner, 2011; Haugland, Wold, Stevenson,
Aaroe, & Woynarowska, 2001; Sundblad, Jansson, Saartok, Renström, & Engström, 2008). Stress, health, and underachievement
are outcomes that independently represent major research priorities, difficult to understand and address in their own right. Yet
implicit theories might tap into a social-cognitive “hub” from
which these outcomes emerge (also see G. L. Cohen & Sherman,
2014; Inzlicht & Kang, 2010; Walton & Cohen, 2011). To our
knowledge, no previous theory or data have shown a belief about
the malleability of social attributes simultaneously has an influence on all of these consequential outcomes.

Implicit Theories Affect Coping and Resilience During
Times of Adversity
Individuals can have implicit theories about a variety of human
attributes, including intellectual ability (Blackwell, Trzesniewski,
& Dweck, 2007) and social characteristics, such as personality
(Chiu, Hong, & Dweck, 1997; Yeager et al., 2011), moral character (Chiu, Dweck, Tong, & Fu, 1997), or shyness (Beer, 2002;
also see Finkel et al., 2007; Rudolph, 2010). Broadly, implicit
theories in these domains create psychological worlds or “meaning
systems” that affect self-regulation and behavior by shaping how
information is processed (Molden & Dweck, 2006).
When individuals are not experiencing any difficulty, implicit
theories are not strongly predictive of self-regulation and behavior
(for a meta-analysis, see Burnette, O’Boyle, VanEpps, Pollack, &
Finkel, 2013). Just as the belief that intelligence is fixed is not
threatening when school is easy (Blackwell et al., 2007), the belief
that people’s socially relevant characteristics are fixed is not likely
to lead to helplessness when there is no threat to one’s social status
(see Chen, DeWall, Poon, & Chen, 2012). However, during times
of difficulty, the different psychological worlds created by entity
versus incremental theories can lead to divergent coping and

resilience-related behaviors (Blackwell et al., 2007; see Yeager &
Dweck, 2012; also see Mueller & Dweck, 1998). In response to
exclusion or bullying, an entity theory—with its focus on static
traits and its tendency to view small behaviors as diagnostic of
global traits— can lead to the judgment that those who behave
aggressively are “bad people” and that a rejected person is “a
loser” (Erdley et al., 1997; Erdley & Dweck, 1993; Yeager et al.,
2011). These types of attributions compromise resilience by putting individuals in a world in which negative people or circumstances seem set in stone (Graham & Juvonen, 1998). As a result,
individuals with more of an entity theory tend to experience more
shame, harbor grudges, and seek aggressive revenge (Yeager et al.,
2011; Yeager, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2013; also see Finkel et
al., 2007).
Nearly all this research, however, has focused on implicit theories and resilience within a given domain, such as the effect of
implicit theories of intelligence on academic achievement (Blackwell et al., 2007; for a meta-analysis, see Burnette et al., 2013) or
the effect of implicit theories of socially relevant personality traits
on aggression in response to a social conflict (e.g., Yeager et al.,
2011; Yeager, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2013; also see Chen et al.,
2012). The present research extends these ideas by suggesting that
when individuals are in a developmental period during which
social adversity is chronic and widespread, then there may be
important spillover effects of implicit theories of personality into a
number of discrete domains of functioning (cf. Inzlicht & Kang,
2010). While it would be possible to test this hypothesis during any
such developmental period, below we outline why the transition to
high school is one appropriate period during which to do this.

The Transition to High School Is an Appropriate Time
to Measure and Change Implicit Theories
All life transitions have the potential to affect a person’s social
life, but the transition to high school can be especially difficult for
several reasons. First, moving into high school frequently disrupts
social networks, as old friendships are lost and new ones must be
created (Cairns & Cairns, 1994). For instance, during the first year
of high school, roughly 50% of casual friendships are different
from 1 month to the next (Chan & Poulin, 2007). This can make
social status precarious. Students often turn to aggression and
exclusion as a means of shoring up their social status (G. L. Cohen
& Prinstein, 2006; Faris & Felmlee, 2011; see Pellegrini & Long,
2002). In the face of this social reality, adolescents can understandably be anxious about threats to their social status coming
from exclusion or other forms of aggression, even if they themselves are not directly victimized (Juvonen & Graham, 2014).
Second, experience-sampling studies also suggest that adolescents become preoccupied with peer relationships. These studies
find that the percentage of time thinking about peer relationships
rises dramatically as teens move into high school (e.g., Richards,
Crowe, Larson, & Swarr, 1998).
Third, the threat that social adversity poses may be heightened
by the social-cognitive changes that lead adolescents to interpret
adversity in more problematic ways. High school-aged adolescents, relative to children or younger adolescents, increasingly
come to believe that social attributes are fixed entities that cannot
change (e.g., Killen, Kelly, Richardson, & Jampol, 2010). For
instance, older adolescents rely more on traits such as niceness or

AQ: 6

AQ: 7

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

IMPLICIT THEORIES, STRESS, HEALTH, AND ACHIEVEMENT

meanness as a way of classifying peers, relative to younger children (e.g., Birnbaum, Deeb, Segall, Ben-Eliyahu, & Diesendruck,
2010; Diesendruck & haLevi, 2006). Thus, adolescents entering
high school are both in a context that requires them to be more
vigilant to threats to their social status, and they hold more implicit
theories that make these threats seem more constant.
In summary, the changes common to the transition to high
school—the increased uncertainty of peer relationships, the heightened preoccupation with peer relationships, and the growing view
of personality traits as fixed—make it an appropriate developmental period to test whether the effects of implicit theories of personality generalize beyond reactions to social adversity and extend
to adjustment in multiple domains of functioning.

Stress, Health, and Achievement
Here we review the rationale for our specific predictions regarding the effects of implicit theories on stress, health, and achievement during the transition to high school.

Stress
Stress is defined as the sense that the demands in one’s environment are greater than one’s ability to cope with them (Lazarus
& Folkman, 1984), and past research has found that stress is
greatest when ambiguity and uncertainty about social status are
high, such as when social hierarchies are uprooted (for a review of
the primate and human literature, see Sapolsky, 2005; also see
Gould, 2003). This perfectly describes adolescent life during the
transition to high school (Juvonen & Graham, 2014). However, not
all adolescents will experience the transition to high school as
equally stressful. Social-cognitive theories of development emphasize that adverse experiences, such peer exclusion or victimization,
do not always undermine long-term adjustment. This is because
the interpretations of these adversities matter (Olson & Dweck,
2008; for a classic formulation in the context of depression, see
Beck, 1967). From this social-cognitive perspective, adolescents
who draw problematic conclusions from their social adversities—
for instance, believing exclusion means they are a “loser” who will
never be included—will tend to appraise them as more stressful.
Hence, life overall might be experienced as more stressful for high
school adolescents who interpret social failures through the lens of
an entity theory (e.g., Erdley et al., 1997). If so, then perhaps an
intervention designed to teach adolescents a different interpretation of adversity— one growing out of an incremental theory of
personality— could reduce overall levels of stress in life.

Physical Health
The social adversities common in unstable social hierarchies
also pose a greater likelihood of poor physical health (see Sapolsky, 2005). This is because chronic stress can produce physiological changes that undermine the immune system (see Miller, Chen,
& Cole, 2009; Sapolsky, 2005). Not surprisingly, then, largesample correlational studies find that experiences of peer social
adversity during childhood or adolescence predict poorer health
(Gini & Pozzoli, 2009), and this effect can persist long into
adulthood (Wolke, Copeland, Angold, & Costello, 2013). Additionally, blaming one’s own character for social difficulties is

3

associated with physical health symptoms (see Dickerson, Gruenewald, & Kemeny, 2011). Thus, it is possible that an intervention targeting implicit theories, which lessens negative reactions
such as shame when social status comes under attack (Yeager et
al., 2011), could, over time, result in reports of better health among
teens making the transition to high school.

Academic Achievement
Finally, social adversities such as exclusion could undermine
academic achievement for several reasons. Hormones commonly
elicited by social stressors such as peer dominance can have a
direct effect on the brain’s ability to form connections and create
new memories following a learning task (see Lupien, Maheu, Tu,
Fiocco, & Schramek, 2007). In addition, when social threats are
chronic—as they often are during the transition to high school—
the vigilance required to monitor one’s social status might monopolize attention, impairing the ability to focus on academic content
(Guinote, 2007a, 2007b), engage in abstract learning (Smith &
Trope, 2006), and make strategic decisions that benefit long-term
self-interests (Smith, Jostman, Galinsky, & van Dijk, 2008). Furthermore, ninth-grade students who believe that bullying is prevalent at their high school— even if they themselves are not bullied—are less likely to be committed to doing well at that school,
disagreeing with items such as “I try hard at school” (Mehta,
Cornell, Fan, & Gregory, 2013). Perhaps an entity theory, beyond
exacerbating the subjective experience of common social adversities, could impair learning, attention, and engagement, resulting in
lower academic performance over the year. Relatedly, perhaps an
appropriately timed nudge in the direction of an incremental theory
of personality could reduce this hypervigilance. This might allow
adolescents to focus on and engage more effectively with their
schoolwork, resulting in better grades over the year.

The Importance of Longitudinal Field Experiments for
Testing Basic Psychological Theory
Our research rests on the recognition that social-psychological
processes have a temporal dimension—that they do not end with
the first outcome assessed but instead can continue to unfold over
time (G. L. Cohen & Garcia, 2008; G. L. Cohen & Sherman, 2014;
Lewin, 1943; also see Reis & Gosling, 2010; Ross & Nisbett,
1991; Wilson, 2006; Yeager & Walton, 2011). Building on this,
the present research tests the hypothesis that interpretations of
social adversity arising from implicit theories trigger accumulating
consequences. Over time, these lead to divergent levels of stress,
health and academic achievement. Following recommendations
from Lewin (1952) and Bronfenbrenner (1979), we use longitudinal field experiments to test this. A presumption of this research is
that a brief but theoretically informed intervention could have
effects that persist many months later (e.g., G. L. Cohen, Garcia,
Purdie-Vaugns, Apfel, & Brzustoski, 2009; Finkel, Slotter,
Luchies, Walton, & Gross, in press; Sherman et al., 2013; Walton
& Cohen, 2011; see Garcia & Cohen, 2012; Walton, in press;
Wilson, 2006; Yeager & Walton, 2011). It could do so by changing
a key force in a “tension system”—the network of interacting
forces that drive behavior in a social environment (Bronfenbrenner, 1979; Lewin, 1952; Ross & Nisbett, 1991). Such a key
force might be a psychological tendency that asserts its influence

AQ: 8

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

4

YEAGER ET AL.

repeatedly, such as a tendency to interpret social adversity as fixed
rather than changeable (Abelson, 1985; Yeager et al., in press).
Intervention experiments can inform theory because they can test
whether a given psychological tendency is truly influential in a
given real-world tension system that abounds with uncontrolled
and powerful forces affecting behavior (see Cialdini & Paluck, in
press; Reis & Gosling, 2010). An additional advantage of intervention experiments is that they can directly inform efforts to
address major social issues (Cialdini & Paluck, in press; Wilson,
2006)—in the present case, social coping, stress, health, and academic underachievement during a difficult adolescent transition.

mental theory of personality. We used a double-blind experiment
to assess its impact on immediate reactions to social adversity and
its longer-term impact on stress, physical health, and academic
achievement. In Study 3, we replicated the intervention in a new
context—a low-income, predominately ethnic minority urban public high school—to assess the generality of the processes. This
study also explored potential long-term effects on adolescents’
construals of themselves, to begin to understand how and why an
implicit theories intervention might have a lasting impact.1

Fn1

Study 1

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Method
The Elusiveness of Cross-Domain Effects in
Intervention Research
Finally, the present research seeks to achieve one elusive goal of
research in the behavioral social sciences: transfer of an intervention’s benefits across domains. Several comprehensive early childhood interventions lasting several years and costing many thousands of dollars per person such as Perry Preschool or the
Abecedarian Project have successfully produced cross-domain effects (Heckman & Kautz, in press). Yet the track record is much
more disappointing for similarly comprehensive and expensive
adult or adolescent interventions explicitly designed to produce
cross-domain effects. For instance, Heckman and Kautz (in press)
reviewed a large number of diverse adolescent interventions, including interventions providing counseling, career and college
readiness skills, and improved nutrition. They did not find a
single example of a program that positively affected both educational outcomes and health outcomes upon longitudinal
follow-up. However, these past interventions, often involving
long-term training or residency programs, were not built on
precise social-psychological theory.
The present research provides a test of the general question of
whether it is possible for a theory-based adolescent intervention to
have effects on stress, health, and academic achievement. This
possibility rests on the finding that social relationships have wideranging downstream consequences (Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008;
also see Walton & Cohen, 2011). Thus, the present research is
an opportunity to assess the power of precise psychological
theory to make progress where more traditional human capital
interventions have hit an impasse.

The Present Research
In three studies, we investigated the longitudinal effects of implicit
theories of personality on stress, health, and academic achievement in
addition to the well-established short-term effects on social coping.
The first study asked whether there is correlational evidence that an
entity theory of personality predicts adjustment across a variety of
domains during the transition to high school—specifically, responses
to social adversity and levels of stress, health, and academic achievement. This longitudinal study measured implicit theories and responses to social adversity in the first month of school and then
examined associations with year-end levels of these adjustment measures, controlling for initial levels.
The second study used a randomized experiment to address the
causal role of implicit theories. During the first month of high
school we delivered an intervention that taught students an incre-

Participants. Participants were ninth grade students at a high
school in Northern California (N ! 158). Eight percent of students
received free or reduced-price lunch, a measure of low socioeconomic status. Forty-four percent of participants were White, 41%
Asian, 13% Latino, and 2% another racial or ethnic group. Fortyfour percent were female. Social adversities were common. On a
survey conducted in the third week of the school year, many
students (77%) already reported being the victim of at least some
physical, verbal, or social aggression.2 Some students did not
provide data at both assessments, and so degrees of freedom varied
across analyses.
Procedure. During the first week of the school year in September, parental consent was obtained for all students. In the third
week, students assented and completed an initial survey measuring
implicit theories of personality, baseline levels of global psychological stress and reported physical health, and background characteristics. One week later students came to the school’s computer
lab, where they participated in an established protocol for eliciting
feelings of social exclusion (described below). After the task,
participants reported their responses to the event. In May, at the
end of the school year, students were again surveyed to measure
their global stress and physical illness symptoms. After the school
year, official grades were collected from the school’s registrar.
Experience of peer exclusion. To elicit reactions to social
exclusion, students participated in a standard laboratory experience
of exclusion—the “Cyberball” paradigm (Williams & Jarvis,
2006). Cyberball is a short-lived and ultimately harmless instance
of social exclusion (Williams, 2009) and involves an online game
of catch with two “peers” purportedly from the students’ school.3
The task was programmed so that at first the other “players”
threw the ball to the participant twice. Then, for the remaining
minutes of the task, the other players threw it exclusively to each
other and not to the participant. Immediately following this, dependent variables were assessed.
1
Greater detail on all procedures, measures, and results in the three
studies can be found in the online supplemental materials.
2
In this study and throughout the article, the stopping rule was to collect
as much data as possible given the logistical constraints, student absences,
and class sizes in each school.
3
To further confirm that our Cyberball procedure had no lasting negative effect on stress, health, or achievement and that our extensive precautions were effective, in the present study, we were fortunate that other
students in the same school were surveyed at the beginning and end of the
year but did not play Cyberball. These students (who are a part of a
different study and are not discussed further) did not differ significantly in
their September or May outcomes compared to their peers who participated
in Cyberball, as described below.

Fn2

Fn3

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

IMPLICIT THEORIES, STRESS, HEALTH, AND ACHIEVEMENT

We took several precautions to make the exclusion experience
ultimately innocuous. Specifically, after completing initial dependent variables, participants saw an “error” box appear on the
screen informing them that there had been a glitch in the first
round such that the other Cyberball players were not able to see
their icon and therefore could not throw the ball to them. They
were asked to play again, and this time, participants were fully
included in the game of catch. At this point participants answered
a number of generic open-ended questions that were later coded to
assess suspicion (e.g., “Is there anything you’d like to share with
the research team?”). After the entire session was completed,
research assistants informed the class that in fact Cyberball had
been created by researchers in order to understand exclusion in
high school and that no one had actually been excluded. Assistants
answered students’ questions about the task. Students in general
saw the value of the task and many spontaneously said that they
were glad to have participated in the study and contributed to
science.
To minimize any possibility of participants informing other
students about the true purpose of the study, all participants were
run through the study in 1 day, in back-to-back classes in three
different computer labs in each class period. Beyond the openended questions described previously, the survey asked students if
they had heard anything about the study before entering the classroom and, if so, what they had heard. Participants’ responses to
these and all other open-ended questions were reliably coded by
research assistants. Twenty-two students suspected that the Cyberball task was being controlled by the computer, either because they
had been informed by a peer (four students) or because they did
not believe the cover story (18 students). These students were
excluded only from analyses of responses to Cyberball. Throughout the article, students were reliably coded as suspicious or not
about the Cyberball task by two independent coders (blind to
identities and characteristics of students) on the basis of participants’ open-ended responses to questions in the posttask survey
(Krippendorff’s " # .81). Suspicion was uncorrelated with all
measured variables.
Measures.
Implicit theories of personality. On the initial survey in September of ninth grade, students were given four items used in
previous research to assess adolescents’ implicit theories of personality (Yeager et al., 2011; e.g., “Bullies and victims are types
of people who really can’t be changed”; 1 ! Strongly disagree
to 6 ! Strongly agree). Responses were averaged (" ! .81),
and higher values corresponded to stronger endorsement of an
entity theory.
Negative reactions to social exclusion. One week after the
initial survey, participants underwent the Cyberball procedure and
reported how they reacted to it (three items: “How much stress
were you feeling when playing Cyberball?” “How much anxiety
were you feeling when playing Cyberball?” “How good or bad
were you feeling about yourself when playing Cyberball?”) on
fully labeled 7-point scales, with 7 corresponding to the most
negative responses (e.g., An extreme amount of stress or feeling
Extremely bad about yourself). In this study and throughout the
article, the items were averaged (" ! .75), then log-transformed to
reduce significant skew and converted to z-scores for ease of
interpretation (the joint test of both skew and kurtosis for the
untransformed metric was significant at p $ .0000001, and “ladder

5

of powers” analyses revealed that the log transformation improved
normality the most).
Global psychological stress. First on the initial survey and
then again at the end of the year, participants completed the
10-item Perceived Stress Scale (S. Cohen, Kamarck, & Mermelstein, 1983). This scale measures global appraisals that situations
in one’s life are stressful and beyond one’s ability to cope with
them (e.g., “In the last month, how often have you felt difficulties
were piling up so high that you could not overcome them?”). These
items, each rated on a fully labeled 5-point scale (1 ! Never, 5 !
Very often), were averaged (" ! .83).
Physical health. We sought to measure the extent to which
adolescents were sick to the point that it affected the quality of
their daily lives. To examine whether symptom levels were of this
magnitude, we adapted a subset of items from the validated Medical Outcomes Study core measures of health-related quality of life
(Hays, Sherbourne, & Mazel, 1993). In the form of this survey
intended for adults, items ask whether physical health symptoms
limit one’s role at work; in a validation study, such items were the
highest-loading items on a global factor of physical health (Hays et
al., 1993). In the present study, minor edits were made to make
these items relevant for adolescents. Three items assessed complaints that feeling “sick, tired, or in pain” interfered with “schoolwork or other regular daily activities” in the past 4 weeks (e.g.,
whether they “cut down the amount of time” spent on daily
activities due to illness; for each, 1 ! Yes, 0 ! No; items were
summed; range ! 0 –3; " ! .78).
Academic achievement. End-of-semester grades for English,
math, and science for the fall and spring terms of ninth grade were
obtained from official school records. Grades were reported on a
range from 0 to 4, with 4 corresponding to an “A” and 0 corresponding to an “F.”
Covariates and moderators. On the initial survey, participants
reported sex, race, and ethnicity. Students also reported their
frequency of experiencing various forms of peer victimization
(e.g., being excluded, having rumors spread about you, insulted,
hit; these were rated on a scale from 0 to 4, such that 0 ! Never,
and 4 ! All the time; ratings were then averaged). From school
records, we obtained grades earned the prior year, in eighth
grade.

Results
We examined the relationship between implicit theories of personality and responses to the experience of Cyberball exclusion,
each assessed in the first month of the school year. Next, we
examined associations between initial implicit theories and endof-year adjustment in each of the three domains— global psychological stress, health, and grades— controlling for initial levels of
each variable.
With the exception of academic achievement, all key variables
were analyzed with ordinary least squares regressions using
heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors. To examine associations
with academic achievement, three-level hierarchical linear models
with grading period and school subject nested within students were
estimated using the lme4 package in R (in these models, p-values
for significance tests were estimated using Monte Carlo sampling,
following best practices; Bates, 2010). All analyses controlled for
student sex and race/ethnicity. For tables reporting results that do

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

6

YEAGER ET AL.

Table 1
Effects of Implicit Theories of Personality on Stress, Physical Illness, and Grade Point Average
Independent variable
Study 1: Entity theory of
personality measure
(September of ninth grade)
(N ! 158)

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Dependent variable

T1

Immediate reactions to social exclusion
(September of ninth grade)
Global psychological stress
(May of ninth grade)
Physical illness (May of ninth grade)
Grade point average (Cumulative over
ninth grade)

b

SE

0.22!!

0.09

.21

0.18!!
0.27!

0.06
0.10

.20
.19

&0.18!!!

0.06

&.16

%

Study 2: Incremental theory
of personality intervention
(September of ninth grade)
(N ! 78)
b

SE

%

&0.50!

0.22

&.26

&0.37!!
&0.58!

0.15
0.28

0.34!

0.17

Study 3: Incremental theory of
personality intervention
(September of ninth grade)
(N ! 150)
b

SE

%

&0.32!

0.16

&.18

&.27
&.23

&0.23!
&0.54!!

0.11
0.19

&.18
&.21

.16

0.95!!

0.35a

.34

Note. The effect on each dependent variable for each study was estimated in a separate regression model. Models predicting reactions to exclusion, global
stress, and physical illness were estimated using ordinary least squares, controlling for sex and race and, when available, baseline values. Models predicting
grades were estimated in hierarchical linear models, with subjects and marking periods (e.g., semesters) nested within students; these models controlled for
sex, race, and prior (Grade 8) performance.
a
Results for grades in Study 3 were estimated among those with an entity theory at baseline (#3.5 on the entity theory measure, N ! 42), due to a significant
Intervention ' Baseline Implicit Theories interaction for that outcome. N is the maximum sample size; exact sample sizes vary across analyses within a
study due to missing data.
!
p $ .05. !! p $ .01. !!! p $ .001.

not include these covariates, and tables reporting results of regression models used in exploratory mediational analyses, see the
online supplemental materials. These do not differ in their overall
pattern of statistical significance. In this study and throughout the
article, all means, standard deviations, and proportions reported in
the text are raw, unadjusted numbers. All test statistics (t, z, etc.)
come from regression models and test the significance of a given
regression coefficient when controlling for the covariates noted
above.
Response to social adversity. Conceptually replicating past
research (Erdley et al., 1997; Yeager et al., 2011), during the first
month of ninth grade, adolescents with more of an entity theory
of personality reacted to the experience of Cyberball exclusion
more negatively, reporting more stress, anxiety, and negative
self-feelings, unstandardized b ! .22, t(147) ! 2.56, p ! .01,
standardized % ! .21 (see Table 1). We next turned to the
question of whether this effect on the social domain could,
generalize to additional outcomes over the course of the year.
Global psychological stress, physical health, and academic
achievement. Controlling for baseline levels of global stress,
adolescents who began the school year with more of an entity theory
of personality reported more global stress at the end of the school
year, b ! .18, t(138) ! 3.03, p ! .003, % ! .20 (see Table 1).
Adolescents with more of an entity theory of personality at the
beginning of the year also reported poorer physical health at the
end of the school year (i.e., more complaints that physical illness
impaired daily functioning), b ! .27, t(139) ! 2.37, p ! .02, % !
.19, again controlling for initial levels. Finally, stronger endorsement of an entity theory predicted lower grades over ninth grade
(averaging across math, science, and English), b ! &.18,
t(157) ! &3.10, p $ .001, % ! &.16, controlling for eighth-grade
achievement. Illustrating this finding, adolescents who held an
entity theory at baseline (who “agreed,” on average, with the entity
theory questions, i.e., average score #3.5 on the 1– 6 scale) had a
cumulative grade point average of 2.62, compared with a grade

point average of 3.08 among those who did not endorse an entity
theory (!3.5 on the 1– 6 scale).
In summary, an entity theory of personality—which was measured during a student’s first weeks in high school–predicted not
only more negative short-term reactions to social adversity (a
domain-specific effect) but also greater stress, worse health, and
lower grades over the course of the year, controlling for initial
levels of these variables. This suggests that implicit theories may
have longer term, cross-domain implications during a socially
difficult adolescent transition.4
Mediation. Recall that our theory was that the effects of
implicit theories of personality would generalize to other domains
to the extent that they alter interpretations of social adversity. We
therefore considered the possibility that negative reactions to Cyberball exclusion (i.e., reporting more stress, anxiety, and negative
self-feelings) might statistically mediate the link between implicit
theories and measures of overall adjustment across domains. If this
were the case, it might suggest that reactions to social adversity fed
into changes in the other variables over time. Consistent with this
expectation, correlation analyses found that more negative reac4
Past theory and data suggest that implicit theories should predict
adjustment and behavior primarily in times of adversity (Burnette et al.,
2013; Yeager & Dweck, 2012), and past research has shown this by
documenting an interaction between reports of peer victimization and
implicit theories in predicting adjustment outcomes (Rudolph, 2010; Yeager et al., 2013). At the same time, the present study was conducted during
the transition to high school—a time when, as noted at the outset, large
majorities of students experience at least some social adversity, and even
if they did not, they might reasonably worry that social difficulty could
befall them at any time. Nevertheless we examined whether students’
initial reports of the frequency of peer victimization might moderate
implicit theories effects on long-term adjustment. In separate regressions,
none of the Implicit Theories ' Peer Victimization interactions were
significant (ts $ 1.4, ps # .3), and none were in the theoretically expected
direction.

Fn4

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

IMPLICIT THEORIES, STRESS, HEALTH, AND ACHIEVEMENT

AQ: 9
AQ: 10

AQ: 11

tions to Cyberball exclusion in the first month of school significantly predicted year-end levels of global stress (r ! .31, p $ .001)
and poorer physical health (r ! .24, p ! .002). In mediational
analyses (Imai, Keele, & Tingley, 2010; Imai, Keele, Tingley, &
Yamamoto, 2010), there was a significant indirect (mediated)
effect of implicit theories through Cyberball reactions on global
stress (b ! .05, Quasi-Bayesian 95% confidence interval [CI]: .02,
.10) and physical health (b ! .06, 95% CI: .01, .14). We did not
find that our measure of reactions to Cyberball exclusion mediated
the effect on academic achievement (negative reactions to exclusion were uncorrelated with grades in either term, rs $ .05, ps #
.8).
In sum, we found significant evidence for mediation by negative
reactions to Cyberball exclusion for global stress and physical
health. Mediation by Cyberball was not apparent for grades.

Study 2
Study 1 was a preliminary correlational longitudinal study
showing that an entity theory of personality (the belief that people’s traits are fixed) is associated with harsher immediate reactions to social exclusion and also to longer-term differences in
overall adjustment across multiple domains over the school year.
Clearly, however, an experiment with random assignment to condition is needed to speak to the causal role of implicit theories.
Therefore in Studies 2 and 3 we administered an incremental
theory intervention during the first month of high school. The
intervention was designed to redirect adolescents’ implicit theories
away from an entity theory, so as to cut off cascading cycles of
stress, illness and underperformance before they could gain momentum (cf. Cook, Purdie-Vaughns, Garcia, & Cohen, 2012; Finkel et al., in press; Sherman et al., 2013). Mirroring Study 1, we
first tested whether the intervention lessened negative reactions to
social exclusion— how much stress, anxiety, and negative selffeelings participants report experiencing after being excluded. We
then assessed whether implicit theories affected long-term global
stress, physical health, and grades.
Aside from the intervention’s ability to illuminate the causal
relation between implicit theories and adjustment, the present
longitudinal field experiment is unique in several regards. First,
past implicit theories of personality interventions looked chiefly at
social outcomes, such as emotional and attributional reactions to
social exclusion (Yeager, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2011), aggressive retaliation (Yeager, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2013), or misconduct in school (Yeager, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2013). By
contrast, we test for wide-ranging effects on stress, health and
academic achievement. Second, in contrast to previous research,
the present study used a precise and light-touch intervention to
manipulate incremental theories. A past intervention used six
facilitated classroom workshops to alter adolescents’ implicit theories of personality (Yeager, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2013).
However, this past intervention involved many elements (e.g., lectures, discussion groups, skits). It is unknown whether a briefer
intervention that more precisely and efficiently communicates the
incremental theory could alter outcomes in the long term, with no
reinforcement.
In addition, no past control condition in an implicit theories of
personality experiment has taught a message about growth. Past
control conditions taught helpful skills (Yeager, Trzesniewski, &

7

Dweck, 2013) and/or delivered no message (Yeager et al., 2011;
Yeager, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, 2013). An important extension
of the present research is to rule out the possibility that any
optimistic message of growth—whether it addresses personality
traits or not— could promote positive outcomes across domains.
We compare an incremental theory of personality to an incremental theory about an important area that is thought to be unrelated to
responses to social exclusion.
Finally, we conducted this research during the first few weeks of
ninth grade. This is because of past theory and research demonstrating the recursive nature of social and academic life, with early
successes, failures, relationships and resources affecting later ones
(Garcia & Cohen, 2012; G. L. Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Yeager &
Walton, 2011). Indeed, Cook et al. (2012) conducted a brief
psychological intervention (a values affirmation) and manipulated
timing within the school year. These authors showed that the brief
intervention delivered early in the school year improved students’
grades significantly more than the same intervention delivered just
a few weeks later (also see meta-analytic evidence from Raudenbush, 1984). Building on this, the present intervention sought to
change implicit theories in the first few weeks of the first year of
high school, to slow or stop any possible negative recursive processes.

AQ: 12
AQ: 13

AQ: 14

Method
Participants. Study 2 was conducted in a school similar to the
one used in Study 1. Participants were all the ninth-grade students
enrolled in Algebra I at a high school in Northern California (N !
82), and so sample size was determined by the school setting. All
but four participants provided data at the long-term follow-up,
leaving N ! 78 for analysis. No other participants were excluded.
One percent of students were eligible for free or reduced-price
lunch. Participants were 44% White, 44% Asian American, and
12% Latino. In this school, only lower performing students took
Algebra I, with the majority of ninth graders taking Algebra II.
Hence this sample was academically at-risk relative to the school
population. It might more readily show the impact of an incremental theory intervention on their grades because they should be less
affected by range restrictions (i.e., students with all “A” grades
cannot improve).5
Procedure. The procedures were similar to those in Study 1. A
baseline survey was administered in the third week of the school year,
in September, as was the implicit theories of personality intervention.
One to 2 days later, negative reactions to exclusion due to the
Cyberball protocol and postintervention implicit theories were measured. A survey assessing global stress and health was administered in
May, and grades for the year were obtained from the registrar.
Unfortunately baseline levels of stress and health were not assessed.
The implicit theories of personality intervention was the only manipulation in this study (and in Study 3).
Intervention. The intervention procedure is described in
greater detail in the online supplement. Here, we provide an
overview.
5
Preliminary analyses of data from this study— but not analyses of the
dependent variables reported here—appear in a prior article (Study 3 in
Yeager, Miu, Powers, & Dweck, 2013).

Fn5

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

8

AQ: 15

Fn6

YEAGER ET AL.

As a preface to the intervention, during the first week of school,
Algebra I teachers gave an overview to both the experimental and
control groups of how the brain changes and learns. About 2 weeks
later, 1 week after the baseline survey, researchers came into the
classroom. They handed out envelopes containing either an experimental intervention or a control activity, which was randomly assigned at the individual level, with researchers blind to condition.
Students completed it silently during class time, and it took roughly
25 min. Importantly, teachers were kept blind to study hypotheses,
message content and students’ experimental conditions.
The experimental intervention (incremental theory of personality) presented information in support of the idea that people
have the potential to change and that therefore (a) if you are
excluded or victimized, it is not due to a fixed, personal
deficiency on your part, and (b) people who exclude or victimize you are not fixed, bad people but instead have complicated
motivations that are subject to change. Students read a brief
article summarizing actual neuroscience studies showing that
people’s behaviors are controlled by “thoughts and feelings in
their brains” and that such pathways in the brain can be
changed. Next, participants read three quotes purportedly written by upperclassmen who had previously read the same article.
The upperclassmen provided testimonials of how they used the
information discussed in the article when they encountered a
peer conflict. Finally, participants were asked to write their own
version of such a narrative to share with future ninth graders,
drawing on the examples they had just read from the upperclassmen or on their own experiences in high school or middle
school. As in past interventions (e.g., Yeager, Trzesniewski, &
Dweck, 2013), this is a “saying is believing” activity designed
to promote the internalization of the intervention message (see
E. Aronson, 1999; J. Aronson, Fried, & Good, 2002; Walton &
Cohen, 2011). After completing the one-time activity, it was not
mentioned again to students by researchers or teachers.
The control group activity was parallel but focused on the
malleability of athletic ability—a nonpersonality area that was not
thought to be as central to social adversity and therefore was not
predicted to have widespread effects during times of social adversity.6 As noted, this was done to eliminate the possibility that
simple optimism about the potential for growth in any important
area might account for our results. Although one way to test the
incremental theory of personality intervention would be to compare it to an entity theory intervention, this condition was precluded for obvious ethical reasons.
Experience of social exclusion. One to 2 days postintervention (depending on the class schedule), all students experienced
exclusion through the Cyberball protocol described in Study 1
and online. Research assistants administering the task were
blind to students’ experimental condition assignments. Five
students’ Cyberball data were not analyzed due to suspicion that
the Cyberball players were controlled by the computer—judgments that, as noted in Study 1, were made by coders blind to
condition assignment or other participant characteristics. In this
study and in Study 3, these judgments did not differ across
conditions.
Measures. The same measures of negative reactions to social
exclusion (i.e., stress, anxiety, and overall negative feelings about
the self), global psychological stress, and physical health, as described in Study 1 were again employed. In this study (and in

Study 3) we were able to obtain preintervention (eighth grade)
state test scores and combine these with preintervention grade
point averages so as to more completely control for prior differences in achievement. These were converted to z-scores and then
averaged. In addition, in the present study more grading periods
were available for analysis (three per semester, yielding six total
over the year, rather than only the final semester grades used in
Study 1). At each grading period, grades in the different subjects
demonstrated acceptable internal consistency reliability ("s #
.72).
As a first manipulation check, two coders, blind to experimental
hypotheses and to participant identities and characteristics, independently and reliably (Krippendorff’s " ! .85) judged whether
participants sufficiently answered the writing prompts in the intervention materials. This allowed us to assess whether the manipulation successfully elicited thinking that is in line with the incremental theory. When the coders disagreed, they were coached to
agreement by a third blind coder. As a second manipulation check,
the same implicit theories of personality measure as described in
Study 1 was administered in the baseline survey (1 week preintervention) and again after the Cyberball experience (one to 2 days
postintervention; "s # .78).

Results
Effectiveness of random assignment. There were no baseline
differences between the experimental and control groups in terms
of any variable we measured (see supplemental materials).
Manipulation check. We first investigated whether participants successfully read and processed the intervention materials.
The large majority of participants (97%) provided responses to the
intervention that were in line with the incremental theory. Specifically, when participants were asked to write about a time they felt
rejected or excluded and then explain to a peer how to use the
incremental theory in response to such an event, they wrote essays
such as those listed in Table 2.
The intervention also altered students’ reports of their implicit
theories. The experimental intervention led to lower postintervention entity theories of personality one to 2 days after compared to
students in the control group (Experimental M ! 2.39, SD ! 1.09;
Control M ! 2.86, SD ! 1.20), t(76) ! &2.05, p ! .04,
d ! &0.39, controlling for baseline theories.
Response to social adversity. Furthermore, replicating the
Study 1 correlational findings, students in the experimental condition reacted less negatively to the Cyberball exclusion one to 2
days after the intervention (Z-scored, unadjusted data: Experimental M ! &.22, SD ! .97; Control M ! .27, SD ! .92),
t(71) ! &2.24, p ! .03, d ! &0.52. Recall that, in this study and
throughout the article, means and standard deviations come from
raw data, while t-statistics come from a regression testing the
6
Testifying to the strength of the control intervention that focused on
athletic ability, females in the control significantly increased their likelihood of joining a sport in the Fall semester compared to those in the
incremental theory of personality treatment. There was no effect among
males and no omnibus effect. Including sports participation as a covariate
did not change any of our results, and sports participation did not predict
the key outcomes.

T2

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

IMPLICIT THEORIES, STRESS, HEALTH, AND ACHIEVEMENT

9

Table 2
Representative Quotes Written by Participants Who Were Taught an Incremental Theory of Personality
Study

Quotes

2

“All the people that are mean and hurtful to you are just missing out on a good friend they could’ve had. But with all that said people can
change and learn what they did and said are wrong. Just because someone is one way right now doesn’t mean they can’t change at all
in time. Because in reality they can change.”
“If someone was being picked on at school, I would tell its [sic] not going to last forever and it only hurts for a little while . . . if they feel
different or left out the person that they are now is not the person they will be in 10 years.”
“When we were starting the school year I went [to] where my friends hang out. Then they just looked at me and kept on talking . . . I felt
really left out especially because we were all really good friends in middle school . . . [Although] it may seem like your life is crashing
down, and that nothing will ever get better, it is not the end of the world. Your life will not be like this forever. . . . People can change.
It’s only your first day of school.”
“After all that [peer victimization] happened . . . I knew that they would one day change but I didn’t know when. . . . maybe they were
going through a hard time and they all just wanted to make themselves feel better. Or maybe they were back-stabbed by their old
friends and wanted to release their anger. I honestly don’t know but I made new friends and they are so nice! Don’t be afraid to make
new friends, they can change your way of thinking.”
“Understand that she could be going through some hard times in her life too. The problem isn’t always you. It could be her too. I felt
very out of place at the school I went to. But over time, I started to change, and people around me started to change too. After that
year, I felt right in place.”

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

3

Fn7

F1

significance of the treatment variable in a model with covariates.7
Overall, it appears that students read and processed the intervention, and it altered their immediate reactions to social exclusion,
conceptually replicating past findings (e.g., Yeager et al., 2011).
Building on these analyses, we turn to our primary question:
whether the effect of the intervention on responses to social
adversity generalizes to multiple domains of adjustment over the
first year of high school.
Global psychological stress, physical health, and academic
achievement. Extending the Study 1 findings, incremental theory condition participants reported significantly lower global stress
scores 8 months postintervention (Experimental condition M !
2.86, SD ! 0.69; Control M ! 3.21, SD ! 0.63), t(76) ! &2.53,
p ! .01, d ! &0.56. In addition, the incremental theory intervention improved reports of health (i.e., reduced reports of symptoms
of physical illness that impaired daily functioning) at the end of the
year (Experimental M ! 1.19, SD ! 1.21; Control M ! 1.76,
SD ! 1.32), t(76) ! &2.03, p ! .04, d ! &0.46.
We next examined effects on grades. The achievement of students in the two conditions did not differ before the intervention,
t(76) ! 0.08, ns (also see Figure 1 and online). However, the
incremental theory intervention led to higher grades over the
course of the year (Experimental condition M ! 2.47, SD ! .95;
Control M ! 2.12, SD ! 1.12), t(76) ! 2.11, p ! .037, d ! 0.34
(statistical test from the hierarchical linear model). Plotting the
grades over the year (see Figure 1) showed that the intervention
did not lead to rising grades so much as it slowed a decline in
grades (cf. G. L. Cohen et al., 2009; Finkel et al., in press). That
is, Figure 1 shows that in the months following the intervention,
control-condition students showed a steep decline in performance,
which is common for academically at-risk students during the
transition to high school (Benner, 2011). The incremental theory
intervention, however, softened the decline such that experimental
condition students better maintained their grades over the year.
This pattern of results is consistent with the notion that social and
academic processes are interwoven and build on each other during
difficult transition periods—and that appropriately timed psychological interventions can redirect interpretations of adversity and
set in motion more beneficial, self-reinforcing processes across

domains (see G. L. Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Cook et al., 2012;
Garcia & Cohen, 2012; Walton, in press; see Wilson, 2011).8
An important predictor of later achievement is passing Algebra
I by ninth grade. This is a crucial “gateway” course for high school
graduation. Students who have to repeat the course are highly
unlikely to graduate (e.g., Silver, Saunders, & Zarate, 2008; also
see Langenkamp, 2011). We found that 14% of control-condition
students received a D or below in both semesters of Algebra I (the
level of performance at which students were encouraged by teachers to repeat the course), compared to only 2% of experimental
condition students, logistic regression (2(1) ! 3.83, p ! .05, odds
ratio (OR) ! .13.
Moderation by baseline implicit theories? Past implicit theories research (e.g., Blackwell et al., 2007) has found evidence in
the direction of larger treatment effects among those with an entity
theory at baseline. This is sensible because those who hold an
entity theory presumably have more to gain from learning an
incremental theory than do those who already hold an incremental
theory. Therefore our hypothesis was that the incremental theory
of personality intervention would have the largest effects among
those who began the year with an entity theory. In separate
regressions, one for each outcome, we tested for Experimental
Condition ' Baseline implicit theories interactions. Surprisingly,
in this study, none were significant (ts # 1, ps # .3). That is,
although we had predicted stronger effects among those who may
need the incremental theory the most, it appeared, at least in this
sample, that students across the implicit theories continuum benefited equally from the incremental message.
7
The overall pattern of significance was not altered when analyses were
reconducted with no covariates in the model (see regression tables in the
online supplement).
8
The effect of the intervention was not moderated by baseline levels of
peer victimization. In separate regression analyses, the Intervention ' Peer
Victimization interactions were not significant at p $ .05: When predicting
year-end global stress or health (ts $ 1, ps # .4); when predicting grades,
b ! .25, t(76) ! 1.80, p ! .08. Unlike in Study 1, in every case the
nonsignificant moderation was in the theoretically expected direction of
greater long-term effects for students reporting more peer victimization at
baseline.

Fn8

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

10

YEAGER ET AL.

3.0

Grade Point Average

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

2.7

2.4

2.1

Intervention

Condition
Incremental Theory of Personality
Control

1.8

End of
8th Grade

1

2

End of
Semester 1
of 9th Grade

Grading Period

4

5

End of
Semester 2
of 9th Grade

Figure 1. Effect of incremental theory of personality intervention on academic performance across the
transition to high school (Study 2). Lines represent raw means for a given marking period, drawn with a LOESS
smoothing curve. Eighth-grade performance is a composite of grade point average and state test scores (with test
scores rescaled to have the same mean and standard deviation of the eighth-grade point average).

Mediation. Negative reactions to Cyberball exclusion significantly predicted year-end levels of global stress (r ! .28, p !
.02), and mediated the effect of the treatment on stress (b ! –.09,
95% CI –.21, –.002). Next, negative reactions to Cyberball exclusion did not significantly predict year-end health (r ! .21, p !
.10). While Cyberball reactions did not significantly mediate the
effect of the treatment effect on health (b ! –.11, 95% CI –.34,
.03), it is possible that this latter mediation failed to reach statistical significance due to lower statistical power than in Study 1.
Indeed, the standardized indirect effect in the present study (% !
.045), was nearly identical to the same indirect effect in Study 1
(% ! .044).
Analysis suggested that the effects of the intervention on grades
were partially mediated by Cyberball reactions. In a hierarchical
linear model, negative reactions to Cyberball at the beginning of
the school year predicted grades over the year (% ! .17, p ! .03),
controlling for eighth-grade achievement. Next, controlling for
Cyberball reactions reduced the treatment effect to nonsignificance
(p ! .13). We then conducted a “2-2-1” mediation model (Zhang,
Zyphur, & Preacher, 2009). In the present mediational model, the
“Level 2” variable (implicit theories intervention) predicts another
“Level 2” variable (Cyberball reactions), which in turn predicts the
“Level 1” variable (grades). Because there is not a standard package to implement this model in R, we wrote a custom bootstrapping program. When doing this, there was a significant indirect

effect of the treatment on grades through Cyberball reactions (% !
.04, bias-corrected and accelerated 95% CI: .029, .049). In sum,
when looking broadly across Studies 1 and 2, in five out of six
cases (four of which were significantly different from zero at p $
.05) the mediational data were consistent with the idea that implicit
theories could affect overall adjustment across domains by altering
reactions to social exclusion.

Study 3
Study 2 demonstrated the causality of the processes documented
in Study 1 and showed that it is possible for an intervention in one
domain to have effects that ripple into various domains of functioning during adolescence. The present study was a replication
conducted a year later in a different school— one of the poorestperforming and lowest-income in California. Many researchers
have recently emphasized the importance of exact replications for
building a psychological science that maximizes reproducible findings (Schimmack, 2012; Simmons, Nelson, & Simonsohn, 2011).
This study was designed to do this.
At the same time, many factors could affect the likelihood of a
replication in a new and different context. As Lewin’s (1952)
theory maintained, any psychological strategy to promote behavior
change is embedded in a “tension system” of factors promoting
and hindering behavior (G. L. Cohen & Sherman, 2014; Ross &

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

IMPLICIT THEORIES, STRESS, HEALTH, AND ACHIEVEMENT

AQ: 16

Nisbett, 1991). Often, psychological interventions such as that
tested here assume that the system was poised for change, provided
that thinking was redirected. When that is not the case, divergent
results may emerge. Stated differently, brief psychological interventions that produce widespread and lasting treatment effects
likely do so through a number of different, interconnected mediators that depend critically on context (cf. Pennebaker & Chung,
2011). When these intermediary processes are not present, or are
not effectively altered, then an intervention might not produce
either immediate or sustained change (G. L. Cohen & Sherman,
2014).
Study 2 was conducted in a nonpoor, largely nonminority context, in which students on average experienced high quality instruction and are presumed to be safer in their neighborhoods
relative to youth in less advantaged contexts. Yet perhaps in such
a context social exclusion is a primary source of stress, meaning
that a psychological intervention to take the edge off these experiences could transfer across multiple domains of functioning.
However, many adolescents live in different settings—settings in
which social adversity involving peers in school is just one stressor
among many. It is unknown whether similar effects would be
observed for youth with greater environmental stressors—for instance, racial minority youth living in high-poverty, high-violence
neighborhoods with historically low levels of educational attainment. Perhaps the effect would be drowned out by competing
adversities. Then again, perhaps social adversity matters as much
or more in these contexts, and so an incremental theory intervention would have similar or larger effects. Altogether, the present
study was designed to push the boundaries of the effect of implicit
theories of personality to a new population, as an initial foray into
examining the generality of the effect.
Finally, Study 3 involved exploratory analyses to extend theory
about the role of implicit theories of personality in affecting the
development of views about the self during adolescence. Following some recent research, we focus on students’ construals of
themselves (Sherman et al., 2013). Key to our theory is research
suggesting that those with more of an incremental theory of
personality place greater emphasis on behaviors than on traits,
because behaviors are more dynamic, context-sensitive and malleable (e.g., Chiu, Hong, & Dweck, 1997; also see Molden &
Dweck, 2006). Perhaps students receiving the intervention would
be more likely to see themselves in terms of actions as opposed to
labels—as “doing” rather than “being.” To explore this we took
advantage of a feature of the Study 3 baseline and follow-up
surveys: a new warm-up question that asked participants to write
about what people in school thought of them. This open-ended
question was likely to elicit students’ construals of themselves and
their social image. We coded students’ responses using the LIWC
textual analysis software (Pennebaker, Francis, & Booth, 2007)
and analyzed the use of common verbs (as an index of seeing
oneself as “doing” rather than “being”).

11

leadership was strong and progressive, and so perhaps there was
untapped potential for student motivation and learning. To mirror
the Study 2 sample, students in Algebra I were invited to participate and parental consent and assent were obtained from nearly all
(95%).9 Forty-nine percent of the participants were female; 77%
were Hispanic or Latino, 10% were White, 5% were Black or
African American, and 8% indicated some other race or ethnicity.
A majority spoke Spanish in the home. As in Study 2, many
students in the school experienced social adversities: 70% of
students reported at least some form of physical, verbal, or socialrelational aggression on a baseline survey in the first month of the
school year. Some students could not be reached for the year-end
survey, and so degrees of freedom varied across analyses.
Procedures. We made every effort to conduct a precise replication, although we had to adapt to the realities of the school.
First, many students’ English skills were poor, so we provided
students the option of reading the intervention in Spanish (which
had been translated by native Spanish speakers). Seven percent
chose to do it in Spanish (this was no different by condition and
did not have an effect on experimental outcomes). The intervention
was delivered by computer rather than on paper (which was done
in Study 2) so as to enable the option to complete the activity in
Spanish or use web-based translation software. Next, the school
was unable to provide an additional class session for the Cyberball
experience of exclusion. Therefore, the measure of reactions to
social adversity and the manipulation check survey items were
administered immediately after the intervention, rather than 1–2
days later as in Study 2. Finally, all data collection (and the
intervention) occurred in nonacademic classes such as physical
education or art.
As in Studies 1 and 2, some students (19) suspected that the peer
Cyberball players were being controlled by the computer (as
judged by reliable, independent coders blind to hypotheses or
condition assignments; this did not differ by condition), and so
their reactions to Cyberball were not analyzed (although their data
for the remaining dependent variables were analyzed).
Measures. All measures in Study 3 were identical in terms of
both content and timing of assessment to those administered in
Study 2, except for (a) the change noted above in the timing of the
Cyberball experience and manipulation check, (b) the addition of
a “warm-up” question that was useful for assessing self-construals,
and (c) only end-of-semester grades were available for the two
semesters and not the two additional intermediate grades per
semester that were available in Study 2.
Self-construals. The first question on the September preintervention survey and May postintervention survey was this: “In
general, what do people in your grade at school think about you?
Type as many or as few words that people in general might think
about you in the box below.” Ninety percent of students wrote a
response, with an average number of 10 words. Responses to this
question were first spell-checked to correct common errors and
increase match rates for the LIWC software. The theoretically

Method
Participants. Participants (N ! 150) were ninth-grade students attending one of the lowest-performing high schools in
California according to test scores. Seventy-three percent of students in the school were eligible for free or reduced-price lunch, an
indicator of low socioeconomic status. Despite this, the school

9
Students were excluded if they had a disability and were placed in
special education (e.g., dyslexia or autism), because these students would
not be expected to successfully self-administer the theory-change materials
in the time allotted, and because their grades were not comparable (teachers
provided grades for those students based on an individualized education
plan, not based on mastery of grade-level content standards).

Fn9

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

12

YEAGER ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

relevant linguistic category was common verbs (e.g., walk, went,
see; not auxiliary verbs such as am, will, or have). Examples of
statements with common verbs were “I think outside the box” or “I
know for a fact a few people do not like me, which honestly
doesn’t bug me at all” or “I get my work done-most of the time”
or “I try to be nice to people.” A dichotomous variable was
created, such that participants received a value of 1 if they used
any word in a category and 0 if they did not. The base rate was
65%. The other standard LIWC dictionaries were also applied (see
www.liwc.net/descriptiontable1.php), and exploratory analyses are
reported in the supplemental materials.

Results
Effectiveness of random assignment. There were no baseline
differences between the experimental and control groups in terms
of any variable we measured (see online supplement).
Manipulation check. As in Study 2, independent, reliable
coders (Krippendorff’s " ! .88) judged that the overwhelming
majority of participants (93%) wrote acceptable responses to the
prompt asking participants to support the incremental theory of
personality with an example from their own lives. Some examples
written by participants are in Table 2.
Unexpectedly, unlike Study 2 or past studies (Yeager et al.,
2013) the intervention did not measurably alter students’ responses
to the manipulation check measure assessing implicit theories of
personality (Experimental M ! 3.14, SD ! 1.22; Control M !
3.07, SD ! 1.32), t(150) ! 0.52, p ! .60, d ! &0.08, controlling
for baseline theories. (As noted earlier, throughout this study
means and standard deviations are from raw data while statistical tests come from regression models.) We believe this null
finding is likely due to the difference in experimental procedure
noted above (i.e., with the implicit theory measure coming right
after the Cyberball experience), but we are unsure of the mechanism. Perhaps adolescents showed greater reactance because
they had just viewed persuasive materials, or perhaps the Cyberball experience differentially changed the meaning of the
scale choices.
Response to social adversity. Most important, however, we
replicated the Study 2 finding that participants in the experimental
condition reacted to the Cyberball exclusion significantly less
negatively than did those in the control condition (as in Studies
1–2, this log-transformed measure was z-scored: Experimental
M ! –.22, SD ! 1.03; Control M ! .07, SD ! .96), t(123) !
–2.02, p ! .045, d ! &0.31. Thus, given the effect on immediate
interpretations of social adversity—and given students’ openended responses, which clearly demonstrate that participants read
and processed the incremental theory message—we proceeded to
test whether the intervention again generalized its effects to overall
stress, health and grades.
Stress and physical health. The findings related to stress and
health were replicated (Table 1). Eight months postintervention,
intervention condition participants reported reduced global psychological stress (Experimental M ! 2.68, SD ! .60; Control M !
2.91, SD ! .66), t(135) ! –2.14, p ! .03, d ! &0.37, and better
physical health (i.e., fewer complaints of physical illness that
impaired daily functioning; Experimental M ! 0.89, SD ! 1.06;
Control M ! 1.43, SD ! 1.99), t(133) ! –2.59, p ! .01,
d ! &0.46. As in Study 2, none of these findings were moderated

by baseline implicit theories (ts $ 1, ps # .7) or reports of peer
victimization (ts $ 1.3, ps # .17), although all of these were in the
theoretically expected direction (greater effects for victimized students and those with more of an entity theory at baseline). Of
course, the large majority of adolescents reported at least some
peer victimization, and so perhaps all participants faced sufficient
worries about being excluded by peers and therefore could benefit
from the incremental theory. Overall, the effect of the incremental
theory intervention on stress and health replicated even in a lowincome, urban public school—a population thought to have many
more environmental stressors and threats to health than the Study
2 population.
Academic achievement. The incremental theory intervention
significantly improved grades among those who began the school
year with more of an entity theory and not among those who
already held an incremental theory. There was no significant main
effect of the intervention on grades, b ! .04, t(149) ! 0.25, p !
.80, d ! 0.03, but the expected Experimental Condition ' Baseline implicit theories interaction (which was not found in Study 2)
emerged, t(149) ! 2.56, p ! .01. To interpret this result, which
was obtained using the continuous implicit theories measure, we
examined the simple effects within substantively meaningful
groups: those who had an entity theory of personality at baseline
(who “agreed,” on average, with the entity theory scale, i.e., #3.5)
and those who did not (!3.5 on the entity theory scale). Among
baseline entity theorists, there was a large and significant treatment
effect on grades (Experimental M ! 2.29 on the 0 – 4-point scale,
SD ! 1.23; Control M ! 1.23, SD ! 1.22), t(40) ! 2.71, p ! .009,
d ! 0.80. Among those who did not have an entity theory at
baseline there was no effect of the treatment on grades (Experimental M ! 2.01, SD ! 1.33; Control M ! 2.05, SD ! 1.25),
t(106) ! – 0.75, p ! .45, d ! 0.12. There was no significant
moderation by baseline peer victimization in the full sample or
either subsample of students with an entity or incremental
theory at baseline (ts $ 1, ps # .5). Thus grades were improved
by a great deal for a theoretically and practically important,
albeit small, subgroup of participants with an entity theory at
baseline.
We replicated the effect of the intervention on course failures in
Algebra I among those with an entity theory at baseline. In that
subsample, 42% of control-condition students received a D or
below in both semesters of Algebra I, compared to only 19% of
experimental condition students: logistic regression (2(1) ! 5.36,
p ! .02, OR ! .32.
Mediation. Looking only at the data from Study 3, negative
reactions to Cyberball exclusion did not significantly predict yearend global stress (r ! .13, p ! .14), or grades, % ! .03, p ! .81
but did predict health (r ! .21, p ! .02) and did not significantly
mediate the effect of the intervention on these outcomes at the p $
.05 level (Stress: b ! –.01, 95% CI: –.07, .04; Health: b ! –.07,
95% CI: –.20, .01; Grades: b ! –.06, 95% CI: –.11, .01). Some of
this discrepancy may be due to statistical power. To examine this
further, we maximized power by stacking data from Studies 2 and
3 into a single data set (see Cooper & Patall, 2009, for a review of
raw data meta-analysis; also see Schimmack, 2012). We then
conducted moderated mediation tests (Imai, Keele, et al., 2010) to
assess whether the indirect effects were significant overall and
whether the indirect effects were significantly different across the
two studies. In the stacked data set with Studies 2 and 3 combined,

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

IMPLICIT THEORIES, STRESS, HEALTH, AND ACHIEVEMENT

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Fn10

Cyberball exclusion significantly mediated treatment effects on
long-term stress, –.02, 95% CI: –.03, –.01, corresponding to 8% of
the direct effect—a small but statistically detectable amount. Cyberball reactions also significantly mediated treatment effects on
long-term health (b ! –.08, 95% CI: –.12, –.04), corresponding to
35% of the direct effect. Moderated mediation tests comparing
Study 2 to Study 3 did not approach significance (p ! .30 and p!
.76, respectively). Thus, when using all of the available data,
Studies 2 and 3 support theory regarding the role of differential
reactions to social exclusion as one mediator of long-term stress
and health effects. This closely parallels the Study 1 correlational
findings. For grades, the mediational findings across studies were
more inconsistent.10
Self-construals. The design of Study 3 allowed for an analysis
of intervention effects on self-construals, assessed via subtle features of the text of students’ self-descriptions coded by the LIWC
program. The data supported the hypothesis that learning more of
the incremental theory might lead students to see themselves more
in terms of actions as opposed to labels. In the experimental group,
74% of students used a common verb in their May selfdescriptions, compared to 56% of control students, (2(1) ! 5.53,
p ! .02. These groups did not differ at baseline on this metric,
(2(1) ! 1.59, p ! .21, and controlling for initial levels in a logistic
regression did not eliminate the statistical significance of the May
condition effect on verb-use (in the covariate model, p ! .03).
Summary. The core of the Study 2 findings were replicated in
this highly different context with a larger sample. A brief intervention teaching an incremental theory of personality reduced
immediate negative reactions to social exclusion, and, 8 months
postintervention, reduced overall life stress and reports of physical
health problems. In addition, the intervention improved overall
grades among those expected to benefit the most—students with
an entity theory of personality at baseline. Furthermore, a textual
analysis of students’ self-descriptions suggests the intervention
may have seeped into students’ construals of themselves. If these
linguistic analyses are confirmed in future studies, this may lead to
new avenues for understanding the long-term maintenance of the
treatment effect.

General Discussion
The present correlational and experimental studies support a
novel social-cognitive account of what causes some people to
adjust better than others during a developmental transition that is
fraught with social adversities. Study 1 showed that adolescents
just beginning high school reacted to social adversity more negatively when they interpreted it through the lens of an entity theory
of personality, an implicit theory that leads students to see social
adversity as stemming from traits that cannot change (Erdley et al.,
1997; Yeager et al., 2011). And perhaps because the stresses of
social adversity accumulate over time, an entity theory predicted
greater overall stress, poorer health, and worse grades at the end of
the school year.
Given that an entity theory seems to be a psychological
liability during the transition to high school, we sought to
determine whether delivering a brief but theoretically informed
intervention to reduce entity theories could promote adjustment.
Studies 2 and 3 showed that exposing adolescents to an incremental theory of personality—the idea that people’s traits in

13

high school are not fixed throughout life but have the potential
to change— could alter responses to immediate social adversity
and reduce reports of global stress and physical illness at the
end of the school year. These findings replicated in a relatively
advantaged high school sample and in a low-income, lowperforming high school. Interestingly, the intervention had
these lasting effects with no explicit reinforcement or mention
of the incremental theory after the initial session.
The incremental theory intervention reported in Studies 2 and
3 also improved English, math, and science grades over the
school year. In Study 2 this was true for all students. In Study
3 this was true for students who began the school year with
more of an entity theory, a finding that is consistent with
theoretical expectations. In each study, the intervention also
affected more specific academic outcomes such as the pass rate
in Algebra I, an important predictor of whether students will go
on to graduate high school and attend college (Silver et al.,
2008). The overall pattern of results suggests that implicit
theories of personality can tap into a psychological hub during
the transition to high school, resulting in effects that benefit
multiple domains of development— even domains that, at first
glance, seem remote to beliefs about personality traits.
The present findings add to past research in several ways. First,
previous research has shown that implicit theories of intelligence
can affect academic performance (e.g., Blackwell et al., 2007). But
no research had shown that implicit theories of personality relate
to academic performance— either correlationally or experimentally. Next, previous interventions have taught an incremental
theory of personality and affected social outcomes, such as realworld aggression in response to peer provocation (e.g., Yeager et
al., 2013). However, the present research is among the first to
show that an intervention addressing a belief about the social self
could extend to the variables of stress, health, and academic
performance during difficult adolescent transitions (also see Walton & Cohen, 2011).
Next, much research has documented an association between
stress or health on the one hand and self-relevant cognitions and
emotions such as self-blame or shame on the other (e.g., Dickerson
et al., 2011). Yet no research had examined the link between stress
or health and the underlying beliefs—in the present case, implicit
theories—that have been shown to give rise to self-blame or shame
(Erdley et al., 1997; Yeager et al., 2011).
More generally, a large number of past adolescent interventions
have found it difficult to produce cross-domain effects on stress,
health, and achievement, and this is often been interpreted as
meaning that larger, more time-intensive, and earlier interventions
are required (e.g., Heckman & Kautz, in press). Yet this interpretation perhaps undervalues the importance of psychological construals of adversity during difficult life transitions. The present
research illustrates that a precise theory of the beliefs that give rise
10
Unfortunately the Imai, Keele, et al. (2010) program cannot test
moderated multilevel mediation. Yet it seems likely that significant moderation by sample would occur given the robust mediation in Study 2 and
the effect in the opposite direction in the present study, Study 3. At the
same time, recall that the mediation effect for grades was only tested within
the smaller subsample of roughly 45 students who began the year with
more of an entity theory. And so statistical power to detect mediation for
that outcome was dramatically reduced.

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

14

YEAGER ET AL.

to problematic interpretations of difficulty can, during developmental periods rife with social hardship, have counterintuitively
large and lasting effects across a number of domains of human
functioning (see G. L. Cohen & Sherman, 2014).

Understanding the Lasting Effects of
Brief Interventions

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

AQ: 17

The present intervention used tactics developed in a long line of
past brief social-psychological interventions that affected consequential outcomes over time (see G. L. Cohen et al., 2009; Pennebaker, 2004; Ross & Nisbett, 1991; Sherman et al., 2013; see
Walton, in press; Wilson, 2006; Yeager & Walton, 2011). Wilson
et al. (2002) showed that a brief attributional retraining intervention could improve struggling students’ grades at the end of the
following semester, and Walton and Cohen (2011) showed that a
brief (1-hr) social belonging intervention could improve minority
college students’ academic achievement 3.5 years postintervention
(also see G. L. Cohen et al., 2009; Sherman et al., 2013). These
studies have many elements in common with the present research.
Each starts with a theory about how interpretations of a commonly
recurring adversity—low grades, experiences of being left out or
negatively stereotyped— could feed into a cycle of stress and
academic performance. Next, these interventions seek to alter the
meaning of these adversities—for instance, preventing the conclusion that struggling in school means you are “dumb” or “don’t
belong,” or, in the present research, that being picked on means
you are a “loser” and that the aggressors are “bullies.” Crucially,
these interventions are delivered at times when adversities were
predicted to recur, precisely when changes in the meaning of
adversity can be critical for setting in motion the processes that
sustain change and maximize its impact (Cook et al., 2012). Of
course, an important future direction is to directly examine the
optimal timing of the present intervention through further experimentation, in addition to broader efforts to develop theory and data
about recursive processes that affect development (G. L. Cohen &
Sherman, 2014; Yeager & Walton, 2011).

Strengths, Weaknesses, and Future Directions
Several features of our studies lead to confidence in our conclusions. Studies 2 and 3 were conducted in two highly different
school sites— one low-income and urban and one higher income
and suburban—and we found evidence for the relation between
implicit theories of personality and overall adjustment in both.
This supports the generalizability of the direct effects, at least in
these two different settings, acknowledging that it is unknown how
similar these schools are to urban and suburban schools in general.
Importantly, justification for causal inferences within these schools
was clear. The experimental intervention was double-blind, meaning that teachers (and students) were unaware of assignment to
groups and to hypotheses regarding stress, health or achievement,
preventing them from treating experimental and control students
differentially on the basis of condition assignments. Moreover, the
implicit theories of personality intervention were compared to a
control group that also learned a positive and optimistic message
about growth, which controls for the simple placebo effect of
getting an uplifting message. It therefore adds to previous implicit
theories of personality studies that have not done this (such as
Yeager et al., 2011, 2013).

Still, the present research is not without limitations. As with
many findings in psychology, we do not fully understand the set of
conditions required to obtain the effects documented here. While it
is helpful that the findings replicated in very different school
settings, it is also true that the research team held a number of
procedural details relatively constant across the two experiments
that may or may not have affected the results. This involves factors
such as timing during the school year (the first few weeks; Cook
et al., 2012), keeping students blind to the persuasive purpose of
the materials, piloting and customizing the intervention and assessments, and procedures to ensure students were minimally
distracted when completing the materials. To the extent that future
studies might alter these, effect sizes might differ. Effect sizes
might also vary when contextual factors that produced the sustained treatment effect are not present (cf. Lewin, 1952), as may be
the case when conducting these interventions in new school settings. Altogether, the boundary conditions of the effects have not
yet been mapped out and thoughtful replication efforts may help
document these.
The present findings may also lead to future lines of research.
First, the mechanisms that sustained the effect of the intervention
until the end of the year could be further explored. One explanation
is that the intervention produced lasting changes in adolescents’
interpretations of social adversity. Indeed, the exploratory linguistic analyses of self-construals presented in Study 3 provide evidence consistent with this possibility (also see analyses of lasting
changes in interpretations of social adversity in Study 2 in the
online supplement). A second explanation, however, is that the
intervention’s effects on reactions to adversity might “wear off,”
but only after they have set in motion positive recursive social and
academic processes that reinforce themselves through their repetition (cf. G. L. Cohen et al., 2009; Finkel et al., in press; Sherman
et al., 2013). Perhaps treated students, by reacting with less stress,
anxiety and negative self-feelings following early social exclusion, were more resilient when making friends, leading them to
have more stable social networks. These social supports may
have reduced stress levels and improved health and grades over
time (see, e.g., Walton, Logel, Peach, Spencer, & Zanna, 2013;
also see Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008). Future research with more
diverse assessments from multiple informants could more fully
track these potential processes.
All participants in the experimental studies were exposed to
Cyberball ostracism following the incremental theory intervention
to test the hypothesis that responses to Cyberball would mediate
long-term effects. However it is possible that exposure to this
social adversity itself could have facilitated the longitudinal treatment effects by allowing students to “practice” their new, more
hopeful way of thinking in the short term, before the incremental
theory message faded. Indeed, past intervention studies testing the
effects of values affirmation (Cook et al., 2012; Sherman et al.,
2013), attribution retraining (Wilson et al., 2002), and emotional
reappraisal (Jamieson, Mendes, Blackstock, & Schmader, 2010)
have used an analogous procedure of having a challenge or adversity immediately follow the delivery of a brief psychological
intervention. Like these past studies, we did not directly test
whether this feature of our design facilitated the long-term treatment effects. Perhaps this was not necessary because high school
could provide enough stressful experiences; the experience of
Cyberball may be redundant with the real-world exclusion teen-

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

IMPLICIT THEORIES, STRESS, HEALTH, AND ACHIEVEMENT

AQ: 18
AQ:18,
19

agers face. If so, then teens might have the opportunity to utilize
their new implicit theory whether an immediate social adversity
experience is provided by researchers or not.
Our research relied on self-reports to assess stress and health. It
is reassuring that the relation between implicit theories, stress, and
health both matched theoretical predictions and replicated across
three different schools. Nevertheless, future research might supplement these self-reports by assessing the relation of implicit
theories to biological indicators of stress following social adversity, such as levels of cortisol (see Dickerson & Zoccola, in press),
as well as more objective and comprehensive measures of physical
health.
Last, future research should assess the temporal relation between changes in stress and changes in achievement and health.
We believe it is possible and even likely that the intervention, in
softening interpretations of social exclusion, altered levels of overall stress, which in turn affected learning and academic performance. Indeed, in supplemental analyses not reported in the text,
we found that the effect of implicit theories on grades over the year
was significantly mediated by year-end levels of overall stress in
all three studies. However, due to the timing of our assessments
(stress was assessed in May, grades over the entire year), such
mediational analyses cannot truly illuminate the direction of the
relation between global life stress and either grades or health. An
alternative possibility is that by affecting early levels of stress, the
interventions improved grades and health, which in turn affected
year-end levels of stress, in a recursive process that strengthened
through its repetition (cf. G. L. Cohen et al., 2009; Cook et al.,
2012; Finkel et al., in press; Sherman et al., 2013). Testifying to
the interconnectedness of these outcomes, Knack et al. (2011)
showed that stress reactivity following peer victimization predicted later health problems, while Nishina and Juvonen (2005)
showed that the low grades and absenteeism among victimized
teens could be explained in part by physical health complaints (see
Juvonen & Graham, 2014). It will be interesting and important in
future research to understand these possible reciprocal relations.

Conclusion
As we noted at the outset, a common idea in American society
is that being labeled “cool” or a “nerd” early in high school defines
a person forever after, regardless of the changes they may make
later. Our research shows that many teens are hearing this message
loud and clear, and it is undermining their resilience.
Of course, not all people think this way. For instance, Winnie
Holzman, the creator of the iconic show about high school, My
So-Called Life (Herskovitz, Zwick, & Holzman, 2007), said (as
summarized by Senior, 2013):
“In high school we become pretty convinced that we know what
reality is: We know who looks down on us, who is above us, exactly
who our friends and our enemies are.” The truth of the matter, is that
we really have no clue. “What seems like unshakable reality is
basically just a story we learned to tell ourselves.” (p. 5)

Consistent with this notion, our research shows that adolescents
can learn to tell themselves a different story, a story in which
people have the potential to change. And when they do, they show
better adjustment across the board: lower stress, better health, and
higher grades. Going forward, it will be important for researchers,

15

educators, parents, and media outlets to find ways to emphasize
this message of the human potential for change.

References
Abelson, R. P. (1985). A variance explanation paradox: When a little is a
lot. Psychological Bulletin, 97, 129 –133. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.97.1
.129
Aronson, E. (1999). The power of self-persuasion. American Psychologist,
54, 875– 884. doi:10.1037/h0088188
Aronson, J., Fried, C., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the effects of stereotype threat on African American college students by shaping theories of
intelligence. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 113–125.
doi:10.1006/jesp.2001.1491
Barber, B. K., & Olsen, J. A. (2004). Assessing the transitions to middle
and high school. Journal of Adolescent Research, 19, 3–30. doi:10.1177/
0743558403258113
Bates, D. M. (2010). lme4: Mixed-effects modeling with R. Retrieved from
http://lme4.r-forge.r-project.org/book/
Beck, A. T. (1967). Depression: Clinical, experimental and theoretical
aspects. New York, NY: Hoeber Medical Division, Harper & Row.
Beer, J. S. (2002). Implicit self-theories of shyness. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 83, 1009 –1024. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.83.4
.1009
Benner, A. D. (2011). The transition to high school: Current knowledge,
future directions. Educational Psychology Review, 23, 299 –328. doi:
10.1007/s10648-011-9152-0
Birnbaum, D., Deeb, I., Segall, G., Ben-Eliyahu, A., & Diesendruck, G.
(2010). The development of social essentialism: The case of Israeli
children’s inferences about Jews and Arabs. Child Development, 81,
757–777. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2010.01432.x
Blackwell, L. S., Trzesniewski, K., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Implicit
theories of intelligence predict achievement across an adolescent transition: A longitudinal study and an intervention. Child Development, 78,
246 –263. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2007.00995.x
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The ecology of human development: Experiments by nature and design. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Burnette, J. L., O’Boyle, E., VanEpps, E. M., Pollack, J. M., & Finkel, E. J.
(2013). Mindsets matter: A meta-analytic review of implicit theories and
self-regulation. Psychological Bulletin, 139, 655–701. doi:10.1037/
a0029531
Cacioppo, J. T., & Patrick, W. (2008). Loneliness: Human nature and the
need for social connection. New York, NY: Norton.
Cairns, R. B., & Cairns, B. D. (1994). Lifelines and risks: Pathways of
youth in our time. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Chan, A., & Poulin, F. (2007). Monthly changes in composition of friendship networks in early adolescence. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 53, 578 –
602. doi:10.1353/mpq.2008.0000
Chen, Z., DeWall, C. N., Poon, K.-T., & Chen, E.-W. (2012). When
destiny hurts: Implicit theories of relationships moderate aggressive
responses to ostracism. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48,
1029 –1036. doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2012.04.002
Chiu, C., Dweck, C. S., Tong, J. Y., & Fu, J. H. (1997). Implicit theories
and conceptions of morality. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 923–940. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.73.5.923
Chiu, C. Y., Hong, Y., & Dweck, C. S. (1997). Lay dispositionism and
implicit theories of personality. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 19 –30. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.73.1.19
Cialdini, R., & Paluck, E. L. (in press). Field research methods. In H. T.
Reis, & C. M. Judd (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in personality
AQ: 20
and social psychology. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Cohen, G. L., & Garcia, J. (2008). Identity, belonging and achievement: A
model, interventions, implications. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 17, 365–369. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8721.2008.00607.x

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

16

YEAGER ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaugns, V., Apfel, N., & Brzustoski, P.
(2009). Recursive processes in self-affirmation: Intervening to close the
minority achievement gap. Science, 324, 400 – 403. doi:10.1126/science
.1170769
Cohen, G. L., & Prinstein, M. J. (2006). Peer contagion of aggression and
health-risk behavior among adolescent males: An experimental investigation of effects on public conduct and private attitudes. Child Development, 77, 967–983. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2006.00913.x
Cohen, G. L., & Sherman, D. (2014). The psychology of change: Selfaffirmation and social psychological intervention. Annual Review of
Psychology, 65, 333–371. doi:10.1146/annurev-psych-010213-115137
Cohen, S., Kamarck, T., & Mermelstein, R. (1983). A global measure of
perceived stress. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 24, 385–396.
doi:10.2307/2136404
Cook, J. E., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (2012).
Chronic threat and contingent belonging: Protective benefits of values
affirmation on identity development. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 102, 479 – 496. doi:10.1037/a0026312
Cooper, H., & Patall, E. A. (2009). The relative benefits of meta-analysis
conducted with individual participant data versus aggregated data. Psychological Methods, 14, 165–176. doi:10.1037/a0015565
Crosnoe, R. (2011). Fitting in, standing out: Navigating the social challenges of high school to get an education. New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511793264
Dailey, K. (2010, December 16). The legacy of high school cliques: How
the labels we get as teenagers shape the rest of our lives, and why social
networking and the economy are changing the way a generation deals
with those early stereotypes. Newsweek. Retrieved from http://www
.newsweek.com/can-you-ever-escape-those-high-school-labels-69097
Dickerson, S. S., Gruenewald, T. L., & Kemeny, M. E. (2011). Physiological effects of social threat: Implications for health. In J. Cacioppo &
J. Decety (Eds.), Handbook of social neuroscience (pp. 787– 803). New
York, NY: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/
9780195342161.013.0052
AQ: 21 Dickerson, S. S., & Zoccola, P. M. (in press). Cortisol responses to social
exclusion. In C. N. DeWall (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of social
exclusion. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Diesendruck, G., & haLevi, H. (2006). The role of language, appearance,
and culture in children’s social category based induction. Child Development, 77, 539 –553. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2006.00889.x
Erdley, C., Cain, K., Loomis, C., Dumas-Hines, F., & Dweck, C. S. (1997).
The relations among children’s social goals, implicit personality theories
and response to social failure. Developmental Psychology, 33, 263–272.
doi:10.1037/0012-1649.33.2.263
Erdley, C., & Dweck, C. S. (1993). Children’s implicit theories as predictors of their social judgments. Child Development, 64, 863– 878. doi:
10.2307/1131223
Faris, R., & Felmlee, D. (2011). Status struggles: Network centrality and
gender segregation in same- and cross-gender aggression. American
Sociological Review, 76, 48 –73. doi:10.1177/0003122410396196
Finkel, E. J., Burnette, J. L., & Scissors, L. E. (2007). Vengefully ever
after: Destiny beliefs, state attachment anxiety, and forgiveness. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 871– 886. doi:10.1037/00223514.92.5.871
Finkel, E. J., Slotter, E. B., Luchies, L. B., Walton, G. M., & Gross, J. J.
(in press). A brief intervention to promote conflict reappraisal preserves
marital quality over time. Psychological Science.
Gale, B. (Producer), Canton, N. (Producer), & Zemeckis, R. (Director).
(1985). Back to the future [Motion picture]. United States: Universal
Pictures.
Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (2012). A social psychological approach to
educational intervention. In E. Shafir (Ed.), Behavioral foundations of
public policy (pp. 329 –347). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Gini, G., & Pozzoli, T. (2009). Association between bullying and psychosomatic problems: A meta-analysis. Pediatrics, 123, 1059 –1065. doi:
10.1542/peds.2008-1215
Gould, R. V. (2003). Collision of wills: How ambiguity about social rank
breeds conflict. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Graham, S., & Juvonen, J. (1998). Self-blame and peer victimization in
middle school: An attributional analysis. Developmental Psychology, 34,
587–599. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.34.3.587
Guinote, A. (2007a). Power affects basic cognition: Increased attentional
inhibition and flexibility. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
43, 685– 697. doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2006.06.008
Guinote, A. (2007b). Power and the suppression of unwanted thoughts:
Does control over others decrease control over the self? Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 43, 433– 440. doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2006
.03.003
Haugland, S., Wold, B., Stevenson, J., Aaroe, L. E., & Woynarowska, B.
(2001). Subjective health complaints in adolescence: A cross-national
comparison of prevalence and dimensionality. European Journal of
Public Health, 11, 4 –10. doi:10.1093/eurpub/11.1.4
Hays, R. D., Sherbourne, C. D., & Mazel, R. M. (1993). The Rand 36-Item
Health Survey 1.0. Health Economics, 2, 217–227. doi:10.1002/hec
.4730020305
Heckman, J., & Kautz, T. (in press). Fostering and measuring skills: AQ: 22
Interventions that improve character and cognition. In J. Heckman, J. E.
Humphries, & T. Kautz. (Eds.), The GED and the role of character in
American life. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Herskovitz, M., Zwick, E., & Holzman, W. (Producers). (2007). My
so-called life [Television series]. Los Angeles, CA: Shout! Factory.
Imai, K., Keele, L., & Tingley, D. A. (2010). A general approach to causal
mediation analysis. Psychological Methods, 15, 309 –334. doi:10.1037/
a0020761
Imai, K., Keele, L., Tingley, D. A., & Yamamoto, T. (2010). Causal
mediation analysis using R. In H. D. Vinod (Ed.), Advances in social
science research using R (pp. 129 –154). New York, NY: Springer.
Inzlicht, M., & Kang, S. K. (2010). Stereotype threat spillover: How coping
with threats to social identity affects aggression, eating, decisionmaking, and attention. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
99, 467– 481. doi:10.1037/a0018951
Jamieson, J. P., Mendes, W. B., Blackstock, E., & Schmader, T. (2010).
Turning the knots in your stomach into bows: Reappraising arousal
improves performance on the GRE. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 46, 208 –212. doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2009.08.015
Juvonen, J., & Graham, S. (2014). Bullying in schools: The power of
bullies and the plight of victims. Annual Review of Psychology, 65,
159 –185. doi:10.1146/annurev-psych-010213-115030
Killen, M., Kelly, M. C., Richardson, C., & Jampol, N. S. (2010). Attributions of intentions and fairness judgments regarding interracial peer
encounters. Developmental Psychology, 46, 1206 –1213. doi:10.1037/
a0019660
Knack, J. M., Jensen-Campbell, L. A., & Baum, A. (2011). Worse than
sticks and stones? Bullying is associated with altered HPA axis functioning and poorer health. Brain and Cognition, 77, 183–190. doi:
10.1016/j.bandc.2011.06.011
Knee, C. R. (1998). Implicit theories of relationships: Assessment and
prediction of romantic relationship initiation, coping, and longevity.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 360 –370. doi:
10.1037/0022-3514.74.2.360
Langenkamp, A. G. (2011). Effects of educational transitions on students’
academic trajectory: A life course perspective. Sociological Perspectives, 54, 497–520. doi:10.1525/sop.2011.54.4.497
Lazarus, R. S., & Folkman, S. (1984). Stress, appraisal, and coping. New
York, NY: Springer.
Lewin, K. (1943). Defining the “field at a given time”. Psychological
Review, 50, 292–310. doi:10.1037/h0062738

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

IMPLICIT THEORIES, STRESS, HEALTH, AND ACHIEVEMENT

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Lewin, K. (1952). Group decision and social change. In G. E. Swanson,
T. M. Newcomb, & E. L. Hartley (Eds.), Readings in social psychology
(2nd ed., pp. 330 –344). New York, NY: Holt.
Lupien, S. J., Maheu, F., Tu, M., Fiocco, A., & Schramek, T. E. (2007).
The effects of stress and stress hormones on human cognition: Implications for the field of brain and cognition. Brain and Cognition, 65,
209 –237. doi:10.1016/j.bandc.2007.02.007
Mehta, B. S., Cornell, D., Fan, X., & Gregory, A. (2013). Bullying climate
and school engagement in ninth-grade students. Journal of School
Health, 83, 45–52.
Miller, G., Chen, E., & Cole, S. (2009). Health psychology: Developing
biologically plausible models linking the social world and physical
health. Annual Review of Psychology, 60, 501–524. doi:10.1146/annurev
.psych.60.110707.163551
Molden, D. C., & Dweck, C. S. (2006). Finding “meaning” in psychology:
A lay theories approach to self-regulation, social perception, and social
development. American Psychologist, 61, 192–203. doi:10.1037/0003066X.61.3.192
Mueller, C. M., & Dweck, C. S. (1998). Praise for intelligence can
undermine children’s motivation and performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 33–52. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.75.1.33
Nishina, A., & Juvonen, J. (2005). Daily reports of witnessing and experiencing peer harassment in middle school. Child Development, 76,
435– 450. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2005.00855.x
Olson, K., & Dweck, C. S. (2008). A blueprint for social cognitive
development. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 3, 193–202. doi:
10.1111/j.1745-6924.2008.00074.x
Pellegrini, A., & Long, J. (2002). A longitudinal study of bullying, dominance, and victimization during the transition from primary school
through secondary school. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 20, 259 –280. doi:10.1348/026151002166442
AQ: 26 Pennebaker, J. (2004). Theories, therapies, and taxpayers: On the complexities of the expressive writing paradigm. Clinical Psychology: Science
and Practice, 11, 138 –142. doi:10.1093/clipsy.bph063
Pennebaker, J. W., & Chung, C. K. (2011). Expressive writing: Connections to physical and mental health. In H. S. Friendman (Ed.), The
Oxford handbook of health psychology (pp. 417– 437). New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.
Pennebaker, J. W., Francis, M. E., & Booth, R. J. (2007). Linguistic Inquiry
and Word Count: LIWC [Computer software]. Austin, TX: Liwc.net.
Raudenbush, S. (1984). Magnitude of teacher expectancy effects on pupil
IQ as a function of the credibility of expectancy induction: A synthesis
of findings from 18 experiments. Journal of Educational Psychology,
76, 85–97. doi:10.1037/0022-0663.76.1.85
Reis, H. T., & Gosling, S. D. (2010). Social psychological methods outside
the laboratory. In S. Fiske, D. Gilbert, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook
of social psychology (5th ed., Vol. 1, pp. 82–114). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Richards, M. H., Crowe, P. A., Larson, R., & Swarr, A. (1998). Developmental patterns and gender differences in the experience of peer companionship during adolescence. Child Development, 69, 154 –163.
Ross, L., & Nisbett, R. E. (1991). The person and the situation: Perspectives of social psychology. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Rudolph, K. D. (2010). Implicit theories of peer relationships. Social
Development, 19, 113–129. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9507.2008.00534.x
Sapolsky, R. M. (2005). The influence of social hierarchy on primate
health. Science, 308, 648 – 652. doi:10.1126/science.1106477
Schimmack, U. (2012). The ironic effect of significant results on the
credibility of multiple-study articles. Psychological Methods, 17, 551–
566. doi:10.1037/a0029487
Senior, J. (2013, January 20). Why you never truly leave high school: New
science on its corrosive, traumatizing effects. New York Magazine.
Retrieved from http://nymag.com/news/features/high-school-2013-1/
Sherman, D. K., Hartson, K. A., Binning, K. R., Purdie-Vaughns, V.,
Garcia, J., Taborsky-Barba, S., . . . Cohen, G. L. (2013). Deflecting the

17

trajectory and changing the narrative: How self-affirmation affects academic performance and motivation under identity threat. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 104, 591– 618. doi:10.1037/
a0031495
Silver, D., Saunders, M., & Zarate, E. (2008). What factors predict high
school graduation in the Los Angeles Unified School District? (California Dropout Research Project Report #14). Santa Barbara, CA: Univer- AQ: 28
sity of California, Santa Barbara.
Simmons, J. P., Nelson, L. D., & Simonsohn, U. (2011). False-positive
psychology: Undisclosed flexibility in data collection and analysis allows presenting anything as significant. Psychological Science, 22,
1359 –1366. doi:10.1177/0956797611417632
Smith, P. K., Jostman, N. B., Galinsky, A. D., & van Dijk, W. W. (2008).
Lacking power impairs executive functions, Psychological Science, 19,
441– 447. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02107.x
Smith, P. K., & Trope, Y. (2006). You focus on the forest when you’re in
charge of the trees: Power priming and abstract information processing.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 90, 578 –596. doi:
10.1037/0022-3514.90.4.578
Sundblad, G. B., Jansson, A., Saartok, T., Renström, P., & Engström,
L.-M. (2008). Self-rated pain and perceived health in relation to stress
and physical activity among school-students: A 3-year follow-up. Pain,
136, 239 –249. doi:10.1016/j.pain.2007.06.032
Tanen, N. (Producer), & Hughes, J. (Producer & Director). (1985). The
breakfast club [Motion picture]. United States: Universal Pictures.
Walton, G. M. (in press). The new science of wise psychological interventions. Current Directions in Psychological Science.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A brief social-belonging intervention improves academic and health outcomes among minority students.
Science, 331, 1447–1451. doi:10.1126/science.1198364
Walton, G. M., Logel, C., Peach, J. M., Spencer, S. J., & Zanna, M. P.
(2013). Two brief social-psychological interventions transform women’s
experience, relationships and achievement in engineering. Unpublished
manuscript, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
Williams, K. D. (2009). Ostracism: A temporal need-threat model. In M.
Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 41, pp.
279 –314). New York, NY: Academic Press.
Williams, K. D., & Jarvis, B. (2006). Cyberball: A program for use in
research on ostracism and interpersonal acceptance. Behavior Research
Methods, 38, 174 –180. doi:10.3758/BF03192765
Wilson, T. D. (2006). The power of social psychological interventions.
Science, 313, 1251–1252. doi:10.1126/science.1133017
Wilson, T. D. (2011). Redirect: The surprising new science of psychological change. New York, NY: Little, Brown. doi:10.1037/e506142012001
Wilson, T. D., Damiani, M., & Shelton, N. (2002). Improving the academic
performance of college students with brief attributional interventions. In
J. Aronson (Ed.), Improving academic achievement: Impact of psychological factors on education (pp. 89 –108). San Diego, CA: Academic
Press. doi:10.1016/B978-012064455-1/50008-7
Wolke, D., Copeland, W. E., Angold, A., & Costello, E. J. (2013). Impact
of bullying in childhood on adult health, wealth, crime, and social
outcomes. Psychological Science, 24, 1958 –1970. doi:10.1177/
0956797613481608
Yeager, D. S., & Dweck, C. S. (2012). Mindsets that promote resilience:
When students believe that personal characteristics can be developed.
Educational Psychologist, 47, 302–314. doi:10.1080/00461520.2012
.722805
Yeager, D. S., Miu, A., Powers, J., & Dweck, C. S. (2013). Implicit
theories of personality and attributions of hostile intent: A meta-analysis,
an experiment, and a longitudinal intervention. Child Development, 84,
1651–1667. doi:10.1111/cdev.12062
Yeager, D. S., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., Pebley, P.,
Master, A., . . . Cohen, G. L. (in press). Breaking the cycle of mistrust:

APA NLM
tapraid5/z2g-perpsy/z2g-perpsy/z2g00614/z2g4184d14z xppws S!1 3/14/14 0:38 Art: 2013-0713

18

YEAGER ET AL.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Wise interventions to provide critical feedback across the racial divide.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General.
Yeager, D. S., Trzesniewski, K., & Dweck, C. S. (2013). An implicit
theories of personality intervention reduces adolescent aggression in
response to victimization and exclusion. Child Development, 84, 970 –
988. doi:10.1111/cdev.12003
Yeager, D. S., Trzesniewski, K., Tirri, K., Nokelainen, P., & Dweck, C. S.
(2011). Adolescents’ implicit theories predict desire for vengeance after
remembered and hypothetical peer conflicts: Correlational and experimental evidence. Developmental Psychology, 47, 1090 –1107. doi:
10.1037/a0023769

Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. (2011). Social-psychological interventions in
education: They’re not magic. Review of Educational Research, 81,
267–301. doi:10.3102/0034654311405999
Zhang, Z., Zyphur, M. J., & Preacher, K. J. (2009). Testing multilevel
mediation using hierarchical linear models. Organizational Research
Methods, 12, 695–719. doi:10.1177/1094428108327450

Received July 11, 2013
Revision received February 10, 2014
Accepted February 11, 2014 !

