How Can We Instill Productive Mindsets at Scale?
A Review of the Evidence and an Initial R&D Agenda
David S. Yeager
University of Texas at Austin
Dave Paunesku
Project for Education Research That Scales and Stanford University
Gregory M. Walton
Stanford University
Carol S. Dweck
Stanford University

Revised June 10, 2013
A White Paper prepared for the White House meeting on
Excellence in Education: The Importance of Academic Mindsets

David Yeager is a Fellow at the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching and a
Faculty Research Fellow at the Charles A. Dana Center at the University of Texas at Austin.
The authors wish to thank the students, teachers, and school staff who participated in the
research described in this white paper. We also thank Geoffrey Cohen and Sian Beilock for their
advice and/or comments. Please address correspondence to David Yeager
(dyeager@utexas.edu).

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

2	  

Executive Summary
Research has increasingly shown that there is more to student success than cognitive ability,
curriculum and instruction. Students’ mindsets—their beliefs about themselves and the school
setting—can powerfully affect whether students learn and grow in school. For example, when
students have a fixed mindset, they believe that their intelligence is something that is finite and
unchangeable. This makes them doubt their intelligence when they experience difficulty and it
undermines resilience and learning. However, when students have more of a growth mindset,
they believe that intelligence can be developed. In this mindset, students respond more
resiliently to challenges and show greater learning and achievement in the face of difficulty.
Randomized experimental studies find that even brief interventions that convey a growth mindset
can have important, lasting effects on student learning and performance. For instance:
•

In an experiment with over 250,000 students learning math concepts on the Khan
Academy website, growth mindset encouragement presented at the top of the screen
(e.g., “When you learn a new kind of math problem, you grow your math brain!”)
increased the rate at which students successfully solved math problems even months after
students no longer saw the message, compared to controls who did not see this message.

•

In an experiment conducted with over 1500 students at 13 high schools across the
country, learning the growth mindset for one classroom session over the Internet reduced
the percent of courses failed by low-achieving students by nearly 7 percentage points,
compared to control group students.

•

In an experiment with over 7,500 students at a state university with high dropout rates, a
web-based growth mindset intervention completed the summer before freshman year
increased the percentage of students earning >12 credits in the first term by 3-4
percentage points (vs. controls), an effect that was larger for African American students
(10 percentage points). Earning >12 credits strongly predicts on-time graduation.

How can we deploy research on students’ mindsets to help more students succeed in school?
While it can be helpful to redirect students’ mindsets using brief interventions, it may also be
helpful to create everyday experiences that reinforce productive mindsets. Doing so is not
always straightforward, as there are many ways the essential psychological message can be lost
at scale. Scaling responsibly will require dedicated R&D efforts in three areas:
•
•
•

Principles: Understanding how to maximize the effects of mindset interventions.
Practices: Expanding the “toolkit” of day-to-day practices that instill adaptive mindsets.
Assessments: Developing measures that allow for more rapid learning from practice.

With significant investments in these areas, researchers and practitioners can more confidently
apply research on mindsets to effect large-scale changes in education—to make educational
outcomes more equitable by reducing achievement gaps, to make school more enjoyable by
placing the focus on learning and improving rather than on demonstrating raw intelligence, and
to make school more efficient by allowing students to take better advantage of learning resources
already available to them.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

3	  

About This Document
This document was created to share the state of the field regarding academic mindsets with
education policymakers and private and public funding agencies, in order to help with the
organization of investment agendas. It is shared in the spirit of accelerating learning about
strategies to create infrastructures that successfully address student mindsets. It is not meant as a
final document. Indeed, some of the findings summarized here come from recently-conducted
studies that have not yet been able to be accepted for publication. As a result, we ask that
readers not quote the document or cite the data without written permission of the authors.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

4	  

How Can We Instill Productive Mindsets at Scale?
A Review of the Evidence and an Initial R&D Agenda
Why do some students shrink from challenges and wilt in the face of difficulty while others
thrive on challenges, achieve, and fulfill their potential? Imagine a low-income student who is
not learning in school, even with a well-trained teacher using appropriate content and pedagogy.
When the student is given hard tasks and critical feedback, the student shuts down, does not ask
for help, and hides misunderstandings. Why? In recent years, a growing body of experimental
research has begun to answer this question.
This research shows that there is more to student success than cognitive ability or the quality of
the classroom curriculum. Students’ mindsets—their beliefs about themselves and their school
environments—can powerfully affect whether students engage and learn in school or do not.1
Students who conclude “I’m dumb at this” or “People like me don’t belong here” may not
exhibit the tenacity needed to persist in school, regardless of their cognitive ability or the quality
of the instruction they receive. Yet when educators are armed with a precise understanding of
the psychology of mindsets, they can create improvements in academic outcomes even among
chronic low performers. Brief but theoretically-grounded interventions, sometimes delivered
over the Internet directly to students and sometimes delivered by teachers in classroom
workshops, can redirect negative thoughts like “I’m not a math person” or “I’m afraid to make
mistakes” and refocus students on learning. When this is done, students often earn higher grades
and are more likely to stay in school, in some cases months or years later. Crucially, many of
these findings come from the strongest kind of research design for making causal inferences—
double-blind field experiments involving large numbers of students each randomly assigned to a
treatment or control condition, with student outcomes obtained from official school records.2
While much research has shown that it is possible to redirect mindsets and raise achievement in
the context of a randomized experiment, the field must understand how to do so reliably, at
scale, for diverse populations of students in diverse contexts. The ultimate goal of these efforts is
to create a specific psychological experience for students—one that removes a major barrier to
learning and allows students to benefit fully from the educational resources in their
environments. As with all research-based educational improvements, many factors can make it
difficult to recreate a psychological experience at scale. The present document provides a
potential R&D agenda that outlines how the field might begin to learn to successfully use
mindset research to remove psychological barriers to learning in diverse contexts.
Although the R&D recommendations outlined here apply to several different research-based
mindset interventions—for instance, interventions to change students’ mindsets about their
social-belonging in school, interventions to reduce the impact of negative stereotypes in school,

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1
Garcia and Cohen, 2012; Wilson, 2011; Yeager and Walton, 2011
2
See below for a description.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

5	  

and interventions to remind students of the relevance of their schoolwork3— the present
document focuses on mindsets about intelligence.4 This is because mindsets about intelligence
have a great deal of data available in terms of implementation at multiple levels by multiple
sources—teachers, researchers, parents, private industry, etc. These data provide a useful case
study for illustrating broad themes relevant to other mindsets and perhaps to the “non-cognitive”
field more generally.
Definitions of Non-Cognitive Skills and Mindsets
In recent years, there has been a growing understanding of the non-cognitive skills that promote
student learning.5 These factors are called “non-cognitive” because they are not the specific or
general intellectual skills that are typically implicated in learning. In another sense these socalled non-cognitive factors are quite “cognitive”—they often involve beliefs or learning
strategies that students have developed. Nonetheless, we, along with the broader academic and
non-academic community, tend to call the broad cluster of “non-intellectual” factors that affect
academic or professional outcomes “non-cognitive skills.”6
One set of non-cognitive factors involves academic mindsets. Academic mindsets, broadly
defined, involve students’ perceptions of themselves and/or their learning environments, and can
affect how students perform and whether they put forth or withdraw effort in the face of
academic adversity. This includes, for instance, a belief that one’s intelligence is fixed versus
can grow and improve, a belief that one belongs and will be valued in a setting, and a belief that
one’s schoolwork has relevance for important life goals. It also involves the negative stereotypes
that give rise to anxiety, which can interfere with performance.7 Past research has found that
successfully addressing each of these mindsets, sometimes using brief (1-2 session) theory-based
interventions (similar to those outlined below), can improve student performance and reduce
achievement gaps in a way that endures over time.8 As noted above, we focus primarily on
mindsets about intelligence, while acknowledging the important influence that other mindsets
have on student outcomes. See the bibliography in Appendix 1 for some prominent examples of
other targeted interventions that address student mindsets and related non-cognitive factors.
What Are Mindsets About Intelligence?
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3
See Cohen, Garcia, Purdie-Vaugns, Apfel, and Brzustoski, 2009; Hulleman and Harackeiwicz,
2009; Walton and Cohen, 2011; also see Ramirez and Beilock, 2011. Also see the bibliography
in Appendix 1.
4
Blackwell, Trzesniewski, and Dweck, 2007; Dweck, 2006.
5
See Dweck, Walton, and Cohen, 2011; Farrington, Roderick, Allensowrth, Nagaoka, Keyes,
Johnson, and Beechum 2012; U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Technology,
2013.
6
See the Farrington et al. 2012 report for more background.
7
See Blackwell et al., 2007; Cohen et al., 2009; Ramirez and Beilock, 2011; Hulleman and
Harackeiwicz, 2009; Walton and Cohen, 2011.
8
Also see Garcia and Cohen, 2012; Yeager and Walton, 2011.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

6	  

Carol Dweck and others have shown that many students have what is called a “fixed mindset.”
This is the idea that your intelligence is a fixed quantity—something you only have a certain
amount of. Students with a fixed mindset tend to agree with survey items like: “You have a
certain amount of intelligence, and there is not much you can do to change that.”
In controlled laboratory experiments and in long-term studies in schools, a fixed mindset has
many consequences.9 See Table 1 for an overview. First, fixed mindset students avoid
challenges. They want easier problems that will make them look and feel smart. Second, a fixed
mindset leads to unproductive beliefs about effort, like “If I have to try hard, I’m not smart” or
“There’s no point in trying if I’m not a natural.” Last, fixed mindset students are not resilient.
Instead, they hide their setbacks and deficiencies, not wanting people to see them as having low
ability. They fail to ask for help and even lie about low scores when asked about their
performance. And so it is not surprising that in a study of urban minority middle school
students, holding a fixed mindset predicted lower math grades over several years.10 The same
findings emerge in many other age groups and contexts.11
Table 1. Fixed and growth mindsets about intelligence.
Fixed mindset

Growth mindset

Goals

Look smart (don’t look dumb)

Learn

Value of effort, help and
strategies?

Lower

Higher

Response to challenge

Tendency to give up

Work harder and smarter

Changes in grades during
times of adversity

Decrease or remain low

Increase

Importantly, many students hold the opposite belief—what is called a “growth mindset.” This is
the idea that your intelligence has the potential to grow and improve in response to effort, good
strategies, and help from others. These students agree with survey items that portray intelligence
as a quality that can be developed. From the perspective of a growth mindset, an academic
challenge is not a threat to your raw ability; it is an opportunity for learning and improvement. In
a growth mindset, effort is a good thing: a student might say “trying harder makes you smarter.”
In the face of a problem they cannot solve, a growth mindset student will be resilient, seeking
appropriate help or switching strategies, rather than hiding their confusion. In longitudinal
studies, a growth mindset predicts an upward trajectory in grades even across difficult school
transitions.12
What is Known About How to Affect Mindsets?
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
9
See Yeager and Dweck, 2012, for a review of this research.
10
Blackwell et al., 2007
11
Yeager, 2012
12
Blackwell et al., 2007

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

7	  

There are at least two ways to think about how to influence students’ mindsets in educational
settings. First, everyday interactions with students, such as the way parents and teachers praise
performance, frame critical feedback, structure grading systems, or talk about race and gender,
can have a profound effect on mindsets.13 Second, researchers have developed precise, theorybased interventions that redirect students’ thinking toward a growth mindset. These can
involve classroom- or Internet-based reading, writing, or video activities lasting from one to
several class sessions. Below, we briefly review research demonstrating both ways to affect
student mindsets. Next, we outline the key areas of R&D that will help us to apply the lessons
from this research more broadly.
Everyday interactions. A number of studies have documented that subtle verbal feedback from
adults can put children in a fixed mindset and undermine motivation, and that this can happen
even from valued caregivers who are trying to encourage children. A classic paper by Claudia
Mueller and Carol Dweck showed that praising young adolescents for their intelligence—saying
they were “smart” when they did well—created a fixed mindset and its problems.14 It put
students in a world in which people evaluate intelligence. In contrast, praising the student’s
“process” (their effort or strategies) put children in a growth mindset and fostered resilience.15 In
related research, Aneeta Rattan and Catherine Good showed that comforting struggling math
students by saying the equivalent of “Overall, you’re smart, but it’s okay—some people just
aren’t good at math” taught students a fixed mindset and compromised their motivation. In both
cases, practitioners who say these things may be trying to help students feel good. But ironically,
these well-intended practice undermine resilience.
Thus, how adults talk to students can change their mindsets and increase their academic tenacity.
Can such verbal input, if heard repeatedly, create longer-term changes in a child’s overall
motivational framework? Two new studies suggest that it can. Gunderson and colleagues found
that how parents praise 1-3 year-old children—whether they praise the child’s effort and process
versus ability—predicts whether the child will have a growth mindset and a desire for challenge
5 years later. Similarly, Pomerantz showed that children aged 8 to 12 whose mothers used
person praise (“you are smart”) rather than process praise (“you tried hard”) showed more
change in the direction of a fixed mindset over a six-month period.16 Children whose mothers
praised smartness also tended to avoid challenges and instead chose tasks where they would
learn less but would not fail. It is easy to see how those students, over time, would acquire less
knowledge, especially in the face of the rising difficulty of academic work in the middle school
years.
In sum, both experiments and longitudinal studies show that even brief everyday interactions that
support a growth versus fixed mindset can produce different motivational frameworks in students
and powerfully affect learning.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
13
cf. Masten, 2001
14
Mueller and Dweck, 1998
15
Also see Kamins and Dweck, 1999.
16
Pomerantz and Kempner, in press.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

8	  

Precise, theory-based persuasive interventions. As shown above, daily verbal feedback from
valued adults, even if well-intended, can create a fixed mindset. Yet through precise theorybased interventions it is possible to soften the built-up residue of a fixed mindset and create
lasting changes in motivation and learning. Crucially, this is possible both during adolescence
and even later in adulthood. These interventions teach students about neuroscience studies that
demonstrate the brain’s potential to grow and change as well as the implications of this fact—
that if you get confused or stumble, it does not mean you are “dumb.” The intervention teaches
that, in fact, by coping with difficulty and confusion you can grow new connections in your brain
and become “smarter.” Below, we summarize several interventions that tested this strategy.
Example 1: Classroom-based workshops. Lisa Blackwell and Carol Dweck created an eightsession workshop to teach a growth mindset and study skills and evaluated it with low-income
and minority 7th graders in New York City.17 In it, students learned to think of their brains as
muscles that get stronger as you exercise them. Students visualized new neuronal connections
growing as they completed hard math problems. Treatment group students also received six
sessions of study skills. Blackwell et al. compared this to a control workshop that learned only
study skills for eight sessions. The researchers found that the study skills control group
continued the normal decline in math grades commonly experienced by middle schoolers.
Students who learned the growth mindset with the study skills, however, showed a sharp rebound
in their grades, performing significantly better at the end of the semester. See Figure 1.

Math Grade

Figure 1. Effects of growth mindset training on 7th grade students’ math grades
Source: Blackwell, Trzesniewski, and Dweck, 2007.
2.70
2.65
2.60
2.55
2.50
2.45
2.40
2.35
2.30
2.25
2.20

Growth mindset
+ Study skills
Study skills only

Before workshop

After workshop

Example 2: Internet-delivered one-time reading and writing exercises. Studies such as that
conducted by Blackwell et al. have shown that it is possible to change student mindsets through
informative workshops. However, at scale, it can be difficult to rely on this strategy because it
involves intensive teacher training—something that can introduce heterogeneity in
implementation and also be time and cost-intensive. Furthermore, teachers may prefer even
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
17
Blackwell et al., 2007

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

9	  

briefer interventions. In recent years, then, Dave Paunesku, Carissa Romero, Greg Walton, and
David Yeager have tested whether it is possible to distill the essential messages in the classroombased mindset interventions into briefer activities (~ 30 minute) and deliver them over the
Internet directly to students. If effective, this approach would allow researchers and practitioners
to scale mindset interventions to large numbers of students without incurring the human resource
costs of visiting every school with trained facilitators.
In the past two years this strategy has been tested with thousands of students. Each test has
followed the same general procedure. Below we describe the overall intervention materials and
evaluation methods, followed by the results for each population. Because this approach is new,
we cite the working papers reporting these results below.
Overall intervention procedure. In each of the studies summarized below, a growth mindset was
communicated to students via a custom website that students visited either in their school’s
computer lab during school hours or on their own computer at a time of their choosing (for
college students). When students visited this website, the computer randomly assigned them to
be presented either with a growth mindset intervention or a control intervention. When they
completed the intervention, they were thanked and, from their perspective, the study was over.
Student academic records were then obtained from the school or from a national database,
depending on the study.
Students randomly assigned to the growth mindset intervention condition typically read an article
describing the brain's ability to restructure itself as a consequence of effort and changing
strategies. The article focused on the implications of these neuroscientific findings for students'
potential to become more intelligent through study and practice. This message was reinforced
through several writing exercises. In the first, students summarized the scientific findings in their
own words. In the second exercise, they read about a hypothetical student who was becoming
discouraged and starting to think of himself as “not smart enough” to do well in school. Students
were asked to advise this target student based on what they had read about the growth mindset.
In a control condition, students completed an analogous activity, usually one that taught facts
about memory and the brain but did not mention that intellectual ability is malleable. Below, we
describe the effects of this intervention procedure in several different populations.
High school students. Some experiments have tested whether a growth mindset intervention
could affect low-achieving high school students’ GPAs across all academic subjects (Math,
Science, English and History). In the spring of 2012, students at 13 high schools (public, charter,
and private) across the country (N = 1594) participated in a web-based growth mindset
intervention experiment.18 At the end of the term, students’ official grades in academic subjects
were collected. Analyses focused on changes in overall GPA and on the percent of courses
failed.
There were significant but small effects for the whole sample. However, among the lowachieving students (bottom tercile), the growth mindset treatment improved overall GPA by 0.18
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
18	  Paunesku, Yeager, Romero, and Walton, 2013.	  

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

10	  

grade points, a significant improvement. Much of this effect was explained by preventing
students from failing their courses. Within this high-risk population of students, control-group
students passed 60% of their classes, compared to 67% among growth-mindset treatment group
students. This is depicted in Figure 2.
Figure 2. Effects of growth mindset training on high school students’ course passing rates,
among low-performing students (the bottom third in terms of pre-intervention GPA).
Source: Paunesku, Yeager, Romero, and Walton (2013)

Community college students. Nationally, community college students are disproportionally more
likely to be low-performing, low-income or students of color. Thus an important question for
creating educational equality is whether it is possible to improve these students’ prospects for
completing a college credential. Paunesku, Yeager and colleagues tested this in a study similar to
that described above, conducted with students at a community college in the Los Angeles
metropolitan area (predominately Latino students; N = 715) in the Fall of 2011.19 At the
beginning of the Fall semester, students completed the one-session growth mindset intervention
via the Internet. At the end of the term, researchers obtained official records from the registrar.
The primary outcome was post-intervention GPAs in all academic subjects (Math, Science,
English, History, etc.). Analyses showed that the one-time growth mindset intervention raised
overall GPA by 0.18 grade points compared to the control group who learned facts about the
brain, a significant difference.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
19
Yeager, Paunesku, Romero, Brown, Muhich, and Walton, 2013.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

11	  

A secondary question was whether a growth mindset message might benefit students who might
be most likely to have a strong belief that they are not “math people”—that is, students who have
enrolled in community college but are taking developmental (pre-college) math. Indeed, in a
survey of developmental math students at 21 colleges across the country conducted by the
Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, nearly 70% of students endorsed a fixed
mindset about math ability, saying a person is just a “math person” or not, and there is nothing
they can do about it.20 In the present study, we looked at the effects of the intervention
specifically on math course dropout among the sub-sample of developmental math students (N =
292). The growth mindset treatment reduced dropout from the course by over half (Control:
20% dropped out; Growth mindset treatment: 9% dropped out), a significant difference. Thus,
learning that your “math brain” can grow and develop could benefit even adults who have likely
experienced a lifetime of feeling “dumb” at math.
Students transitioning out of a high-performing charter school. Other recent experiments have
tested whether growth mindset interventions might help address college persistence problems
faced by graduates of high-performing urban charter high schools. Many high-quality charter
schools such as KIPP, YES Prep, Mastery, Aspire, or Achievement First achieve high graduation
and college acceptance rates, relative to similar students at local district schools or lowerperforming charter schools. Yet many of these high-performing charters report that too few of
their students successfully complete college within 6 years—in some cases fewer than half—
even though relative to comparable district schools serving similar students their rate of college
completion is quite high. Some might view the lower persistence rates of these charter students
as a critique of the school curriculum or student body. Another possibility however is a
psychological one. Perhaps the schools are adequately preparing students in terms of academics
but students’ beliefs about whether they will be viewed as having intellectual potential in college
contributes to their difficulty persisting until graduation.
Building on past research by Joshua Aronson, Catherine Good, and Claude Steele,21 a new
intervention conducted by Yeager, Walton, and Dweck rested on the notion that racial minority
students may worry that their intellectual ability will be viewed negatively in college, and that
this worry could be an impediment to persistence in college. If so, then learning that intelligence
is not a fixed trait but can be developed through education might alleviate some of the threat of
negative stereotypes and allow students to more readily embrace the challenges of college.
In light of this possibility, Yeager and colleagues collaborated with staff at an urban charter
school network on the East coast to conduct a growth mindset intervention with all outgoing
seniors at two schools (N = 160) in the spring of 2012.22 Nearly all of the students were African
American and low-income (i.e., received free or reduced-price lunch). In May of senior year
students completed a version of the brief web-based growth mindset materials described above
(randomly assigned at the individual level). Working closely with school staff, the intervention
was customized through a four-month R&D process that drew on extensive focus groups,
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
20
Silva and White, 2013; Yeager, 2012.
21
See Aronson, Fried, and Good, 2002; Steele, 1997.
22
Yeager, Walton, Powers, House, Keane, Kementz, and Dweck, 2013.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

12	  

interviews, and pilot tests. The customized intervention emphasized not only that people’s
intelligence can be developed but also that your “know how” in college—your skills in
navigating the environment—can grow and improve as you face new challenges. It
communicated that if you struggle adjusting to college it does not mean you are “dumb” or that
you “don’t belong” but rather that you are growing your “know how” to succeed in college.
Randomly-assigned control students learned brain facts.
No contact was made with students after the intervention was delivered in May of their senior
year. Instead, researchers, working with school officials, measured college persistence rates via
the National Student Clearinghouse (NSC), a non-profit database that tracks full-time enrollment
(at many colleges, full-time enrollment is defined as 12 credits or more; note that the NSC does
not report GPA, so college grades are not available as an outcome in this study). Analyses of
these data are ongoing, but the initial results are striking. Raw data show that 49% of controlcondition students were enrolled full-time in college but 66% of growth-mindset condition
students were, a significant difference. This effect was not diminished and remained significant
when controlling for other predictors of college persistence, like SAT scores. These findings are
supportive of the overall idea that one barrier to college persistence is a concern that one’s
intelligence could be negatively stereotyped and undermined by everyday setbacks. However,
even brief one-time interventions that teach that intelligence is not static but can grow powerfully
affected full-time college enrollment.
Full-scale implementation at a large institution. Is full-scale implementation of a web-based
growth mindset intervention within an institution possible? Yeager, Walton, and Dweck tested
this in a randomized experiment conducted at a large four-year university in Texas. Students at
this university graduate on-time at a lower rate than might be expected based on their academic
credentials (roughly 50%)—rates that are especially low for African American students (39%)—
making it a suitable place to test whether a growth mindset intervention might help increase
those rates both in the general population and among students more likely to face negative
intellectual stereotypes.23
As a part of online freshman orientation activities—in which students filled out medical forms
and learned how to sign up for classes—all incoming students were required to complete a 30minute overview of the “university mindset.” In this activity, students were randomized (at the
individual level) to a version of the growth mindset intervention described above or to a placebo
control group that discussed adjusting to the physical layout of a new city and a college campus.
The growth mindset intervention from past studies was customized for this university by
conducting interviews, focus groups, and pilot tests with current upperclassmen, who wrote
about the difficulties they had making the transition to college.
Over 91% of incoming students successfully completed the intervention (N = 7,342). Research
assistants reliably coded the quality of the open-ended intervention responses and found that
fully 96% provided substantive responses to the prompt. No participants were excluded from
analyses on the basis of their responses, however, so as to estimate an “intent-to-treat” effect,
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
23
Yeager, Walton, Ritter, and Dweck, 2013.	  

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

13	  

which is important in estimating the effect of the treatment in real-world terms. Thus, this study
is close to a census of the freshman class, making it a reasonable demonstration of what a fully
“scaled-up” growth mindset intervention might look like.
Students completed the growth mindset materials between May and July of 2012. It took
roughly 22 minutes to complete and students did so using whatever computer they used to
complete the rest of their orientation materials. Although students will continue to be tracked
through college, for the present analyses credit attainment information was obtained from the
University registrar for the Fall 2012 semester. The focal outcome was the percent of students
who obtained more than the minimum number of credits (>12 gpa-bearing credits: a past analysis
found that this was one of the strongest predictors of on-time graduation).24
The growth mindset intervention increased the rate at which students in the full sample earned
>12 credits from 61% in the control to 64% in the growth mindset treatment, a significant
difference. These effects were larger for African American students, who may face negative
stereotypes about their intellectual ability. While only 45% of African American students in the
control group earned 12+ credits, this number was increased to 55% in the treatment condition,
also a significant difference. This corresponded to a 63% reduction in the achievement gap in
credit earning between White students and African American students, as a function of a onetime growth mindset intervention delivered over the Internet months before school started.
These findings are illustrated in Figure 3. All of these findings remained significant and were
slightly larger when adjusting for covariates that predict credit attainment, like SAT scores, high
school class rank, and sex.
Figure 3. Percent of students earning >12 credits in the first semester of college as a
function of growth mindset treatment, among all students (N = 7,342) and African
American students (N = 356). Source: Yeager, Walton, Ritter, and Dweck (2013).
Control

Growth Mindset

70%
65%

64%
61%

60%
55%
55%
50%
45%
45%
40%
All Students

African American Students

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
24
Diehl, 2012.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

14	  

Relation to traditional interventions. Mindset interventions are, of course, only part of the
solution to problems of low achievement and group disparities in education. Mindset
interventions do not replace traditional school reforms; instead, they allow students to take
advantage of educational opportunities available to them. Fully addressing systematic issues in
education thus requires continuing investments in improvements to teaching and instruction as
well as other programs to support children and families. Indeed, well-run schools are a
fundamental human right for students, even apart from their impact on learning.
At the same time, it can be helpful from a policy perspective to put the size of the effects of
mindset interventions into context by comparing them to other non-mindset interventions in the
literature. How do the effects of mindset interventions compare to traditional educational
reforms tested at a similarly large scale? Many interventions are randomized at a school or
classroom level, making them ill-suited for comparison to growth mindset training. However,
one well-designed line of research by Goldrick-Rab and colleagues has examined the impact of
offering entering college students $3,500 scholarships if they remain enrolled as full-time
students. Because a sub-set of students in these studies were randomly assigned at the individual
level to be offered these scholarships, researchers could evaluate the impact of doing this on
analogous student outcomes to those summarized above, making this one interesting case against
which to compare effects of growth mindset training. Goldrick-Rab found that offering students
$3,500 scholarships had full-sample effects on full-time college enrollment of 2.4 percentage
points.25 Comparable effects of growth mindset interventions on college outcomes were 3
percentage points for full-time enrollment in the full sample, and 10 to 17 percentage points for
African American students, who statistically are at higher risk of not persisting through college.
Thus, the available evidence obtained from experiments with many thousands of students
suggests that growth mindset interventions delivered over the Internet at no cost to institutions
can be at least as effective as the effect of offering $3,500 scholarships.26
Summary. These findings demonstrate the possibility that even brief but theoretically informed
methods to communicate a growth mindset to students can affect their academic performance
and resilience. However, additional research is needed to build on these demonstrations and
provide specific guidance for practitioners to reliably affect student mindsets in diverse settings.
Below we outline an R&D agenda that summarizes what more needs to be learned to effectively
and responsibly use mindset research and to positively affect more students.
What Do We Need to Learn to Effectively Scale Mindset Research in Education?
Larger-scale experimental studies are needed to understand the conditions that maximize or
reduce the impact of mindset interventions. For instance, what kinds of students benefit most? In
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
25
See p. 38 in Goldrick-Rab, Harris, Kelchen, and Benson, 2012;
http://finaidstudy.org/documents/GoldrickRab%20Harris%20Kelchen%20Benson%202012%20FULL.pdf
26
Goldrick-Rab et al., 2012

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

15	  

what kind of contexts do students benefit most? And what kinds of strategies to impart a growth
mindset are most effective?
These research questions overlap with the interests of educational practitioners. Practitioners
also want to affect student mindsets and raise achievement and they want to do it well. To do so
they need a larger “toolkit” of validated everyday practices for changing mindsets and they need
principles for how to apply these effectively in diverse classrooms. At the same time,
practitioners often ask for assessments so they can learn whether they are effectively changing
mindsets. For reasons we outline below, existing mindset assessments, while suitable for
research purposes, are less suitable for informing rapid improvements in applied settings.
Below, we outline three broad areas for R&D that represent the highest priorities for both
researchers and practitioners: (1) Principles for effective interventions; (2) Everyday practices
that affect mindsets; (3) Assessments that measure short-term changes in mindsets and related
behaviors so as to provide data to inform improvement efforts.
I.

Principles: Understanding how to maximize the effects of mindset interventions.

A crucial area for research and development is to better understand the conditions that allow
mindset interventions to have maximal and sustained effects. Some research and theory can shed
light on these conditions. However, many of these ideas require further testing on a much larger
scale. This is a high priority for research going forward.
Below, we show that past mindset interventions have three essential qualities: They (1)
successfully target students’ beliefs about themselves and their educational environments, (2) are
delivered in a psychologically precise and potent way, and (3) tap into recursive processes in
school (virtuous cycles) that sustain the effects of the initial intervention.27 As we state below,
these principles of effective interventions are grounded in theory and past research but require
further testing to give practitioners more concrete guidance.
Targeting students’ beliefs. Mindset interventions begin by understanding students’ beliefs and
their impact. Mindset interventions may seem small to outside observers, and often they are brief
and low-cost relative to other reforms. However, to a student who worries that a poor test score
means that she is stupid or could be seen as stupid, or who believes that members of his racial
group are not respected in school, learning that the brain is not static but can form new
connections and become smarter when challenged can be powerful. This message assuages the
specific fears that can stifle learning and can thus can have strikingly large effects on student
outcomes.
Because mindset interventions work by targeting student beliefs, research needs to identify the
specific beliefs that matter in a given educational setting to have an impact. In many cases, this
has led researchers to conduct extensive interviews, focus groups, and pilot tests to inform
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
27
For other discussions of these ideas, see Garcia and Cohen, 2012; Yeager, Walton, and Cohen,
2012; Yeager and Walton, 2011.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

16	  

alterations to intervention materials. This was the case in the community college, charter school,
and four-year college intervention experiments noted above. In other cases, however, materials
are not customized but, rather, are designed to be effective for a wide-range of students and are
simply administered to many students, as in the high school experiment noted above. It is
important to conduct research on when mindset interventions require customization (and, if so,
how and to what extent) and when they do not—when they are “robust” in different contexts and
with different populations and how they can be made more robust.
The finding that existing mindset interventions have had significant effects with diverse
populations creates a significant opportunity: Can even non-customized mindset interventions be
effective in changing students’ mindsets and improving academic outcomes on a national level?
And what factors could cause it to have differential impact? We can answer these questions
almost immediately, in the next few years. With coordination, we could evaluate an existing
one-time, web-based growth-mindset interventions with a national probability sample of schools
from various grade levels. Of course this would involve some thinking about logistics, but this is
exactly the sort of problem that government-sponsored research routinely solves. The NSF funds
the General Social Survey and the National Election Studies, the latter of which conducted a
representative-sample web-based study in the 2008 election, demonstrating the feasibility of
probability-based web surveys. With a panel of psychologists, education researchers,
government officials, and experts in probability-based sampling, something analogous could be
accomplished for mindsets. This type of free, web-based intervention would not address all
causes of fixed mindsets in school (let alone all psychological causes of underachievement), and
there will undoubtedly be heterogeneity in effect sizes. Thus, the rest of the R&D agenda
outlined below involves ways to address mindsets in more contextually appropriate ways. In the
meantime, however, a high-priority scientific objective we can achieve in the near term is to
estimate how effective a “baseline” growth mindset intervention could be, especially for lowperforming or disadvantaged students, and what contextual or implementation factors predict
differential impact.
Customizing for Native American communities. In some cases research has customized the
typical growth mindset intervention to make it more consistent with the beliefs of a particular
population. Stephanie Fryberg observed that the traditional “individualistic” framing of a growth
mindset—the idea that you can grow your own personal intelligence—was not as motivating for
Native American populations, who tend to focus more on community-based goals like
contributing to family or community. When the growth mindset message was reframed as a
means to achieve valued collective outcomes, such as contributing to family, this seemed to
produce important improvements. For instance, one school community adopted the new,
collectivistic growth mindset framing throughout the school (and beyond)—teachers, principals,
and parents employed the message that “you help your community when you grow your brain.”
Although not evaluated experimentally, analysis of school records showed a remarkable
turnaround—the school went from being one of the lowest-performing schools in the state in
state test scores to a high performing one in only two years. Kindergarten and 1st grade students
now lead the district in oral reading fluency, and the large majority of older students are showing
more than one year of growth in terms of test scores. However, no published research has
directly compared this community-oriented growth mindset framing to the more traditional
independent one. Future research could directly test whether such revised framings are more

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

17	  

evocative and effective for some populations.
Future directions. There are at least two additional areas of “low hanging fruit” for which it may
be important to customize growth mindset messages. We consider these below.
Early childhood. The interventions summarized above rely on a person’s ability to learn facts
about brain malleability and to understand the relevance of these ideas to schoolwork. How can
such messages be adapted so they are developmentally appropriate for young children?
Research shows that mindsets are operative in young children and affect their challenge-seeking
and persistence. Even subtle hints that people from different groups are “good” or “bad” at
certain tasks can produce in children a fixed mindset about those tasks and undermine resilience.
For instance, Andrei Cimpian and colleagues showed that 4-7 year-old children who hear, for
instance, that “boys are really good at this,” infer that raw ability is necessary to complete a
given task.28 As a consequence, both boys and girls subsequently underperform when they
attempt difficult problems on this task. In addition, as we have noted, praise directed at young
children can affect children’s mindsets, challenge-seeking, and persistence.29 Research that
builds on these findings could inform theories about how to customize messages to instill
productive mindsets in young children. Can we train teachers in Head Start and other early
childhood programs to communicate a growth mindset wisely? Would this be an economically
efficient way to strengthen the long-term effects of early childhood interventions?
Adult vocational education. As the US economy changes and adult workers are increasingly
required to retrain in emerging technologies, it can be especially important for adults to have a
growth mindset—to believe that “old dogs” can learn “new tricks.” In today’s economy, many
employable adults have been laid off, for instance when their jobs became obsolete due to
outsourcing or new technology. Adults with a fixed mindset may feel they cannot acquire
expertise in emerging industries quickly enough to gain new employment. A tailored growth
mindset intervention, however—one that focused on acquiring new job skills—might be a
missing ingredient in adult education programs that seek to help unemployed adults reenter the
workforce. A potential area for innovation is to investigate what would be necessary to apply
growth mindset ideas effectively with this population.
Specific recommendations:
•

•

Use large-scale experiments to learn how robust the effects of a non-customized mindset
intervention are for different groups of students (a “baseline” mindset intervention). For
instance, a population-average effect size could be estimated if a probability-based
sample of K-12 schools and universities participated in individual-level randomized
experimental interventions.
Conduct laboratory and field experiments to learn where it is helpful or necessary to
customize mindset messages to yield larger effects for specific populations (e.g.,
race/ethnic groups; gender groups; age groups; students in specific educational contexts).

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
28
Cimpian, Mu, and Erickson, 2012
29
Mueller and Dweck, 1998

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda
•

•

18	  

Use RFPs or other mechanisms to accelerate growth mindset intervention research in
areas ripe for innovation, such as early childhood and adult vocational training. If
successful, consider public policies that facilitate the implementation of growth mindset
interventions in early childhood and adult educational programs.
Conduct research on the best methods for customizing mindset interventions effectively
in diverse applied settings. For instance, can we develop protocols for conducting usercentered design and then train educational professionals to do this work?

Psychologically wise delivery. As noted, mindset interventions change how students think or
feel about themselves in school. If an intervention does not deliver its message in a way that
leads to these changes, it will not be effective. Each intervention summarized earlier used a
delivery mechanism that drew on research about how to make messages stick.
Rather than simply presenting an appeal to a student, mindset interventions frequently enlist
students to generate the intervention itself. These are active experiences, not passive exposures.
For instance, one delivery mechanism involves asking students to write letters to younger
students advocating for the intervention message (e.g., “Tell a younger student why the brain can
grow”). As research on the “saying-is-believing” effect shows, encouraging students to author a
persuasive appeal and advocate for it to a receptive audience is a powerful means of selfpersuasion.30
Similarly, rather than telling students how they should use a growth mindset in their lives,
interventions sometimes ask students to generate how they could. In these respects, the
interventions provide a built-in element of personalization—individual students respond to
intervention prompts in ways that customize the intervention message for themselves, potentially
making the intervention message most relevant to their own personal experience and increasing
the robustness of the intervention across diverse students. However, this element has not been
tested in past research on the growth mindset.31 An important R&D question involves whether
built-in personalization elements increase the robustness of interventions in diverse populations
and how this robustness may be further improved.32
Although these delivery mechanisms are psychologically powerful and reliable, they are often
subtle. The web-based growth mindset interventions did not expose students to an overt
persuasive appeal (e.g., “You should do your homework to grow your brain”) or tell them they
are receiving “an intervention” to help them. Instead, they used a “stealthy” approach to avoid
feeling controlling or stigmatizing—they avoid conveying that student recipients are seen as in
need of help.33 At the same time, some successful in-person growth mindset workshops have
explicitly emphasized to students that the message is intended to benefit them or their class. For
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
30
Aronson, 1999
31	  Though see	  Godes, Hulleman, and Harackeiwicz, 2007, for a test in the context of mindsets
about the relevance of schoolwork.	  
32
For other examples, see Cohen et al., 2009; Hulleman and Harackeiwicz, 2009; Walton and
Cohen, 2011.
33
Robinson, 2010; Ross and Nisbett, 1991

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

19	  

instance, in Fryberg’s customization for Native American populations, a growth mindset was an
explicit tool for personal and social change. An important empirical question, then, is when a
growth-mindset intervention should be subtle and stealthy and when it should be more overt and
explicit.
What is the right length for a mindset intervention? This is also an empirical question. A worry
is that excessive repetition of the same message risks conveying that students are seen as in need
of help and risks undermining the credibility of the message (“thou doth protest too much”). At
the same time, it may be helpful to have redundancy in mindset messages, so students who may
be unaffected by an initial intervention have additional opportunities to benefit and so that
students can connect an initial mindset message with ongoing academic experiences. An
important area for R&D is to use randomized experiments to test whether “booster” shots
delivered periodically can provide needed redundancy in the delivery of mindset messages and
thus enhance effects without undermining the original intervention.
Specific recommendations:
•

•

•
•
•

Research that tests whether “personalization” elements increase the robustness of mindset
interventions in diverse student populations and, more broadly, how to increase
robustness.
Research that varies the type of persuasive appeal used in a growth mindset experiments,
comparing methods that are more overt to methods that are “stealthier,” to understand
which approach is more effective in particular situations.
Research that tests whether mindset interventions at multiple levels—students, influential
peers, teachers, parents, principals—produce larger effects.
Research that evaluates “boosters” of an intervention, and that identifies what kind, in
what contexts, and delivered when boosters are effective.
Research on developmentally sensitive methods—for instance, methods that pay attention
to adolescents’ concerns about autonomy—that may be needed to successfully address
student mindsets on a wide scale.

Recursive processes. What can seem especially mysterious is how a brief or one-shot mindset
intervention can generate effects that persist over long periods. A key to understanding the longlasting effects of psychological interventions is to understand how they set in motion selfreinforcing processes.
In education, early success begets more success. When an intervention leads a student to study,
learn, and build academic skills, they are better prepared to learn and perform in the future. As
students feel more comfortable in school, they build better relationships with peers and with
teachers—relationships that support higher levels of achievement in the future. As students
perform well, they are placed in higher-level classes—gateways that raise expectations, expose
them to high-achieving peers, and put them on a trajectory of success. Well-timed, well-targeted
mindset interventions can improve students’ relationships, experiences, and performance at a

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

20	  

critical stage and thus improve students’ trajectory through their school careers.34
To date, not enough research has directly tested the specific recursive processes that determine
the long-term impact of mindset interventions. Such research is important for psychological and
sociological theories of education, but it is also important for practitioners who aim to optimally
time and tailor interventions to maximize their impact.
For instance, research should assess the optimal timing of interventions. If mindset interventions
help students acquire foundational skills they can use later in school, or if they allow students to
seek out help from teachers sooner, potentially forming better teacher-student relationships,
interventions delivered earlier in school or in the school year may be more effective.35 At the
same time, it may never be too late to teach someone that the brain can grow and be developed
and improve their academic outcomes, as among adults taking developmental math in
community college, summarized above.
Specific recommendations:
•

•

•

II.

Experimental studies that investigate recursive processes directly—that is, that track the
effect of mindset interventions on real-time change in student confidence, challengeseeking, relationships with peers and teachers, learning, and long-term educational
attainment. This will be increasingly possible as learning happens online and student
work and communications are captured in real-time.36
Experimental studies that discover the optimal timing for the delivery of interventions
(both timing within a school year and developmental timing, such as during childhood
versus adolescence) to improve theories of recursive processes and provide more specific
recommendations for practice.
Studies that assess features of social and educational environments that allow mindset
interventions to set in motion virtuous recursive processes or that prevent them from
doing so (e.g., whether students are exposed to high-quality instruction and curriculum,
have opportunities to pursue higher-level coursework, and have opportunities to form
better relationships with peers and teachers). These contextual features may determine
whether mindset interventions can generate long-term change in a given setting or not.
Practices: Expanding the “toolkit” of day-to-day practices that instill productive
mindsets.

Research on mindsets has produced several recommendations for what to say and what not to say
to students to create a growth mindset and to forestall a fixed mindset. But practitioners have
many thousands of conversations with students every academic year, and they need more—and
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
34
Garcia and Cohen, 2012
35
Cook, Purdie-Vaughns, Garcia, and Cohen, 2012
36
For a discussion of the use of data mining and rapid analytics for R&D in education, see US
Department of Education, Office of Educational Technology, 2012, 2013.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

21	  

more tailored and more useful—recommendations for everyday practice than the experimental
literature has yet produced.
There are at least three ways to rapidly expand the “toolkit” of day-to-day practices that instill
productive mindsets. The first and most immediately actionable strategy is to dramatically
accelerate the amount of randomized intervention research conducted by psychological
researchers in applied settings. We outline examples of this type of research below, and this
constitutes much of the focus of our specific recommendations.
We acknowledge, however, that randomized experiments may test the efficacy of types of
practices but may not generate enough specific advice for practitioners. Thus, we suggest two
additional potential future directions that are worthy of consideration. One is to create more
ways for practitioners to learn rapidly about the effectiveness of their own classroom practices.
Another is to facilitate a marketplace in which private companies create materials and practices
based in theory and evaluated in rigorous research, which teachers and schools can then use.
After discussing the acceleration of experimental research, we discuss these ideas.
Accelerating field-experimental research on “everyday practices.” Recall that much research
has shown that the everyday ways in which adults talk to children can create mindsets that
support or undermine resilience. For instance, Gunderson and colleagues showed that children
who are praised for “process”—effort or strategies—have more growth-oriented motivational
frameworks up to five years later,37 and Pomerantz and colleagues showed that children who are
praised more for “smartness” showed more fixed mindsets over time.38 These observational,
correlational studies have identified some likely inputs to children’s mindsets.
These examples also reinforce the need for experimental research that isolates the impact of dayto-day verbal feedback on students’ mindsets and achievement—and that gives practitioners
concrete feedback about how to talk to children effectively. Effectively promoting mindsets can
be difficult and counterintuitive for parents and teachers. Past research shows how easy it is for
even well-intentioned efforts to motivate students to backfire and cause harm. As we noted
earlier, this is true when adults praise a child as being “smart at that” or when they comfort a
struggling child by saying “Overall you are smart, but maybe you’re not a math person.”39
Adults may have strong, deeply held intuitions about what to say to students to boost their
confidence. Absent strong experimental research, we may fail to question our intuitions and
instead continue to use verbal feedback we believe to be effective but in fact is either inert or
harmful.
Thus, continued experimentation on the sometimes counterintuitive ways that productive
mindsets can be built or undermined is an essential part of the R&D agenda. Two examples that
have done this are below. However, as we state, much more research is needed.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
37
Gunderson, Gripshover, Romero, Dweck, Goldin-Meadow, and Levine, in press.
38
Pomerantz and Kempner, in press.
39
Mueller and Dweck, 1998; Rattan et al., 2012

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

22	  

First, some research has taken advantage of recent advances in online education to accelerate
learning about effective “everyday practices” that support student mindsets. For instance, Dave
Paunesku and colleagues have conducted randomized experiments on the online learning website
Khan Academy (khanacademy.org) with more than 250,000 students. The Khan Academy
website allows students to watch brief (~ 3 minute) videos about math concepts and then take
diagnostic assessments on those concepts. The Khan Academy website allows students to watch
videos about math concepts and then take diagnostic assessments on those concepts. Over a
period of several months, researchers presented to one groups of students statements embodying
a growth mindset (e.g., “When you learn a new kind of math problem, you grow your math
brain!”) at the top of screens during a unit of fractions, and to another group of students
encouraging statements that did not convey a growth mindset (e.g., “If at first you don’t succeed,
try again.”). The placebo statements represented phrases that educators commonly use to
motivate students and convey an overall positive attitude but they do not spark a growth mindset.
A randomly selected third of students saw no encouraging statements at the top of their screens.
The researchers then tracked the number of problems online learners successfully completed
over the ensuing few months. Growth-mindset feedback increased the percent of correct
problems students solved by 3-5%, depending on the task, compared both to students who
received placebo encouragement and to students who received no encouragement. Moreover, this
effect was fully maintained even after students completed the section on fractions and moved on
to the next set of math concepts during which they no longer saw the growth mindset phrasing.40
All told, this research suggests that a growth mindset can be built using brief but theory-informed
messages—something that positive and supportive but generic statements do not.
Other research has examined day-to-day practices using experiments conducted in brick-andmortar school settings. As one example, research by Geoffrey Cohen, Julio Garcia, Valerie
Purdie-Vaughns and David Yeager examined what method of providing critical feedback would
most effectively communicate to students that teachers see them as having the potential to grow
and improve.41 A common intuition is that the most effective way to provide feedback is to first
compliment students to raise their self-esteem, and then to hit them with critical feedback.
However, Cohen and colleagues began with the premise that what students need is not hollow
self-esteem boosting but the belief that their teacher believes in their potential to learn and grow
and to meet a higher standard. The researchers tested this by conducting a series of experiments
in middle school classrooms. Seventh grade students first wrote drafts of an essay about a
personal hero. Next, teachers marked up these essays with standard critical feedback, including
both substantive criticisms (e.g., comments on organization and content) and bland
encouragement (e.g., “overall nice job.”). Before students received the graded essays,
researchers appended brief notes hand-written previously by teachers. In the treatment condition,
the note emphasized the high standards of the course and conveyed the teacher’s confidence in
the student’s potential to meet this standard (“I’m giving you these comments because I have
high standards and know that you can meet them”). The key dependent variable was whether
students turned in a revised essay in the next week. Findings showed that only 40% of control
students revised the essay but 80% of students who received the high standards and personal
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
40
.Sohl-Dickstein, Paunesku, Haley, and Williams (2013)
41
Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns et al. (2013)

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

23	  

assurance note did. The effects were even more striking for African American students (17% in
the control vs. 72% in the treatment).
This type of field-based experimental research on everyday practices affecting mindsets is
relatively rare, unfortunately.42 Why? Many barriers stand in the way. First, there are simply not
enough researchers trained to do it. Most experimental psychologists are not trained to conduct
research in field settings and many educational researchers are not trained to conduct theorydriven, precise experiments. Second, it is logistically difficult and time-intensive to conduct this
research; for instance, it takes time to build trusting partnerships between researchers and
schools. This makes it difficult to conduct more than one such experiment in a school year—far
below the standard rate for a typical experimental psychologist, who might conduct ten or twenty
experiments with undergraduate participants in a year. Hence, conducting practically useful
research on teacher practices seems to be at odds with the professional incentives of
experimental researchers. Third, the analysis and publication process is slow, often requiring
several years of data analysis, writing, and journal submission after a study has been completed.
While it is important to have these types of publications, there is no way for bottom-line findings
from mindset experiments to quickly reach practitioners.
It is crucial then to reduce barriers for researchers to conduct field-experimental research on
teacher practices and to accelerate the analysis and dissemination of that research. Below we
provide specific recommendations for doing so:
Specific recommendations:
• Accelerate the pace of experimentation by using online learning environments such as
MOOCs as laboratories for conducting brief, large, iterative randomized experiments on
methods to improve student mindsets —similar to what software engineers call “A/B
testing.”43
• Consider creating “big science” analogues in psychology and education—how can
researchers pool common resources and relationships with schools to conduct more
experiments and analyze data more quickly? NSF-funded initiatives such as the ANES,
GSS, or TESS may be guides.
• Create alternative outlets for faster dissemination of results of experiments on effective
(and ineffective) “everyday practices,” without undermining the potential for later
publication in disciplinary outlets.
• Continue to support and expand researcher-practitioner networks that produce and
disseminate research-tested methods to improve mindsets.
Future directions. As noted, there are at least two additional ways to accelerate learning about
effective everyday practices to promote productive mindsets: (a) empowering practitioners to
learn from their experiences, and (b) fostering private innovation.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
42
For a rare exception, see, e.g., Destin and Oyserman, 2009; 2010.
43
Also see U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Technology, 2013.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

24	  

A. Create ways for practitioners to partner with researchers and to learn more rapidly what
effectively promotes mindsets. Practitioners are likely to implement mindset ideas in their
classrooms regardless of what researchers produce. A key question, then, is this: How can we
empower practitioners to learn whether their local innovations are helpful or harmful for
students? And how can we help practitioners share and scale innovations that are effective?
This question is especially important because the history of school reform teaches us that
promising ideas, when scaled, frequently lose their essential ingredients. Even when the
materials given to students are replicated across contexts, the psychological or educational heft
of an exercise can be lost. Project-based learning activities that require students to do
independent research and produce a scale model can quickly turn in to a trip to an arts-and-crafts
store or a visit to Wikipedia.44 In some cases innovations became inert versions of their former
selves. In other cases they can be transformed into something harmful. This can potentially
happen to nearly all educational innovations, and it can certainly happen to psychological
interventions.
One well-known example in psychology comes from the self-esteem movement. Researchers
produced an enormous amount of rigorous, large-sample research showing that low self-esteem
is an excellent predictor of poor life outcomes—depression, stress, health, educational
attainment, aggression, etc.45 However the application of this research in educational settings
was to praise children to boost self-esteem. This recommendation rested on the faulty
assumption that doing anything positive to a person would boost self-esteem and improve
academic outcomes—for instance, praising people for being “smart,” complimenting people for
mediocre performance, handing out trophies for last place performances. Ironically, this
misapplication of the research may have led to some of the problems that students now face in
terms of fixed mindsets. And the self-esteem movement is widely viewed as a misinterpretation
of research findings and a misguided attempt to turn them into practice.
It is important to prevent mindset research from being misinterpreted and misused at scale. For
this reason, one priority future direction is to design ways for practitioners to learn more quickly
from their efforts to address mindsets in classrooms. Teachers hoping to instill in children the
belief that they can grow and improve might tell them that they have hidden talent or that
“you’re the best”—both phrases that could imply the importance of fixed ability relative to
peers.46 How can practitioners learn more rapidly whether their efforts to address mindsets in
classrooms have retained the essential psychological message or not?
One future possibility involves training specialists who can help teachers learn about the latest
experimental findings on everyday practices that promote mindsets and then use continuous
improvement processes to make these work reliably in their classrooms.47 Just as it is common
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
44
See, for instance, a discussion of the “California mission project” in Yeager and Walton, 2011
45
e.g. Donnellan, Trezesniewski, Robins, Moffitt, and Caspi, 2005
46
For research showing this was the case in one growth mindset training study, see Shumow and
Schmidt, 2013.
47
See a discussion of improvement research in Bryk, Gomez, and Grunow, 2011.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

25	  

for a school to have instructional coaches who use formative assessments to help teachers
appropriately scaffold their instruction, it is possible to imagine “mindset coaches” who use data
to inform improvement in schools. These professionals would not be develop new theories about
mindsets but would, rather, be trained to use formative assessments and then work with teachers
to acquire and respond appropriately to evidence about the effects of their classroom-based
mindset practices.48
In this spirit, organizations such as the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching
have begun to train “improvement specialists” to track data related to motivation and persistence
over time with teachers—like the number of students who ask questions or show up for class—
and then help teachers implement small changes to improve students’ mindsets and increase
learning behaviors.49 By conducting this kind of data-informed, small-scale improvement
research, teachers and improvement specialists have worked to identify, for instance, which
routines seem to make students comfortable asking questions about concepts they do not
understand—a leading indicator of long-term knowledge acquisition. If this feedback process is
repeated over many cycles with many practitioners testing a larger number of classroom
innovations, schools or districts might amass a large, local evidence base for effective
practices.50 In the next section we discuss in greater detail why existing measures of mindsets
may be ill-suited for this task and we outline what kinds of measures might be more suitable.
B. Foster private innovation and large-scale dissemination through rigorous evaluation and
government certification of mindset interventions. In medicine, companies that create safe,
effective “interventions”—like drugs and medical procedures—and that deliver these
interventions on a large scale to address health problems can reap significant financial rewards.
These incentives motivate companies to develop new interventions that are safer, more effective,
and more robust than prior interventions and to scale them rapidly. This marketplace works in
part because the government plays a critical role. Working through the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), the government acts as an honest broker that evaluates the evidence
regarding the safety and effectiveness of new medical interventions and certifies new
interventions that meet relevant standards to the public and the health care industry. This
certification allows companies to sell their product and reap the financial reward.
Perhaps a similar approach would be effective in education. The government could encourage
private companies to develop new mindset interventions designed to be more effective or more
robust than existing interventions or to be better suited for a given student population. Through a
combination of private research, academic research, and government research, evidence could be
acquired evaluating the effectiveness of a given intervention product. Government panels could
then review this evidence and, if the product meets relevant standards, certify the product as safe
and effective for a given population. This certification could then help or allow companies to sell
intervention products to schools or to others in the educational environment (e.g., to parents).
For instance, the federal government could grant states or school districts access to additional
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
48
See Yeager and Walton, 2011, for a discussion of related ideas.
49
Silva and White, 2013	  
50
Bryk et al., 2011

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

26	  

funds (e.g., a new portion of Title I dollars) to be used specifically for certified intervention
products that reliably reduce achievement gaps or benefit low-performing students.
Government certification is especially important because in some cases poorly applied
psychological interventions may cause harm. It is important for vendors of educational products
to show not only that the product is based on solid research, but also to provide evidence that it
actually produces the psychological experience that the research says is important for student
learning and, in turn, affects challenge-seeking, persistence, resilience and learning.
In short, with the proper incentive structure, insights from research on academic mindsets can be
more efficiently turned into reliably effective interventions in partnerships with private industry.
A future challenge to the field is to learn how to do this responsibly.
III.

Assessments: Measures that allow researchers and practitioners to learn more
rapidly from efforts to change mindsets.

One item high on the list of requests from practitioners is a set of measures of academic mindsets
and other non-cognitive factors. Specifically, practitioners want measures so they can (a)
identify teachers or schools who do or do not promote productive mindsets, to inform
evaluations; (b) identify specific students who have a mindset that puts them at risk so they can
be given a personalized intervention; and (c) help thoughtful practitioners learn from their efforts
and optimize their classroom climates to promote mindsets. These different purposes are
accountability, remediation, and improvement.51
Existing measures are sometimes unsuitable for accountability, remediation or
improvement purposes. Unfortunately, the measures of non-cognitive factors commonly
available to practitioners were designed for an entirely different purpose: theory development.
That is, many of the available student self-report measures were designed for testing the relation
between mindsets and outcomes, e.g., the relation of a fixed mindset to GPA—not for diagnosing
mindsets at the individual level or for determining whether an effort to promote a growth
mindset was effective. While measures for theory development are helpful to the extent that they
illuminate average trends that can inform decision-making at an aggregate level, they are less
helpful for the purposes requested by practitioners. Said another way, many existing measures of
non-cognitive factors are not well-suited for accountability, remediation or improvement.
There are many examples of why this might be true. One compelling unpublished example
comes from research by Angela Duckworth, a leader in the field of measures of non-cognitive
factors. She measured levels of self-reported “grit”—or passion and perseverance for long-term
goals—among students attending West Point military academy and found that levels of grit
actually went down significantly over the four years at West Point, despite the fact that this is
highly unlikely to be the case (West Point students undergo tremendous physical and mental
challenges as a part of their training.)52 Instead, according to Duckworth, it is likely that they
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
51
Also see a discussion of different uses of data in Yeager and Bryk, 2013
52
Angela Duckworth, personal communication.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

27	  

were now comparing themselves to a very gritty peers or role models and revising their
assessment of themselves accordingly.
There are also examples in the published literature. A team of researchers at Mathematica
recently conducted an evaluation of the effect of KIPP charter schools on student test scores.53
KIPP schools have longer school hours, longer school years, more challenging coursework, and
teachers with more demanding standards than traditional schools. Indeed, in this study, KIPP
students completed 30-50 more minutes of homework per night compared to district students
(depending on the analysis). Simply on the basis of completing more work, students in the KIPP
system were predicted to have made greater gains in their mastery of academic concepts
according to state tests. And, in fact, researchers found that KIPP students, when compared to
students who lost the lottery and went to the district school instead, showed greater mastery of
academic concepts. Importantly, however, the researchers also compared the two groups of
students in terms of their self-reports on a large battery of non-cognitive factors, including school
engagement, self-control, academic self-concept, and effort and persistence in school.
Strikingly, the researchers found no differences between the student populations in terms of these
items. That is, while according to all objective standards—demanding curriculum, number of
hours studying, etc.—KIPP students exhibited more self-control, stayed more engaged in their
schoolwork, and expended more effort, they rated themselves no more highly along these factors.
Again, it is likely that they adjusted their ratings to the new comparison group.
As we have been suggesting, it is possible that the reason for this is a change in the reference that
students are using when answering questions used in these studies, something that has been
noted by several past researchers.54 For instance, when students are asked to agree with the
statement “I try hard in school” they may instead be answering the question “I try hard in school
compared to other people around me” or “… compared to how much harder I could be trying.”
When students are surrounded by very different peers working at very different rates, or when
they have been exposed to the potential to work even harder than they are now, as in an
intervention, then it can be difficult to collect data that is meaningful for the purposes outlined
above (e.g., to evaluate schools). This feature of the psychology of questionnaire design can
potentially undermine any comparisons between classrooms, between schools, or over time
within individuals. In addition, many measures of self-reported mindsets, even if unbiased,
cannot be administered repeatedly and they are not likely to be sensitive to short-term changes in
student behavior because they assess global beliefs rather than concrete actions.
New measures of non-cognitive factors are needed. New measures that would be of great
benefit to the field would have many or all of these features:55
• They would likely assess behaviors that indicate the possession of productive mindsets
or non-cognitive skills. Instead of asking students how much they agree that “I like
trying hard problems where I can learn a lot,” a measure might embed real choices
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
53
Tuttle, Cleason, Knechtel, Nichols-Barrer, and Resch, 2013
54
Biernat, 2003
55
Yeager and Bryk, 2013

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

•

•
•
•

•

28	  

between easy and hard problems on a homework assignment and count how often
students choose to work on hard problems instead of easy problems.
They would be valid at the level of analysis they are used for—we could assess the
percent of students who chose hard tasks where they could learn a lot as opposed to easy
tasks where they could get a high score.
They would be repeatable—that is, the meaning and validity of the measure would not
be altered by repeated use.
They would be brief—they cannot be long or redundant, because then practitioners could
not use them repeatedly over time.
They would be convenient and unobtrusive—measures must be easy to collect and
analyze, for instance analyzing whether students review their work or not when doing
homework in an online course management platform.
These might be self-reports, but it would be essential to demonstrate that a particular
self-report measure does not suffer from the biases reported above (i.e., that there is not a
possibility for different reference groups or that this possibility does not undermine
validity).

Ideally, a suite of such measures could be developed in age-appropriate ways. They could be
delivered as stand-alone activities via the Internet or embedded in the web of daily instruction,
for instance by data mining online instructional system data.
These new, briefer, behavioral measures are extremely useful for research-practice partnerships.
If practitioners are going to work with researchers to put their “everyday practices” for
promoting mindsets to the test, they will need measures that can tell them whether, in the short
term, their actions have led to improvements in student mindsets. Thus, to the extent that the
field seeks to create researcher-practitioner partnerships for continuous improvement in the
classroom, creating valid measures to tap this improvement is one of the highest priorities.
It is important to mention, of course, that the types of student behaviors that could be assessed
via the new suite of non-cognitive measures are not only relevant to growth versus fixed
mindsets. Other highly important mindsets—such as mindsets about belonging, about negative
stereotypes, or about relevance of the schoolwork—might also affect similar behaviors such as
effective strategy use, challenge-seeking, persistence, etc. Thus such measures could be usefully
applied to the evaluation of many interventions that seek to enhance students’ engagement with
learning.
Specific recommendations:
• Identify which existing self-report measures are adequate for practitioner purposes, and
which are inadequate.
• Drive toward agreement among relevant stakeholders (researchers and practitioners) to
define a set of important behaviors that new measures should assess.
• Commission a set of measures of behavioral profiles that signal the presence of positive
academic mindsets. These should be brief, scalable (e.g., web-based), repeatable,
relatively unobtrusive, sensitive to short-term changes, comparable across classrooms and
schools, and predictive of long-term outcomes.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

29	  

Future directions.
Using non-cognitive measures for school or teacher accountability. One long-term future
direction is to consider whether such measures could be designed for accountability purposes.
For instance, at the end of standardized tests, students could have optional problems that could
be explicitly framed as either challenging or easy. Or achievement test performance could be
analyzed to determine how well students bounced back from difficulty or wrong answers. It may
be possible to incentivize schools that produce larger numbers of “learners” rather than
rewarding schools only on the basis of producing “knowers.”
Human Capital Development
To carry out the R&D mission outlined here, it is essential to significantly increase the available
community of researchers skilled in conducting experimental research on mindsets in field
settings in education. A high priority is thus to expand opportunities for advanced training in this
area for psychologists and educational researchers, through postdoctoral fellowships, summer
training institutes, and other initiatives.
In addition, as noted, it may be possible to train a new class of professionals to conduct
continuous improvement research in educational settings, specialized in working with teachers to
remove motivational barriers that harm students, especially at-risk students, and in assessing the
effects of such local innovations. Of course, to train these professionals well it will be essential
to increase our knowledge base of the principles, practices, and assessments that are likely to
affect mindsets in applied settings. Said another way, before we can train these people we need
to know what we should tell them. Therefore we see the building of this human resource
throughout education as depending critically on accomplishing the R&D objectives outlined
here.
How Can We Get Started?
Truly solving problems related to student mindsets will require dedicated efforts to change
teaching and perhaps parenting practices. These efforts can be started immediately and should
be pursued in the long-run. At the same time, the most immediate short-term goal—something
that could be accomplished in the next two years—is to estimate how effective existing growthmindset interventions (“baseline” interventions) can be at a population level, and what factors
lead to variance in intervention effectiveness. As we have argued, this can be done by delivering
interventions via the Internet to a probability sample of students in middle school, high school
and college. Through a web-based platform it would also be easy to compare several different
mindset interventions, to find out what works best and for whom and in what setting or context.
We could also compare what delivery strategy is most effective, and whether certain details of
the delivery, like “stealthiness” and personalization, really matter. The baseline mindset
interventions will of course not benefit every student or every school. But there is enough
evidence for the promise of these interventions to expect to find at least average benefits for lowperforming students or for negatively stereotyped students. This may be a powerful catalyst for
the reduction in achievement gaps, as even small effects in large populations can have important
implications for equity. Given the potential to learn a great deal about the effectiveness and

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

30	  

limitations of current intervention strategies to address mindsets, as well as to build out
infrastructure that could support future, more customized and ideally more effective
interventions, it is important to consider how to make this initiative a reality in the very short
term.
Second, there is enough evidence that our national obsession with “smartness” and “talent”
undermines student learning and thus our national competitiveness, especially when considering
achievement in STEM-related fields and among students who face negative intellectual
stereotypes. We should ask: Can we redirect the national conversation away from a focus on
“smart” children and toward a focus on “learning” children? As a nation we could eliminate the
phrase “I’m not a math person” from our vocabulary—a phrase that, itself, can contribute to race,
gender, and socioeconomic inequality in STEM fields.56 Such a sea change is not unheard of in
the U.S. As a society we have for the most part eliminated racial epithets from casual
conversation. Can we do the same regarding mindsets? Instead of it being common to hear “I’m
not a math person,” can we make it ubiquitous to hear “I’m a math learner”? With coordinated
PR and social media and with teachers wise to the power of a growth mindset we can imagine a
world in the very near future where no child’s prospect of success in education is diminished by
harmful mindsets about the fixedness of ability.
Conclusion
As anyone who works in education knows, problems facing students and schools are complex
and multi-determined. There are no silver bullets, but mindset interventions can be helpful for
student learning, and even necessary. When we give students the belief that they can grow and
learn in school, that they are not limited by fixed inability, and that they belong and are valued,
we motivate them to take advantage of the social and educational resources in school. We help
them to learn from the teaching and curricula present there, to develop relationships with people
in school, and ultimately to acquire skills they need for long-term success.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
56
See, e.g., Beilock, Gunderson, Ramirez, and Levine, 2010; Rattan et al., 2012

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

31	  

References
Aronson, E. (1999). The power of self-persuasion. American Psychologist, 54, 875–884.
Aronson, J., Fried, C., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the effects of stereotype threat on African
American college students by shaping theories of intelligence. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 38, 113–125.
Beilock, S.L., Gunderson, E.A., Ramirez, G., & Levine, S.C. (2010). Female teachers’ math
anxiety affects girls’ math achievement. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 107, 1860-1863.
Biernat, M. (2003). Toward a broader view of social stereotyping. American Psychologist, 58,
1019-1027.
Blackwell, L. A., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Implicit Theories of intelligence
and achievement across the junior high school transition: A longitudinal study and an
intervention. Child Development, 78, 246–263.
Bryk, A. S., Gomez, L. M., & Grunow, A. (2011). Getting ideas into action: Building networked
improvement communities. Frontiers in Sociology and Social Research (M. Hallinan,
Ed.). Retrieved May 10, 2013 from
http://www.carnegiefoundation.org/sites/default/files/bryk-gomez_building-nicseducation.pdf
Cimpian, A., Mu, Y., & Erickson, L. C. (2012). Who is good at this game? Linking an activity to
a social category undermines children’s achievement. Psychological Science, 23, 533541.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaugns, V., Apfel, N., & Brzustoski, P. (2009). Recursive
processes in self-affirmation: Intervening to close the minority achievement gap. Science,
324, 400–403.
Cook, J. E., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., & Cohen, G. L. (2012). Chronic threat and
contingent belonging: Protective benefits of values affirmation on identity
development. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102, 479-496.
Destin, M., & Oyserman, D. (2009). From assets to school outcomes: How finances shape
children’s perceived possibilities and intentions. Psychological Science, 20, 414–418.
Destin, M., & Oyserman, D. (2010). Incentivizing education: Seeing schoolwork as an
investment, not a chore. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 846–849.
Diehl, R. (2012). Final Report on the Task Force on Undergraduate Graduation Rates. Austin,
TX: University of Texas Press. Retrieved May 10, 2013 from
http://www.utexas.edu/graduation-rates/documents/GRAD-REPORT.pdf
Donnellan, M. B., Trzesniewski, K. H., Robins, R. W., Moffitt, T. E., & Caspi, A. (2005). Low
self-esteem is related to aggression, anti-social behavior, and delinquency. Psychological
Science, 16, 328-335.
Dweck, C. S. (2006). Mindset. New York, NY: Random House.
Dweck, C. S., Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. (2011). Academic tenacity. White paper prepared for
the Gates Foundation. Seattle, WA.
Farrington, C. A., Roderick, M., Allensworth, E., Nagaoka, J., Keyes, T. S., Johnson, D. W., &
Beechum, N. O. (2012). Teaching adolescents to become learners. The role of
noncognitive factors in shaping school performance: A critical literature review.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Consortium on Chicago School Research.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

32	  

Garcia, J. & Cohen, G. L. (2012). A social-psychological approach to educational intervention.
In E. Shafir (Eds.), Behavioral foundations of policy, (pp. 329-350). Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Goldrick-Rab, S., Harris, D. N., Kelchen, R., & Benson, J. (2012). Need-based financial aid and
college persistence: Experimental evidence from Wisconsin. Retrieved May 10, 2013
from http://finaidstudy.org/documents/GoldrickRab%20Harris%20Kelchen%20Benson%202012%20FULL.pdf.
Godes, O., Hulleman, C. S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2007). Boosting students’ interest in math
with utility value: Two experimental tests. Paper presented at the meeting of the
American Educational Research Association, Chicago, IL.
Gunderson, E. A., Gripshover, S. J., Romero, C., Dweck, C. S., Goldin-Meadow, S., & Levine,
S. C. (in press). Parent praise to 1-3 year-olds predicts children’s motivational
frameworks 5 years later. Child Development.
Heyman, G. D., & Dweck, C. S. (1992). Achievement goals and intrinsic motivation: Their
relation and their role in adaptive motivation. Motivation and Emotion, 16, 231–247.
Hulleman, C. S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2009). Making education relevant: Increasing interest
and performance in high school science classes. Science, 326, 1410–1412.
Kamins, M. & Dweck, C. S. (1999). Person vs. process praise and criticism: Implications for
contingent self-worth and coping. Developmental Psychology, 35, 835-847.
Masten, A. S. (2001). Ordinary magic: Resilience processes in development. American
Psychologist, 56, 227-238.
Mueller, C. M., & Dweck, C. S. (1998). Intelligence praise can undermine motivation and
performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 33–52.
Paunesku, D., Yeager, D., Romero, C., & Walton, G., (2013). Brief social-psychological
interventions are a scalable solution for academic underperformance. Unpublished
Manuscript, Stanford University.
Pomerantz, E., & Kempner, S.G. (in press). Mothers’ daily person and process praise:
Implications for children’s theory of intelligence and motivation. Developmental
Psychology.
Ramirez, G., & Beilock, S. (2011). Writing about testing worries boosts exam perfor- mance in
the classroom. Science, 331, 211–213.
Rattan, A., Good, C., & Dweck, C. S. (2012). “It’s ok — Not everyone can be good at math”:
Instructors with an entity theory comfort (and demotivate) students. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 48, 731–737.
Robinson, T. N. (2010). Stealth interventions for obesity prevention and control: Motivating
behavior change. In L. Dube, A. Bechara, A. Dagher, et al., (Eds). Obesity prevention:
The role of brain and society on individual behavior pp. 319-327. New York: Elsevier.
Ross, L., & Nisbett, R. E. (1991). The person and the situation: Perspectives of social
psychology. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Silva, E., & White, T. (2013). Pathways to improvement: Using psychological strategies to help
community college students master developmental math. Retrieved May 10, 2013 from
http://www.carnegiefoundation.org/sites/default/files/pathways_to_improvement.pdf
Sohl-Dickstein, Paunesku, Haley, & Williams. (2013). Motivating online learning with targeted
psychological messages. Unpublished Manuscript, Stanford University.
Steele, C. M. (1997). A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape intellectual identity and
performance. American Psychologist, 52, 613–629.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

33	  

Shumow, L. & Schmidt, J. A. (2013, April). Exploring teacher effects in outcomes of a growth
mindset intervention in seventh grade science classes. Paper presented at the annual
meeting of the American Educational Research Association, San Francisco, CA.
Tuttle, C. C., Gil, B., Gleason, P., Knechtel, V., Nichols-Barrer, I., & Resch, A. (2013). KIPP
middle schools: Impacts on achievement and other outcomes. Mathematica Policy
Research. Washington, DC.
U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Technology (2012). Enhancing Teaching
and Learning Through Educational Data Mining and Learning Analytics: An Issue Brief,
Washington, DC: Author.
U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Technology. (2013). Promoting grit,
tenacity, and perseverance: Critical factors for success in the 21st century. United States
Department of Education, Office of Educational Technology. Washington, DC.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A brief social-belonging intervention improves academic
and health outcomes among minority students. Science, 331, 1447–1451.
Wilson, T. (2011). Redirect: The surprising new science of psychological change. New York,
NY: Penguin Group.
Yeager, D. S. (April, 2012). Productive persistence: A practical theory of community college
student success. Paper presented at the 2012 Annual Meeting for the American
Educational Research Association, Vancouver, Canada.
Yeager, D.S. & Bryk, A. (2013). The case for practical measurement. Unpublished manuscript,
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX.
Yeager, D. S., & Dweck, C, S. (2012). Mindsets that promote resilience: When students believe
that personal characteristics can be developed. Educational Psychologist, 47, 302-314.
Yeager, D.S., Paunesku, D., Romero, C., Brown, R., Muhich, J., & Walton, G. (2013).
Engineering psychological interventions for scale: The case of the “growth mindset” in
community colleges. Unpublished Manuscript, University of Texas at Austin.
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological interventions in education: They're
not magic. Review of Educational Research, 81, 267-301.
Yeager, D. S., Walton, G., & Cohen, G. L. (2013). Addressing achievement gaps with
psychological interventions. Phi Delta Kappan, 94, 62-65.
Yeager, D.S., Walton, G., Ritter, G., & Dweck, C.S. (2013). Full-scale implementation of
psychological interventions at a large institution: An experimental test. Unpublished
Manuscript, University of Texas at Austin.
Yeager, D.S., Walton, G., Powers, J., House, A., Keane, L., Kementz, D., & Dweck, C.S. (2013).
Addressing beliefs about ability and belonging ease the transition to college for urban
charter students. Unpublished Manuscript, University of Texas at Austin.
Yeager, D.S., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., Pebley, P., Master, A., Hessert, W.,
Williams, M. & Cohen, G.L. (in press). Breaking the cycle of mistrust: Wise
interventions to provide critical feedback across the racial divide. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

34	  

Appendix 1: A Selective Bibliography of Mindset and Self-Regulation Interventions
Attribution Re-Training
Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. (1982). Improving the academic performance of college
freshmen: Attribution theory revisited, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 42,
367-372.
Wilson, T. D., & Linville, P. W. (1985). Improving the performance of college freshmen
with attributional techinques. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 287-293.
Growth vs. Fixed Mindsets of Intelligence
Aronson, J., Fried., C. B., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the effects of stereotype threat
on African American college students by shaping theories of intelligence. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 113-125.
Good, C., Aronson, J., & Inzlicht, M. (2003). Improving adolescents' standardized test
performance: An intervention to reduce the effects of stereotype threat. Applied
Developmental Psychology, 24, 645-662.
Blackwell, L., Trzesniewski, K., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Implicit theories of intelligence
predict achievement across and adolescent transition: A longitudinal study and an
intervention. Child Development, 78, 246-263
Values Affirmation and Social Belonging
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., & Master, A. (2006). Reducing the racial
achievement gap: A social-psychological intervention. Science, 313, 1307-1310.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Apfel, N., & Brzustoski, P. (2009).
Recursive processes in self-affirmation: Intervening to close the minority achievement
gap. Science, 324, 400-403.
Miyake, A., Kost-Smith, L. E., Finkelstein, N. D., Pollock, S. J., Cohen, G. L., & Ito, T.
A. (2010). Reducing the gender achievement gap in college science: A classroom study
of values affirmation. Science, 330, 1234-1237.
Sherman, D. K., Hartson, K. A., Binning, K. R., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J.,
Taborsky-Barba, S., & Cohen, G. L. (2013). Deflecting the trajectory and changing the
narrative: How self-affirmation affects academic performance and motivation under
identity threat. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 104, 591-618.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2007). A question of belonging: Race, social fit, and
achievement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 82-96.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

35	  

Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A brief social-belonging intervention improves
academic and health outcome among minority students. Science, 331, 1447-1451.
Possible Selves
Oyserman, D., Bybee, D., and Terry, K. (2006). Possible selves and academic outcomes:
How and when possible selves impel action. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 91, 188 - 204.
Expectancy-Value Theory
Hulleman, C. S., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2009). Promoting interest and performance in
high school science classes. Science, 326, 1410-1412.
Goal Setting
Duckworth, A. L., Kirby, T., Gollwitzer, A., & Oettingen, G. (in press). From fantasy to
action: Mental contrasting with implementation intentions (MCII) improves academic
performance in children. Social Psychological and Personality Science.
Morisano, D., Hirsch, J. B., Peterson, J. B., Shore, B., & Pihl, R. O. (2010). Setting,
elaborating, and reflecting on personal goals improves academic performance. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 95, 255 - 264.
Anxiety and Emotion Regulation
Jamieson, J., Mendes, W. B., Blackstock, E., & Schmader, T. (2009). Turning the knots
in your stomach into bows: Repappraising arounsal improves performance on the GRE.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 208-212.
Ramirez, G., & Beilock, S. L. (2011). Writing about test worries boosts exam
performance in the classroom. Science, 331, 211-213.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

36	  

Appendix 2: Methodological Supplement
High School Figures
Figure A1. A screenshot from the growth mindset intervention uses the metaphor that the
brain is like a muscle.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda
Figure A2. A “saying is believing” exercise at the end of the growth mindset intervention
leads students to endorse the message and self-customize it by tying it to their own life.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

37	  

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

38	  

Full-Scale Implementation Figures
Figure A3. Screen shot of web portal directing students to the growth mindset intervention

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda
Figure A4. Screen shot of growth mindset article read by participants in the scaled-up
intervention.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

39	  

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

40	  

Appendix 3: Text from Growth Mindset Intervention (Community College Trial)
Think about the article that you just read. What are all the reasons why scientists say that
people's math ability can grow and get better with effort and practice?
Please summarize them briefly below.
[text box]
[page break]
In the article, you learned 3 things:
1. When you work hard and learn new things, your brain grows new connections and you
get smarter.
2. The more you challenge yourself, the smarter you will become.
3. Smart people are the ones who have practiced more—they have built up their reading and
math "muscles."
Think about an example from your own life. What is something you weren’t good at at first.
Then you practiced it using a good strategy and became really good at it. Write about it and
explain how you became good at it.
[text box]
[page break]
Not all math students know that the brain can get smarter, even though it may help them succeed.
And we want to get your help, so we can learn more about how to explain it to them. We're
hoping you can explain--in your own words--that the brain gets smarter when people use good
strategies and try hard.
Imagine a friend who is struggling in school. This friend used to do pretty well in school but now
is having a hard time and is starting to feel dumb. Write a letter to your friend to encourage him
or her—tell them about what you just learned about the brain and why they shouldn’t be
discouraged.
For example, you can tell them:
a) how they can get smarter if they work hard and use a good strategy,
b) how they should work hard to build their reading and math muscles,
c) how they are not dumb, they just need to practice using a good strategy,
d) how they can ask the teacher or other students to help them learn better ways to study.
Or any other tips you have for learning in school and getting smarter.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

41	  

Appendix 4: Open-ended Responses Written By Students in the Full-Scale Implementation
at a Four-Year University
Example 1
[This] is a huge school and I know that it is going to be filled with a lot of "smart" people.
Although I have not actually experienced this firsthand yet, I had a similar experience in high
school. I opted to go to a small, magnet school that was basically an accumulation of all the
smart people from all the other high schools. I was overwhelmed, but then I realized if I worked
hard I would be able to succeed. I guess, one of the biggest thing for me was to dedicate the time
necessary to each subject so that I could fully grasp the concepts I needed to learn. Trust me,
when you get that assignment, project and test back with the wonderful score...it will pay off.
And later down the road when you're able to recall the concepts, you'll be surprised at how well
you know the subject. So essentially, what I'm trying to say is that there's no such thing as a
"smart" or "dumb" person, the "smart" people just had more practice...but everybody is able to
catch up to that level once they put in the necessary time.
Example 2
Hi there. / I had the same issue with the transition from middle school to high school: I had
straight As in middle school, and all of a sudden I was getting Cs. I felt stupid. New
environments provoke new emotions, I guess. / Even worse, it felt like asking a question meant
that you were admitting you were dumb... but that feeling isn't true at all. / You waste time and
opportunity by thinking like that. That time and opportunity could be used to ask questions and
better yourself. In fact, I think that those who ask questions are the smart ones - the ones that
have the confidence to ask questions, the ones that constantly have the courage to gain more
knowledge. / At one point, you have to get over how uncomfortable you are with seeking help or
approaching a professor. That's already a big step to growing. Imagine all the opportunities you
would have to grow. You don't want to limit your resources, and other brains are some of the
best resources to use to grow your own brain. (Hey, in a new age of technology, natural human
knowledge is so, so valuable.) / I'm a strong believer in hard work, and the things you want don't
come easy without it. To get the things you want, you have to work hard and do things you've
never done. Try new strategies! Talk to new people! Grow that brain! / / You're not dumb. You
just have to realize your potential. And find the right way to do it. (Easier said than done, I
know.)
Example 3
Hi! / I heard you are starting to have a hard time in college. From experience, I know exactly
how you feel. When I started college, I worried about not being "smart" enough for the class and
was often very shy to seek for assistance. But believe me, everybody undergoes the same
thoughts. Just because a class seems hard, it doesn't automatically mean that you are dumb. / As
a matter of fact, I learned that it is never too late to learn! Did you know that the brain is like a
muscle and with enough exercise, it can grow? / Yes, it is true. Just like an athlete exercises to
DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

Academic Mindsets: An R&D Agenda

42	  

get stronger, if you open your mind to learning new things, your brain grows with more
knowledge on any particular topic. / So although you are struggling in a class, it doesn't mean
that you aren't meant for it. It may be challenging, but I encourage you to find a way to learn.
You may need to concentrate on the topic even more, but it isn't as difficult nor boring as it
sounds. Around the campus, there are many students, Teacher Assistants, and professors who
can give you the best study advice they can give, and I encourage you to go out and seek these
great opportunities and tips that they have to offer. / Well, I wish you the best of luck, and
remember keep exercising that brain!
Example 4
Dear friend, / / As a student who was once in your shoes a few years ago, I too thought I was
prepared for college and would breeze by with the study methods I had in high school. Although,
I realized soon after that I was far from the truth. I want to tell you that every student has his or
her low point in college either by feeling intimidated by their professors or feeling lost in such an
enormous campus; but it's an awakening for them to realize that its only another challenge to
overcome and improve one's study habits and socializing skills. The professors are not going to
hold your hand and expect you be successful in life; just like a coach is not going to spike the
volleyball, make the free throw or jump the hurdle for you. They challenge you to face that
obstacle head on and if you fall, you get back up and try again. When I reached my low point
first semester of my freshman year, I had to seek advice from other students in my classes and
tutors and realized that they too were in the same boat as I was. We later worked together, shared
study habits and soon become great friends. Now, I have confidence in registering for new
classes instead of dreading to type in that ID number just to get it over with. As a friend with
experience, I am telling you to have dedicated and a open mind when you set foot on campus
because it will make you college experience significantly better.

DRAFT: Please do not quote or cite without written permission.

