Child Development, xxxx 2017, Volume 00, Number 0, Pages 1–19

Loss of Institutional Trust Among Racial and Ethnic Minority Adolescents: A
Consequence of Procedural Injustice and a Cause of Life-Span Outcomes
David S. Yeager

Valerie Purdie-Vaughns

University of Texas at Austin

Columbia University

Sophia Yang Hooper

Geoffrey L. Cohen

University of Texas at Austin

Stanford University

This research tested a social-developmental process model of trust discernment. From sixth to eighth grade,
White and African American students were surveyed twice yearly (ages 11–14; Study 1, N = 277). African
American students were more aware of racial bias in school disciplinary decisions, and as this awareness
grew it predicted a loss of trust in school, leading to a large trust gap in seventh grade. Loss of trust by
spring of seventh grade predicted African Americans’ subsequent discipline infractions and 4-year college
enrollment. Causality was conﬁrmed with a trust-restoring “wise feedback” treatment delivered in spring of
seventh grade that improved African Americans’ eighth-grade discipline and college outcomes. Correlational
ﬁndings were replicated with Latino and White students (ages 11–14; Study 2, N = 206).

I am marked by old codes, which shielded me in
one world and then chained me in the next.—TaNehisi Coates (2015), an African American father, in
a letter to his adolescent son.
A key developmental challenge in contemporary
society is to learn how to monitor, assess, and reassess the trustworthiness of institutions and ultimately make judgments about whether compliance
with institutional policies is warranted (PurdieVaughns, Steele, Davies, Ditlmann, & Crosby, 2008;
Spencer, 2006; Tyler & Blader, 2003). Adolescents
face this challenge with respect to many institutions, such as police, government, healthcare, or
businesses. Here, we focus on one setting where
Support for this research was provided by grants from the
National Science Foundation/REESE Division (Award 0723909),
the Spencer Foundation (Award 200800068), the W. T. Grant
Foundation, the Nellie Mae Education Foundation, and National
Science Foundation Grant DRL-1109548 to the last author. Writing of the manuscript was supported by a fellowship from the
Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences (CASBS)
and a William T. Grant Scholars award to the David S. Yeager.
The authors are grateful to Eric Bettinger for his assistance
obtaining National Student Clearinghouse data and to Hae Yeon
Lee for her analyses of the School and Stafﬁng Survey. Data, syntax, and results of alternative model speciﬁcations are available
online at osf.io/3hpu8.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to
Geoffrey L. Cohen or David S. Yeager. 108 E. Dean Keeton Stop
A8000, Austin, TX, 78712-1043. Electronic mail may be sent to
glc@stanford.edu or dyeager@utexas.edu.

trust discernment comes to the fore and may have
long-term consequences: racial and ethnic minority
adolescents transitioning through middle school.
On the one hand, it can be costly for an adolescent to trust an institution when it systematically
takes advantage of one’s group (Cohen & Steele,
2002; Gambetta, 1988). Indeed, in the U.S. schools,
African American and Latino youth are disproportionately subjected to mistreatment by authorities,
in the form of low expectations from teachers (see
Harber, 1998), extreme disparities in disciplinary
referrals and suspensions for minor misbehavior
(Okonofua & Eberhardt, 2015; Skiba, Michael,
Nardo, & Peterson, 2002), and even unwarranted
stops and arrests by police (see Tyler, Fagan, & Geller, 2014). Because trust of authorities is negotiated
in the context of social interactions (Lewin, Lippitt,
& White, 1939), a natural adaptation to such interactions is to withhold trust.
As illustrated by the quotation above, from TaNehisi Coates (2015) to his 14-year-old son, experiences of injustice can affect one in ways that can
make it more difﬁcult to thrive in an institution.
That is, racial and ethnic minority youth, experiencing and perceiving bias, may generalize from
© 2017 The Authors
Child Development © 2017 Society for Research in Child Development, Inc.
All rights reserved. 0009-3920/2017/xxxx-xxxx
DOI: 10.1111/cdev.12697

2

Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns, Hooper, and Cohen

speciﬁc interactions to a mental representation of
the institution as an abstract entity. Youth may then
demonstrate lower compliance with institutional
policies, accelerating a self-reinforcing cycle of punishment and loss of trust (Crocker & Major, 1989
Fagan & Tyler, 2005; Gregory & Weinstein, 2008;
Levi, Sacks, & Tyler, 2009; Tyler, Goff, & MacCoun,
2015). Exacerbating the potential for mistrust is the
racial divide that characterizes most interactions
between teachers and their students in the U.S.
According to our re-analyses of the School and
Stafﬁng Survey (Coopersmith, 2009), 70% of teachers in minority-serving schools (i.e. those with
50% or more non-white students); the ﬁgure is 96%
in predominately white-student-serving institutions). The tendency to attribute bias is greater
across racial divides than within them (Crocker &
Major, 1989); thus the demographics of most American schools may act as an affordance of mistrust.
Yet a loss of trust can become a liability if some
authority ﬁgures wish to enact fair policies, treat
racial or ethnic minority students with respect, and
help them to thrive (Gregory & Weinstein, 2008;
Okonofua, Walton, & Eberhardt, in press). When
students have lost trust, they may be deprived of
the beneﬁts of engaging with an institution, such as
positive relationships, access to resources and
opportunities for advancement, and avoidance of
punishment. Thus, racial and ethnic minority youth
may be twice harmed by institutional injustices:
They both receive the lion’s share of the initial punishment, and then may be required to psychologically adapt, through a loss of trust, in a way that
prevents them from proﬁting from instruction and
relationships.
This research seeks to understand this predicament by applying a developmental and social-psychological lens (also see Okonofua, Paunesku, &
Walton, in press; Okonofua, Walton, et al., in
press). We use data from an 8-year longitudinal
study that tracked White and African American students from sixth grade until entry into college
across two cohorts (Study 1). In addition, because
our theory is that trust is an issue for any group
that faces negative stereotypes and institutional
mistreatment, we also examine data from a 1-year,
cohort-sequential study of White and Latino middle
school students (Study 2).
Our approach integrates insights from developmental (Killen, Mulvey, & Hitti, 2013; McKown,
2013; Olson & Dweck, 2008) and social-psychological
recursive process models (Okonofua, Walton, et al.,
in press), resulting in the model shown in Figure 1.
We document the mental representations (i.e.,

institutional trust) that sit in the middle between
objective realities (i.e., racial and ethnic minority
group differences in the perceived justice of school
procedures) and developmental outcomes (i.e.,
group differences in rates of noncompliance with
school rules, or in long-term educational outcomes
such as college enrollment). We highlight how these
mental representations are shaped and then create
social reality, propelling effects forward in time.
Finally, we use a small sample, double-blind randomized experiment to test causality. We illustrate
how a timely and credible show of respect from
authorities to racial and ethnic minority youth can,
during a key developmental window, set in motion
an alternative process. This more beneﬁcial process
can culminate in improved educational behaviors
years later.
Institutional Trust Among Adults
Among adults, what causes institutional trust?
Research in social psychology (Tyler, 2006; Tyler &
Blader, 2003; Tyler et al., 2015), political science
(Levi, 1997; Levi et al., 2009), and sociology (Bryk
& Schneider, 2002; Goffman, 1963) has converged
on the conclusion that people trust an institution
more when they perceive that it is procedurally just
—that is, that it uses fair processes to make consequential decisions—and when they believe that
authorities have personal regard for individuals
served by the institution—that is, when authorities
are respectful and have one’s best interest at heart.
Notably, people do not have to have been the personal recipient of procedural justice or personal
regard to gain or lose trust (Tyler et al., 2014). It is
enough to experience it vicariously by means of
observation.
What has been missing from much previous
research, however, has been a developmental perspective. Indeed, an adolescent developmental lens
was a notable absence from recent inﬂuential
reviews of group disparities in crime and policing
(President’s Task Force on 21st Century Policing,
2015; Tyler et al., 2015). Our primary theoretical
contribution is to offer such a lens.
A Developmental Process Model of the Emergence and
Consequences of Institutional Trust
Adolescence has been described as a period of
socialization into a belief about the fairness and
legitimacy of institutions (Baumrind, 1997; Fagan &
Tyler, 2005). Positive and negative encounters with
authorities—such as discipline incidents or moments

Middle School Trust Gap
Developmental Processes

Social-Psychological Processes
Social Reality

Trust
"Adults at
This School
Are Not Fair"

Social-Cognitive Ability for
Abstraction

Pubertal Hormone-Sensitized
Vigilance to Fairness and Respect

Teacher
Criticizes
Student's
Work

Example 2

Low Trust

Social
Reality
Social
Reality
Institutional Trust

Developmental Antecdents
Racial
Awareness

Social
Reality

Mental Representation

Group
Example 1
Disparities in
School
Discipline
and Grades

3

Mental
Representation
of Institution

Social
Reality
Mental
Representation
of Institution

Student Does Not
Revise, Gets Low
Grade

Social
Reality
Mental
Representation
of Institution

Outcomes
Behavioral
Noncompliance
Disidentification
With School

Mental
Representation
of Institution

Poorer
Performance
Mental
Representation
of Institution

"Wise
Feedback"

Lower Human
Capital

Time
(During Adolescence)

Figure 1. A social-developmental recursive process model of trust discernment during adolescence.

of criticism—are “teachable moments,” for good or
ill (Baumrind, 1997; Fagan & Tyler, 2005; Tyler
et al., 2014). Of course, even young children are able
to discern whether to trust another person (Vanderbilt, Liu, & Heyman, 2011) and are aware of racial
and ethnic group membership (see Brown & Bigler,
2005). Why then might adolescence be a special period for institutional trust discernment?
To trust—or distrust—an institution, one must
notice and assign generalized meaning to authorities’ negative treatment of members of one’s group
and attribute it to a bias in the institution as an
abstract actor (the school, or school in general) not
just to an individual actor (a speciﬁc teacher). Several developmental antecedents make adolescents
prepared to do this (see the top left panel in Figure 1).
Changes During Adolescence
Adolescents are increasingly capable of mentally
representing unseen, abstract policies in an institution as the cause of unfair treatment, whereas children may be more attuned to the negative attitudes
of speciﬁc authority ﬁgures acting as individuals
(see Brown & Bigler, 2005; Spencer, 2006). Next,
adolescence is a period marked by questioning
whether to obey adults’ commands (Laupa, Turiel,
& Cowan, 1995) or ignoring them altogether (for an
eample from neurosicence, see Lee, Siegle, Dahl,
Hooley, & Silk, 2014). Third, adolescents may
undergo pubertal changes that can heighten a

sensitivity to the possibility of being disrespected
by adult authorities. The pubertal surge in testosterone and other hormones among boys and girls
(see Peper & Dahl, 2013) is thought to increase
attention to, reactivity to, and memory for experiences of being disrespected or made to feel low status (see Terburg & van Honk, 2013).
Developments Speciﬁc to Minority Youth
As they mature, adolescents undergo these
changes regardless of ethnic group membership.
However, by the start of middle school, negatively
stereotyped ethnic minority adolescents are also
more likely than White peers to be racially and ethnically aware—that is, to have conscious appraisals
about how different racial and ethnic groups are
evaluated and treated by the larger society (Ruble
et al., 2004; Sellers, Copeland-Linder, Martin, &
Lewis, 2006; Spencer, 2006; Swanson, Cunningham,
Youngblood, & Spencer, 2009). Long before they
get to sixth grade, children and teachers stereotype
African American children as aggressive (Sagar &
Schoﬁeld, 1980), and children take note. By early
adolescence, African American students report
occurrences of others perceiving them as a threat
(Sellers et al., 2006), and the overwhelming majority
are aware of negative stereotypes about their
group’s intelligence or behavior by the beginning of
middle school, even as their White peers are unaware (Bigler, Averhart, & Liben, 2003; McKown &
Weinstein, 2003).

4

Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns, Hooper, and Cohen

Negatively stereotyped racial and ethnic
minority adolescents may therefore enter middle
school prepared to attribute unfair treatment to
group membership rather than group-irrelevant
factors and do so more readily than White peers
(Crocker & Major, 1989, McKown & Weinstein,
2003; also see Cohen & Garcia, 2005). This preparedness then meets social reality in the form
of disparate punishment and remediation in
school (Okonofua & Eberhardt, 2015; see Skiba
et al., 2002). Even when students themselves are
not subjected to disparate treatment, vicarious
experiences of group members offer a window
into the potential unfairness endemic to the institution (see Bigler & Liben, 2006).
Recursive Process
Like a stone rolling down a hill that triggers an
avalanche, the loss of trust—especially among
members of negatively stereotyped minority groups
—could accumulate behavioral consequences over
time (see Roberts & Caspi, 2003; Spencer, 2006), as
illustrated in the right panel of Figure 1. For members of stereotyped groups, disparities in treatment
in a given institution can amplify signals of unfairness and disrespect (Crocker & Major, 1989, PurdieVaughns et al., 2008), while obscuring signals of
fair treatment (Harber, 1998), accelerating loss of
trust, and its potential negative consequences
(Okonofua, Walton, et al., in press).
Social-psychological process models emphasize
the importance of attributions in this feedback loop
(Cohen & Steele, 2002; Okonofua, Walton, et al., in
press; see the left panels in Figure 1). If adolescents experience procedural injustice or disrespect,
they may come to expect it. If they expect it, they
will tend to see it. If they see it, they will tend to
expect more (cf. Lord, Ross, & Lepper, 1979). Seeing and expecting injustice and disrespect, negatively stereotyped ethnic minority adolescents may
disengage, defy authorities, underperform, and act
out. This process may culminate in greater disciplinary incidents and lower academic attainment,
even among ethnic minority adolescents who
began middle school motivated and capable of
succeeding (Gregory & Weinstein, 2008; Okonofua,
Walton, et al., in press; Spencer, 2006).
Our process model offers an alternative to deﬁcit
models of adolescent behavior problems. It does
not posit deﬁciencies in executive function, cultural
mismatches between school contexts and ethnic
minority families. Nor does it posit a developmentally deterministic path in which adolescents

inevitably rebel against adult authority. These may
play a role but the causal action in our model is in
the interaction between social reality and psychology. A loss of trust and its behavioral consequences
are often reasonable adaptations to an environment
of disrespect and procedural injustice (Spencer,
2006; Swanson et al., 2009). This adaptation can
have long-term consequences when left unaddressed. However, as a mental representation, trust
can be improved through timely intervention (see
Olson & Dweck, 2008).
Slowing a Loss of Trust Through “Wise” Strategies
That Respect Youth
What might prevent a loss of trust in adolescence? “Wise” strategies can accomplish this. They
convey to students that they will be neither treated
nor judged in light of a negative stereotype but will
instead be respected and treated as a valuable individual (Cohen & Steele, 2002; Goffman, 1963). If
such a signal was offered during sensitive periods
for trust formation, it might create accumulating
positive consequences, by means of a virtuous
recursive cycle rather than a vicious one (Yeager &
Walton, 2011).
The term “wise” was originally formulated by
Goffman (1963) in his analysis of social stigma. To
be “wise” is the act of seeing stigmatized individuals in their full humanity, which enables an openness and honesty when one interacts with them.
Ethnographic accounts of exceptional teachers
show how wise practitioners build trust with and
motivate members of stigmatized groups (e.g., Lepper & Woolverton, 2002; Treisman, 1992; see Gregory & Weinstein, 2008). Such teachers have been
described as “warm demanders” (Vasquez, 1988)
and “compassionate disciplinarians” (Irvine, 2003),
meaning that they are distinguished by their ability
to combine high performance standards with high
personal regard for students’ well-being. One student described a “wise” teacher this way: “When
she talk to you with seriousness, she mean [sic] it,
but then she also have a smile like ‘I’m on your
side” (Gregory & Weinstein, 2008).
In large-scale survey studies, this combination of
high standards and personal care predicted higher
achievement for negatively stereotyped and socioeconomically disadvantaged youth (Gregory &
Weinstein, 2004; Shouse, 1996). Furthermore, in a
daily diary study, African American students who
reported experiencing both high expectations and
feelings of personal care were the most likely to
report that they trusted their teacher (Gregory &

Middle School Trust Gap

Weinstein, 2008, Study 2)—regardless of the teacher’s racial and ethnic group.
Research has distilled the practices of wise mentors to investigate them experimentally. Cohen,
Steele, and Ross (1999) showed that when African
American students were required to endure tough
criticism on an essay, they beneﬁtted from learning
that the teacher was critical not because of bias but
because of his stated desire to hold them to a
higher standard (procedural justice) and his belief
that they were capable of meeting that higher standard (personal regard). This message—called “wise
feedback”—increased African American college students’ motivation and reduced their attributions of
bias (Cohen et al., 1999). In these experiments, wise
feedback clariﬁed that the critical feedback originated in the critic’s positive motivations rather than
bias. In these experiments, wise feedback clariﬁed
that the critical feedback originated in the critic’s
belief in the student’s potential rather than bias. By
changing attributions in this manner, the intervention turned what might have otherwise been seen
as negative feedback into positive feedback. This
wise feedback method was later tested in a behavioral ﬁeld study that affected African American seventh-grade students’ institutional trust and
motivation (Yeager et al., 2014). Yeager et al. (2014)
showed that a single hand-written note from students’ social studies teacher, appended to an essay
they had written, and pithily but credibly conveying the teacher’s high standards and belief in students’ capacity to reach them, increased from 17%
to 72% the proportion of African American adolescents who revised their critiqued essays a week
later (covariate-adjusted values). Furthermore,
2.5 months later, the note halted the semester-oversemester decline in trust for African American
seventh graders who, at baseline, had begun to
mistrust school.
In this research (Study 1), we analyze additional
longitudinal data from the same data set originally
reported by Yeager et al. (2014; Studies 1 and 2).
We look at the implications of an experience of
wise feedback on African American adolescents’
subsequent disciplinary infractions and eventual 4year college enrollment.
This Research
We test whether disciplinary outcomes in school,
and the sense of procedural injustice they give rise
to, predict a loss of institutional trust for negatively
stereotyped racial and ethnic minority adolescents
(Figure 1, top left panel), and whether this loss in

5

turn predicts greater awareness of procedural justice, starting a feedback loop (Figure 1, right panel).
We assume but do not measure developmental
antecedents that can facilitate this process, such as
racial and ethnic awareness, social-cognitive ability,
and the start of puberty (Figure 1, top left panel).
We then test whether middle school adolescents’
trust predicts their later behavioral outcomes—their
discipline incidents in eighth grade and their eventual enrollment at a 4-year college (bottom right of
Figure 1).
Finally, as noted, we take advantage of a randomized experimental intervention embedded in
this correlational study, to test causality. Can wise
critical feedback from a teacher, which has already
been shown to sever the effect of academic mistrust
on subsequent willingness to revise an essay and
later mistrust (Yeager et al., 2014, Studies 1 and 2),
set in motion a virtuous recursive cycle? We
explored whether a wise hand-written note from a
teacher, known to convey respect and build trust
(cf. Gregory & Weinstein, 2008), might set in
motion a process that leads to greater behavioral
compliance the subsequent year as well as greater
eventual enrollment at a 4-year college (also see
Okonofua, Paunesku, et al., in press).

Study 1
Method
Participants
Survey sample. A total of N = 277 students in
two consecutive cohorts (Fall of 2004 and 2005)
were recruited from a middle-class to lower-middle-class public middle school in the northeast
region of the United States and surveyed twice
yearly from sixth to eighth grade. The overall
school population was split evenly between African
American and White students. Twenty-two percent
were eligible for free or reduced-price lunch, an
indicator of socioeconomic status. Fifty-two percent
of the students were female; 48% were African
Americans, and 52% were White. Not all students
completed all measures, so degrees of freedom varied across analyses.
Experimental subsample. In the spring of seventh
grade in each cohort, a subsample of 44 students
(88 total) with “B” or “C” grades participated in a
randomized experimental intervention in their
social studies classrooms. The focus on “B” and
“C” students was motivated by the fact that the
intervention conveyed to students that they were

6

Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns, Hooper, and Cohen

able to reach a higher standard. This message, it
was expected, would lack credibility in the eyes of
very low-performing students and seem redundant
in the eyes of very high-performing students, who
were already, by and large, reaching a higher standard (Yeager et al., 2014).
All social studies teachers were white. This
matches the modal experience for students in the
U.S., as noted previously.
In each cohort, n = 11 students from each racial
group (White and African American) were assigned
either to a treatment condition or placebo control
condition, yielding 22 total per racial group per
condition. These constituted the “experimental subsample” (for extensive detail on this subsample, see
Yeager et al., 2014, Studies 1–2).
Procedure
Survey sample. Students were surveyed in the
spring and fall of sixth, seventh, and eighth grades
(six total surveys). At the end of the middle school
years, data on discipline incidents and school
grades were collected from the school registrar. College enrollment data (whether students enrolled in
the year after high school and whether it was a 4year college or not) were obtained 6 years after
middle school through the National Student Clearinghouse (NSC).
Experimental subsample. The “wise feedback”
intervention was designed to be an antidote to mistrust of teachers. No intervention could fully dispel
concerns about racial bias. Instead, this treatment
was aimed to interrupt the reciprocally reinforcing
relationship between perceived bias and mistrust
(Figure 1). Because the process depends on a continual feedback loop, even a minor interruption
could have beneﬁts that persist and compound with
time. The intervention altered students’ construals
of an acute experience with the potential to increase
mistrust: the receipt of teachers’ critical feedback on
an essay they had written. Such feedback could
plausibly be attributed to either negative or positive
factors, such as bias or a belief in one’s ability to
reach a higher standard (Cohen & Steele, 2002). The
treatment sought to promote the latter judgment.
In spring of seventh grade, in the context of their
social studies class, students wrote an essay about a
personal hero. Their initial draft received thorough
critical feedback from their teachers, accompanied
by whatever encouragement the teacher felt
inclined to give. Before students received their edited essay, the research team appended one of two
notes to the essays of the participating students.

Both notes had been hand written by the teacher in
advance. In a placebo control condition, the note stated, “I’m giving you these comments so that you’ll
have feedback on your paper,” which fulﬁlls the
grammatical expectation to provide an explanation
but conveys no information relevant to the trustworthiness of the criticism. In the wise feedback condition, the note stated, “I’m giving you these
comments because I have very high expectations
and I know that you can reach them.” A blank
piece of paper covered the notes and edited essays
to keep peers and teachers blind to condition.
Over the next week, students had the opportunity to revise their essays, which most did. Yeager
et al. (2014) previously reported that the randomly
assigned “wise feedback” note increased African
American students’ likelihood of revising their
essays and improved the quality of their revisions.
For instance, it doubled the number of teacher-suggested edits that students implemented. Furthermore, 3 months posttreatment, African American
students with low levels of baseline trust showed a
less steep decline in trust in the treatment condition
than in the control condition.
Survey Measures
School trust. Trust was assessed with six questions (e.g., “I am treated fairly by teachers and
other adults at my school,” “Students in my racial
group are treated fairly by teachers and other
adults at [school name] middle school;” 1 = very
much disagree, 6 = very much agree). Items were averaged at each wave (all as > .70), with higher values
indicating greater trust.
Awareness of bias in enforcement of school policies. Students reported their belief that racial bias
intruded in school disciplinary decisions—and thus
providing a measure of procedural injustice—using
two items written speciﬁcally for this study (“If a
Black or a White [school name] student is alone in
the hallway during class time, which one would a
teacher ask for a hall pass?” and “If a Black and a
White [school name] student do something wrong,
who is more likely to get in trouble for it?” Rated
on a 5-point scale; 1 = almost always the black student
instead of the white student; 3 = both of them about the
same; 5 = almost always the white student instead of the
black student). Only 2% of all participants ever gave
a response > 3, which would have indicated proAfrican American bias. Therefore, the measure is
best interpreted as perceptions of anti-African
American bias. The two items were averaged, with
higher values corresponding to a greater

Middle School Trust Gap

expectation of unjust treatment (a > .70). We then
reverse coded the composite score, with higher values corresponding to a greater expectation of procedural injustice. The modal response was “about the
same,” with over 55% of students at each wave
providing a rating of 3. Data could thus be analyzed either in their original continuous form or
dichotomized. Although we used the former
method, substantive results were unchanged with
the latter.
School records. From school records we obtained
the following data for each student: their gender, the
number of disciplinary incidents in each of the three
middle school years (range: 0–34), and grade point
averages (GPAs) in core classes (math, science,
social studies, and English or reading; range: 0 [F]
to 4.33 [A+]) for each academic quarter of each of
the three school years. As is common in this kind
of administrative data, disciplinary incidents were
nonnormal due to large numbers of students with 0
incidents and few with very many (> 20). To better
normalize the distribution, high outliers were
recoded to the 98th percentile and then the overall
metric was square root transformed. However, substantive results were unchanged when this was not
done (i.e., signiﬁcant results in the article were signiﬁcant in the raw data as well). In addition, for the
ﬁrst cohort only, the school provided data on the
reason for each disciplinary action.
College enrollment. College enrollment data were
obtained from the NSC. NSC is a nonproﬁt database that reports on students receiving ﬁnancial aid
to both private and federal loan providers, and as a
result it tracks college enrollment and degree attainment for the vast majority of college students in
America. Researchers conducting program evaluation in partnership with schools, as in this case, can
obtain participating students’ college enrollment
data. In the Northeast region of the United States,
where nearly all participating students attended college, the coverage rate for African American students attending public 4-year institutions was
99.6%, at public 2-year institutions it was 99.2%,
and at private nonproﬁt institutions it was 97%
(Dynarski, Hemelt, & Hyman, 2013).
The primary outcome of interest was on time
enrollment at a 4-year college (1 = enrolled at a 4-year
college the year after high school; 0 = did not),
which was the appropriate measure for the middleachieving (B and C average) students who participated in the experiment. Exploratory analyses also
focused on whether students enrolled in college at
all; roughly 70% of students in this middle-class
school had records the year after high school,

7

indicating college enrollment. Just over two thirds
of these students enrolled in a 4-year college.
Covariates. Covariates used in all structural
equation models were as follows: students’ gender,
cohort, and prior achievement. The latter was an average of students’ state test scores in the ﬁrst month of
sixth grade and their prior grades. To ensure that
this achievement measures represented baseline values, the correlational analyses, which began with
data from the fall of sixth grade, used ﬁfth-grade
GPA, whereas analyses of the experimental treatment, implemented in the spring of seventh grade,
used GPA from the fall of seventh grade. College
enrollment models, which as described below used
seventh- and eighth-grade measures, also controlled
for prior (sixth grade) trust.
Results
The software Mplus was used for all structural
models. Full information maximum likelihood was
used to estimate parameters without discarding or
imputing missing data. For models predicting
school discipline (a count variable), Poisson regression was used. Additional detail on all statistical
models can be found in the Supporting Information, and syntax is posted online (osf.io/3hpu8).
The Emergence of the Middle School Racial Trust Gap
In a growth curve model, including all students
from both racial groups, trust decreased from
Grades 6 to 8, slope: unstandardized b = 0.13,
p < .001, 95% CI [ 0.17, 0.09]. The model ﬁt the
data acceptably: v2(29) = 83.45, p < .001; root mean
square error of approximation (RMSEA) = .08, 90%
CI [0.06, 0.10]; and comparative ﬁt index (CFI) = .93.
However, trust declined faster for African American students, producing a racial trust gap. Figure 2
shows that there was no signiﬁcant trust gap
between African American and White students in
sixth grade, but the gap emerged by fall of seventh
grade. Student race signiﬁcantly predicted the slope
from sixth to eighth grades in a latent growth curve
model, unstandardized b = 0.06, p = .028, 95% CI
[ 0.11, 0.01]. This steeper loss of trust for African
American students led to signiﬁcant race-based differences in trust by seventh and eighth grade.
Predictors of the Trust Gap
Does age alone account for the trust gap?. If age
alone—and not school experiences—accounted for
the emergence of the trust gap across the middle

8

Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns, Hooper, and Cohen

Figure 2. The racial and ethnic trust gap emerges in seventh grade and is largest in spring of seventh grade in Studies 1 and 2.
Note. Values are covariate adjusted, controlling for premiddle school achievement, gender, and cohort. p-values are from t-tests;
d = Cohen’s d. Results are from independent regression models.

school years, then one might expect the decline in
trust over middle school to be a monotonically
decreasing linear function. However, when inspecting Figure 2, the change in trust in the summer is
mostly ﬂat or positive, whereas the change in trust
during the school year mostly slopes downward.
This is consistent with the explanation that loss of
trust emerges from experiences in school not processes tied to chronological age or pubertal maturation alone.

To test this formally, in another growth model
conducted with all students, we estimated a “school
year” slope and a “summer” slope by ﬁxing weights
on two latent slope variables (“School year:” fall
sixth grade = 0, spring sixth grade and fall seventh
grade = 1, spring seventh grade and fall eighth
grade = 2, spring eighth grade = 3, “Summer:” fall
sixth grade and spring sixth grade = 0, fall seventh
grade and spring seventh grade = 1, and fall eighth
grade and spring eighth grade = 2). The model ﬁt

Middle School Trust Gap

the data acceptably: v2(22) = 48.95, p < .001;
RMSEA = .07, 90% CI [0.04, 0.09]; and CFI = .97.
For all students, “school year” trust declined signiﬁcantly over time, unstandardized b = 0.32,
p < .001, 95% CI [ 0.42, 0.22], and “summer”
trust did not, unstandardized b = 0.10, p = .092,
95% CI [ 0.02, 0.21]. A Wald test of parameter constraints showed that the “school year” decline was
steeper than the “summer” decline, W = 17.01,
df = 1, p < .001.
Moreover, student race signiﬁcantly predicted
the latent “school year” slope, unstandardized
b = 0.10, p = .036, 95% CI [ 0.18, 0.01]; model
ﬁt: v2(26) = 54.39, p < .001; RMSEA = .06, 90% CI
[0.04, 0.09]; CFI = .96, and not predict the summer
slope (p = .088). In sum, African American students
lost more trust during the school year than their
White peers. They did not lose more trust over the
summer.
Which school experiences might account for the
growth of the trust gap?
Procedural injustice in school discipline. Students
may discern whether to trust the school based on
the social reality of whether suspicion and punishments primarily target members of their racial and
ethnic minority groups. Students’ private grades
may matter as well (which is why we control for
them), but discipline-related events, such as a teacher sending a student to the principal, are more
readily observable to all children.
Ofﬁcial records revealed that African American
students received signiﬁcantly more discipline
throughout middle school. This was true at every
grade level in the continuous data and when
inspecting a dichotomous measure of whether a
student had any incident at all (sixth grade:
White = 24%, African American = 55%; seventh
grade: White = 40%, African American = 67%;
eighth grade: White = 41%; African American = 69%). Although disciplinary events rose with
time for both racial groups, the largest race gap
was apparent in sixth grade.
This racial group difference does not appear to
be driven by differences in social class or in academic achievement. In a Poisson regression predicting number of discipline incidents in sixth to eighth
grades with student race and relevant covariates
(see above) a substantial student race gap in discipline remained, unstandardized b = 0.90 events, t
(269) = 13.78, p < .001, 95% CI [0.77, 1.03], and this
was relatively undiminished compared with the
race gap with no covariates (raw gap: 5.8 incidents,
covariate-adjusted gap: 4.16 incidents). Thus, on the
basis of the allocation of punishment in this school,

9

African American students may have wondered
whether the rules of the institution were being
applied fairly to their group.
This is especially apparent when limiting analyses to what we call “judgment call” incidents—operationally, “deﬁance” and “disobedience,” as
coded by the school. In much prior research, there
has been no group disparity in discipline for more
objectively apparent infractions—such as bringing a
weapon to school—but African American students
were far more likely to be disciplined for subjective
infractions such as disrespect, disobedience, loitering, or excessive noise (Gregory & Weinstein, 2008;
Skiba et al., 2002). Students’ levels of trust may be
more affected by subjective than objective incidents.
To be disciplined for an objectively apparent matter, like ﬁghting, is difﬁcult to quarrel with. But to
be disciplined for talking out of turn, and to see fellow African Americans more frequently sentenced
to such disciplinary measures, is perhaps more
likely to raise questions about teachers’ trustworthiness.
In the ﬁrst cohort, the only cohort with school
codes for incident type, African American students
outnumbered their White peers roughly three to
one for deﬁance or disobedience (25% vs. 8%,
respectively), a signiﬁcant difference v2(1) = 6.52,
p = .012, and one that corresponds to the group difference in an analyses of all 17 middle schools in a
large district (Skiba et al., 2002). For objective incidents such as cheating, ﬁghting, or obscene gestures, the race gap was not signiﬁcant, (7% vs. 4%),
v2(1) = 0.56, p = .453.
Awareness of bias in enforcement of school policies. In addition to receiving more discipline, African American students also perceived bias in
disciplinary sentencing (see Figure 2). Analyses of
the awareness of bias survey items showed that
African American students were more likely to
expect that they, and not their White peers, would
be disciplined for the same events (e.g., being in the
hallway without a hall pass), at every measurement
occasion, ps < .05. White students, by contrast, saw
no bias in discipline. At every measurement occasion except the last one, 80% of White students
expected equal treatment for White and African
American students (Figure 2). Only at the end of
eighth grade did White students show a signiﬁcant
tendency to see bias against African Americans, but
they still saw less bias than African American students did at the beginning of sixth grade, as shown
in Figure 2. By contrast, for African American students, fewer than 55% expected equal treatment at
every wave except the ﬁrst month of sixth grade.

10

Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns, Hooper, and Cohen

Figure 3. Recursive processes in awareness of bias and school trust among African American middle school students: a parallel growth
curve analysis in Study 1.
Note. Unstandardized coefﬁcients. Covariates were gender, prior achievement (ﬁfth-grade grade point average and fall sixth-grade test
scores), and cohort. “Awareness of bias” is coded so that higher values correspond to greater expectations of equal treatment (i.e., lower
awareness of bias), matching Figure 2, so that all correlations with trust were expected to be positive. ***p < .001.

Recursive process. A parallel growth curve model
explored the relationship between African American students’ awareness of bias in disciplinary decisions and their level of trust. The model estimated
a latent intercept at fall of sixth grade as well as a
latent slope from that point until spring of eighth
grade, separately for both awareness of bias and
trust (Figure 3).
We found evidence consistent with the recursive
process displayed in Figure 1. African American
students who reported greater awareness of disciplinary bias (reverse-coded) in the fall of sixth
grade also reported lower trust at the same time
point (i.e., the intercepts were correlated), unstandardized b = 0.68, t(132) = 3.97, p < .001, 95% CI
[0.28, 1.054]. Next, a change in awareness of bias
(reverse-coded) predicted a concurrent change in
trust (i.e., the slopes were correlated), b = 1.79,
t(132) = 7.58, p < .001, 95% CI [0.96, 2.61] (these
results were no different when estimating the
“school year” slopes only). These correlational data
do not isolate which of the two constructs, mistrust
or awareness of disciplinary bias, have temporal
causal precedence, but rather demonstrate their
pattern of reciprocal reinforcement through time.
Furthermore, if perceived bias and mistrust reinforced each other, then perceived bias should
increase with time. Indeed, the growth curve model

found a signiﬁcant slope for awareness of bias (not
reverse-coded), unstandardized b = 0.06, p = .002,
showing that African American adolescents
perceived increasingly high levels of bias through
middle school. This was in spite of the fact, noted
previously, that the objective size of the gap in
disciplinary sentencing, if anything, decreased with
time (although disciplinary events rose for all
students, regardless of race, over time). In sum,
students who were more aware of bias reported
lower trust, and students who became more aware
of bias lost more trust—and vice versa.
This process did not appear to be driven by students who were the most likely to be disciplined.
Controlling for students’ ﬁfth-grade discipline incidents did not change the signiﬁcance levels of
either of these results. Moreover, there was no
interaction involving ﬁfth-grade discipline (in a
multiple-group analysis), suggesting that the patterns held for students with a history of disciplinary
problems and those without one. Furthermore, African American students showed a signiﬁcant decline
in trust (i.e., a signiﬁcant slope) even when conﬁned to those who never received a disciplinary
infraction during middle school. These supplemental analyses dovetail with past research suggesting
that vicarious awareness of procedural injustice can
affect institutional trust, even when one has not

Middle School Trust Gap

been the direct recipient of unfair treatment (Fagan
& Tyler, 2005).
Does a Loss of Trust Predict Future Discipline
Incidents?
What implications might the loss of school trust
have for future behavior? A series of regression
analyses found that lower trust each spring was
associated with disciplinary behavior the following
year. Poisson regressions predicting discipline incidents showed that lower trust in the spring of sixth
and seventh grades predicted African American
students’ discipline incidents in the subsequent
year: spring sixth-grade trust predicting seventhgrade discipline, b = 0.26, t(109) = 5.53, p < .001,
95% CI [ 0.35, 0.17]; spring seventh-grade trust
predicting eighth grade discipline, b = 0.22, t
(102) = 4.172, p < .001, 95% CI [ 0.32,
0.12].
Hence, one year’s level of institutional trust predicted the next year’s level of behavioral deﬁance
of institutional policies.
Long-Term Consequences of Loss of Trust
Did a loss in trust predict long-term developmental outcomes? We estimated residual scores
from regressions of spring trust on fall trust, for
each of the three school years: sixth, seventh, and
eighth. Lower values correspond to a greater loss of
trust. The advantage of the residual score is that it
is independent of either of the two scores used to
compute it (supplementary analyses using raw
change scores yielded the same substantive results).
Seventh-grade residual trust scores predicted on
time enrollment at a 4-year college for African
American students, standardized b = .19, Z = 2.26,
p = .024, 95% CI [0.025, 0.36], meaning that students who lost more trust than would be expected
in seventh grade were less likely to end up at a 4year college. (Similar results emerged in a supplemental ordinal regression analysis that examined
college enrollment at three levels, 0 = no college,
1 = 2-year college, 2 = 4-year college, Z = 2.38,
p = .018.) Fall eighth-grade absolute levels of trust
predicted college enrollment as well (p < .01), and
no other absolute or residual measure of trust did
(see Supporting Information).
Thus, it appears that the damage to African
American students’ trust by the end of seventh
grade or the beginning of eighth grade signiﬁcantly
predicted whether they made it to a 4-year college
the year after high school. Crucially, this was true
even after controlling for relevant predictors of

11

college enrollment such as premiddle school academic performance. In contrast, trust spring residual scores or within-year change scores in any year
were not associated with college enrollment for
White students (see Figure S5).
Effect of the “Wise Feedback” Intervention
One limitation with the analyses reported so far
is endogeneity. Students’ social realities in their
institutions, their mental representations of them,
and their behaviors over time occur in a mutually
causal system, creating a confound for causal inference. We are fortunate, however, that it was possible to supplement a portion of the correlational
analysis with an experimental one. As noted, students were randomly assigned at the individual
level to receive trust-sustaining “wise feedback”
from their seventh-grade teacher in the context of a
potentially unfair interpersonal event: being criticized on a writing assignment (recall that, in a previous article reporting on these data, the note
sustained African American students’ trust at
the end of seventh grade; Yeager et al., 2014,
Studies 1–2).
Eighth-grade discipline. Receiving a trust-sustaining “wise feedback” intervention in the spring of
seventh grade signiﬁcantly reduced African American students’ eighth-grade discipline incidents, t
(43) = 2.96, p = .005, d = .67. There was no effect
for White students (p = .75), and the Race 9 Condition interaction was signiﬁcant, t(81) = 2.04,
p = .045. Figure 4 reports raw and covariateadjusted means. In the control condition, African
American students received four times more disciplinary citations as compared to White students. In
the treatment group that gap was halved. These
results represent a conceptual replication of
research that has changed teachers’ chronic behaviors, improving students’ feelings that teachers
respected them, thus reducing race-related discipline disparities (Gregory et al., in press; Okonofua,
Paunesku, et al., in press).
These results support the theory presented in
Figure 1, which contends that adolescents engage
in inductive reasoning on the basis of interpersonal interactions but, after forming a mental
model, are also partly top–down in their assessments of future attributionally ambiguous interactions. Here, a trust-restoring experience with a
single teacher in seventh grade affected discipline
in eighth grade, even as students entered into new
interactions with different teachers and authority
ﬁgures in the school (for analogous year-over-year

12

Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns, Hooper, and Cohen

Figure 4. Longitudinal effects of trust-restoring “wise feedback” intervention (administered spring of seventh grade) on eighth-grade
discipline incidents and on time enrollment in a 4-year college 5½ years postintervention, in Study 1.
Note. Covariates include prior achievement (grade point average and test scores), preintervention trust, gender, and cohort. Covariateadjusted values for each racial group estimated at the mean for each racial group.

effects, see Gregory et al., in press). This suggests
that it is possible to interrupt or at least slow the
top-down appraisals that contribute to worsening
mistrust.
College enrollment. Next, the wise feedback intervention in spring of seventh grade—the period
when we found that changes in trust were most
predictive of college outcomes—signiﬁcantly
increased African American students’ likelihood of
attending a 4-year college the year immediately following high school, 5.5 years posttreatment,
Z = 2.58, p = .010 (Covariate-adjusted values: Control = 40%, Wise feedback = 70%, see Figure 4 for
raw values). Gender, prior achievement, and prior
trust all signiﬁcantly predicted college enrollment,
but cohort did not; removing the latter did not

change the signiﬁcance of the treatment effect
(p = .01). Treatment effects for White students were
nonsigniﬁcant (p < .5).
There were no treatment effects on whether adolescents enrolled at any college at all (2 or 4 years),
Z = 0.16, p = .880, only on 4-year college enrollment. In a supplemental ordinal regression analysis
when 0 = no college enrollment, 1 = 2-year college,
and 2 = 4-year college, the treatment effect was
marginally signiﬁcant, Z = 1.69, p = .092.
Recall, however, that this experiment was conducted among the subset of “B” and “C” average
students who were already more likely to attend
college than students with lower grades, and so
there was range restriction. Within the subset of
those who attended any college at all (N = 37 of

Middle School Trust Gap

44), we analyzed treatment effects on 4-year college
enrollment (1 = 4-year college, 0 = 2-year college,
NA = not enrolled in college). In that analysis,
effects of the wise feedback treatment were stronger, Z = 2.95, p = .003, with covariates. Thus, at
least in our small sample of middle-class “B” and
“C” African American students who eventually
attended college, the trust-sustaining “wise-feedback” intervention resulted in greater likelihood of
attending 4-year college instead of a 2-year college.

Study 2
Method
Participants and Procedures
Study 2 was a 1-year cohort sequential study
that followed the entire middle school (sixth, seventh, and eighth grade) at a rural school in Colorado for 1 year (N = 206). Students were either
Hispanic or Latino (44%) or White (56%). Unlike
Study 1, the negatively-stereotyped ethnic minority
students were largely working class. These differences between the studies permitted us to assess
the generality of our ﬁndings to a new negatively
stereotyped group (Latino Americans) that was
relatively economically disadvantaged and living in
an altogether different geographic location from the
students in Study 1.
Survey procedures were analog to Study 1. Adolescents completed fall and spring survey measures
assessing school trust and awareness of procedural
injustice, identical to Study 1, except the procedural
injustice in school policies survey measures (after
piloting) referred to “Hispanic” students, not “African American” students. Students were surveyed
only for 1 year of middle school, and because this
study was conducted years after Study 1, students
have not yet been tracked through college. Furthermore, discipline incidents in the year after the study
were not available.

13

year, was strongest for minority rather than majority students, with the largest gap in trust between
the two ethnic groups occurring in the spring of 7th
grade. Thus, analyses of school trust in a cohortsequential design with Latinos replicated Study 1’s
results with African Americans.
What Caused the Trust Gap?
Unlike Study 1, in the fall of sixth grade there
was no initial signiﬁcant Latino–white difference in
expectations of bias in application of school policies
(Figure 2). However, by the spring of sixth grade a
signiﬁcant difference emerged, and from then on
the results of Study 2 paralleled Study 1.
Next, we examined the relationship between
awareness of bias and changes in trust. Because
Study 2 is a cohort sequential design, not a true
longitudinal design like Study 1, the latent change
score model is not identiﬁed, as it requires at least
three observations. Therefore, we estimated crosslagged autoregressive models with Latino participants from all three grades (sixth, seventh, and
eighth) and tested the effects of fall awareness of
bias on spring trust.
The cross-lagged model showed that the extent
to which Latino students believed there was injustice in school discipline in the fall was a signiﬁcant
predictor of their subsequent trust of school in the
spring, in cross-lagged models (b = 0.53, p < .001;
see Figure 5). The reverse was not true, suggesting
a path from awareness of bias to trust, and not vice
versa. This path was not signiﬁcantly different for
any of the three grade levels, when constraining
paths across grade levels in a multigroup analysis
(see Supporting Information). (We have also reconducted Study 1’s analyses using cross-lagged models, and they are reported in the online supplement,
Figure S6. These yield the same conclusions, with
the exception that both paths, from trust to bias
and bias to trust, are signiﬁcant at different waves.)

Results
Emergence of the Latino–White Trust Gap in Middle
School
As in Study 1, a signiﬁcant (p < .05) ethnic group
gap in school trust emerged during fall of 7th grade
and was sustained through the end of middle
school (see Figure 2); once again, the trust gap was
not signiﬁcant in 6th grade. As in Study 1, the largest loss in trust appeared in the 7th grade school

Figure 5. Cross-lagged models show that awareness of bias in
discipline predicts subsequent lower levels of trust among Latinos
in Study 2. Unstandardized regression coefﬁcients. ***p < .001.

14

Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns, Hooper, and Cohen

These ﬁndings extend the parallel growth curve
analysis in Study 1 by showing that awareness of
bias in the fall predicts lower trust of school in the
spring.

Discussion
In a Pew Center survey of adults in the United
States, 61% of African Americans and 53% of Latinos reported low levels of trust in the fairness of
American society, as compared to only 32% of
White Americans (Taylor, Funk, & Clark, 2007).
Analog gaps exist with regard to speciﬁc U.S. institutions. For instance, 70% of African Americans
recently reported low levels of trust in the police
compared to 43% of White Americans (Gallup,
2015). Such racial and ethnic gaps in adults’ levels
of trust are large. They may appear unavoidable,
normative, and unsurprising. A key contribution of
this article is to offer a testable social and developmental psychological process model for how racial
and ethnic gaps in institutional trust emerge during
adolescence and affect long-term developmental
outcomes (Figure 1). A second contribution is to
show that such gaps and their consequences need
not be inevitable.
Speciﬁcally, this research used a theory-informed
developmental frame to understand the formation
of institutional trust among racial and ethnic minority adolescents and to explore its behavioral implications over an 8-year period. Trust declined every
semester of middle school, and this decline happened more quickly and strongly for African Americans (Study 1) and Latino (Study 2) students.
Racial and ethnic minority students’ decline in trust
was predicted by their awareness of bias—that is,
their awareness of the possibility of procedural
injustice at their school. This ﬁnding was conﬁrmed
using a parallel growth curve model (Study 1) and
a cross-lagged model (Study 2). These results are
consistent with much prior research showing that
trust is tied to perceptions of procedural justice and
predicts institutional compliance (Levi, 1997; Tyler
& Blader, 2003).
One intriguing aspect of the process shown in
Figure 1 is its recursive nature. Once students’
sense of trust or distrust was formed, it seemed to
feed off its consequences, producing perceptions of
procedural injustice that caused trust to decline further (also see Fagan & Tyler, 2005; Gregory &
Weinstein, 2008). Moreover, that decline in trust
seemed to increase the likelihood of discipline
infractions, creating the very social reality that

precipitated it. These feedback loops proceed often
hidden from the view of teachers and administrators because they unfold slowly and are partly psychological in nature. But their cumulative effect is a
large trust gap by seventh grade that disfavored
racial and ethnic minority students. Years later, the
drop in trust in the transition to seventh grade and
then eighth grade seemed to have lingering consequences, in the form of lower 4-year college enrollment for African Americans.
Trust, it seems, sat “in the middle” between
social reality and later behavioral outcomes such as
disciplinary infractions and college enrollment (cf.
Olson & Dweck, 2008). We know this from an intervention in Study 1 that experimentally bolstered
African Americans’ sense of trust in the face of
sharp criticism of their work in the seventh grade
(previously shown in Yeager et al., 2014, Study 2).
Because the link between trust and later outcomes
depends on a continual feedback loop, an early
experience that refuted the plausibility of procedural injustice had long-term effects, presumably
through a kind of developmental cascade from trust
to engagement and into educational pathways (cf.
Masten et al., 2005).
African American seventh graders who received
wise feedback on an essay—conveying that the teacher believed in their potential to reach a higher
standard, thus reassuring students that they would
be seen based on their merits rather than through
the lens of a negative stereotype about the intellectual ability of their racial group—beneﬁted. Our
intervention was based on a body of previous theoretical and empirical research (Cohen et al., 1999;
Gregory & Weinstein, 2008; Shouse, 1996) and was
timed to the emergence of the trust gap (see Cohen,
Garcia, Purdie-Vaughns, Apfel, & Brzustoski, 2009).
Although the objective experience of receiving
“wise feedback” was short, the psychological and
developmental consequences seemed long-lasting.
Adolescents receiving the note were assigned fewer
disciplinary infractions later according to ofﬁcial
records and, nearly 6 years later, were more likely
to attend a 4-year college according to the NSC.
Trust, and the trust-restoring wise feedback
intervention, did not predict subsequent college
persistence for White students (Figure S5). Why
not? For students with group-based advantages,
such as majority-group students, there may simply
be greater redundancy in the system. When one’s
group is positively stereotyped and overrepresented
in a domain, a loss of trust or a poor relationship
with a teacher might be a temporary setback but
not fatal. For a stigmatized student, however,

Middle School Trust Gap

outcomes might depend more on the accident of
having a teacher who believes in them (for an anlog
example from low-income children in early childhood, see Tucker-Drob, 2012). Thus, although the
present results offer an exciting possibility for what
might be done to prevent race-based achievement
gaps, they simultaneously act as an indictment of
the educational system, by demonstrating that
minority students’ outcomes are more contingent
on everyday experiences of respect—experiences
that may occur too rarely and by happenstance.
Limitations and Future Directions
The wise feedback experiment has limitations.
First, the evidence is based on only one school. Second, the sample size was small, and small sample
sizes can lead to false-positive ﬁndings or to overstated effect sizes when researchers have ﬂexibility
in data analysis. Here, sample size was constrained
by the number of B and C students in the two
cohorts, and analysis was constrained to be parallel
across types of analysis—correlational and experimental—which yielded similar results. In addition,
the results are robust across many (but not all) alternative model speciﬁcations (see both signiﬁcant and
nonsigniﬁcant model speciﬁcations at osf.io/3hpu8).
At the same time, the overall sample size was
approximately 70% of the longitudinal sample for
the Perry Preschool project, which has had a
tremendous inﬂuence on early childhood policy
(e.g., Heckman, 2006). Furthermore, unlike the
Perry Preschool project, in this study there were no
problems with randomization or missing data (because random assignment was effective, Yeager
et al., 2014; and outcome data were collected from
the NSC). We also note that prior psychological
interventions that initially involved a few dozen
treated students (e.g., Aronson, Fried, & Good,
2002) later showed reproducible ﬁndings when conducted with many thousands of students (Paunesku
et al., 2015) and when analyses were preregistered
and data were collected by third-party research
ﬁrms (Yeager, Romero, et al., 2016).
Nevertheless, it will be important for future
experiments to reproduce our method with a larger
sample and in more heterogeneous contexts. Doing
this will not be without challenges. The present
experiments require working closely with schools
over several years to guide teachers in designing
assignments and hand-writing personal notes to
students, and tracking these students over the ensuing 6 years. Moreover, we know very little about
what contextual conditions might moderate the

15

effects of wise feedback, but we imagine they are
plentiful.
Although we have focused on the middle school
transition, the processes documented here did not
begin in sixth grade and do not stop in eighth
grade. It will be critical in future research to understand how to prevent experiences of racial and ethnic discrimination that begin early in childhood and
also to develop methods to regain racial and ethnic
minority students’ trust after they transition to high
school. For instance, one possibility is that students
reengage their potential to trust when they transition to a novel institution—asking themselves
whether the “old codes” apply or not (cf. Coates,
2015). Perhaps timely intervention at later life transitions might approximate the effects of the wise
feedback intervention documented here (for an
example among college students, e.g., Yeager, Walton, et al., 2016).
We emphasize that our theoretical model does
not “psychologize” the social problem of racial disparities in discipline and college enrollment. Nor
does it “sociologize” it and ascribe outcomes solely
to unalterable structural causes. It is, as we show in
Figure 1, the interaction of structure with psyche
that drives outcomes over time (Cohen, Garcia, &
Goyer, 2017). School presents a social reality to
which all students, especially negatively stereotyped minority groups, must psychologically adapt.
That psychological adaptation, in turn, can reinforce
the social reality, as when African American middle
school students act out against a system they perceive as unjust. It is neither the attributes of the
child, such as a troublesome nature or a behavioral
disorder, nor the social environment alone that is
the driver of inequality. Rather it is the unfolding
transaction between the child and the environment
(Cohen et al., 2017; Gregory & Weinstein, 2008;
Okonofua, Walton, et al., in press).
Our approach echoes Bronfenbrenner’s (1977)
early formulation of ecological systems theory and
aligns with contemporary social-cognitive theories
of development (Olson & Dweck, 2008). Mental
representations, the product of observing and interacting with a social context, continue to exert an
inﬂuence on development for years to come. Yet by
the logic of causal mediation, intervening in a
timely way slowed the psychological accretions of
injustice and lessened its lasting harm.
Our theoretical perspective is consistent with
phenomenological variants on ecological systems
theories, which address the social, structural, cultural, and historical contexts in which youth
develop (Spencer, 2006). A mental model of trust

16

Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns, Hooper, and Cohen

can act as a protective factor or a risk factor. Trust
allows a person to reap the rewards of engagement
with the system, but it also puts them at risk of
being taken advantage of. Trust, absent justice,
might be misplaced, but well-placed trust can help
people thrive. Hence, institutions would do well to
simultaneously improve fairness and reduce bias
while also addressing the psychological legacy of
previous injustices. Said differently, wise feedback
is not, on its own, the solution to race gaps in discipline. Schools and teachers need to be trustworthy.
When they are, then wise feedback can help clear
the attributional air and redirect students’ working
mental models of the institution, so that students
can proﬁt from the relationships and instruction in
their schools.
These data inform education policy and practice.
By experimentally testing the wise feedback intervention, it demonstrates a method for helping
teachers create a classroom climate that is more
likely to maintain the trust of students who may
contend with discrimination (also see Gregory
et al., in press; Okonofua, Paunesku, et al., in
press). Based on prior correlational (Gregory &
Weinstein, 2008; Shouse, 1996) and experimental
research (Cohen & Steele, 2002; Cohen et al., 2009;
Yeager et al., 2014), the intervention was not only
precisely targeted to address the key psychological
process but was timed to intervene on that process
at a crucial stage: when mistrust was likely to
emerge and to exert a growing impact. This is
because a process can be easier to affect at its
beginning. Once it has accumulated consequences—
the child is labeled as a “troublemaker,” sees his
permanent record tainted by a suspension—the process will have a momentum that is much harder to
halt (Okonofua, Paunesku, et al., in press; Okonofua, Walton, et al., in press).
Of course, truly “wise” educators do not simply
append notes to essays and end their interventions
there. Instead, they send the continually send the
message that their students are capable, valued,
and respected, weaving it into the culture of the
classroom. Our studies demonstrate the way that
larger cultural forces infuse the interactions
between teachers and students. How to break free
of their inﬂuence is a craft that requires both wisdom and tact.

References
Aronson, J. M., Fried, C. B., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing
the effects of stereotype threat on African American

college students by shaping theories of intelligence.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 113–125.
doi:10.1006/jesp.2001.1491
Baumrind, D. (1997). The discipline encounter: Contemporary issues. Aggression and Violent Behavior, 2, 321–
335. doi:10.1016/S1359-1789(97)00018-9
Bigler, R. S., Averhart, C. J., & Liben, L. S. (2003). Race
and the workforce: Occupational status, aspirations, and
stereotyping among African American children. Developmental Psychology, 39, 572–580. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.39.3.
572
Bigler, R. S., & Liben, L. S. (2006). A developmental intergroup theory of social stereotypes and prejudice.
Advances in Child Development and Behavior, 34, 39–89.
doi:10.1016/S0065-2407(06)80004-2
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1977). Toward an experimental ecology of human development. American Psychologist, 32,
513–531. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.32.7.513
Brown, C. S., & Bigler, R. S. (2005). Children’s perceptions
of discrimination: A developmental model. Child Development, 76, 533–553. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2005.00862.x
Bryk, A. S., & Schneider, B. (2002). Trust in schools: A core
resource for improvement. New York, NY: Russell Sage
Foundation.
Coates, T.-N. (2015). Between the world and me. New York,
NY: Random House Publishing Group.
Cohen, G. L., & Garcia, J. (2005). “I am us”: Negative
stereotypes as collective threats. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 89, 566–582. doi:10.1037/00223514.89.4.566
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., & Goyer, J. P. (in press). Turning
point: Targeted, tailored, and timely psychological
intervention. In A. Elliot, C. S. Dweck & D. S. Yeager
(Eds.) Handbook of competence and motivation (2nd ed.):
Theory and application. New York, NY: Guilford.
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Apfel, N., &
Brzustoski, P. (2009). Recursive processes in self-afﬁrmation: Intervening to close the minority achievement
gap. Science, 324, 400–403. doi:10.1126/science.1170769
Cohen, G. L., & Steele, C. M. (2002). A barrier of mistrust:
How negative stereotypes affect cross-race mentoring.
In J. M. Aronson (Ed.), Improving academic achievement:
Impact of psychological factors on education (pp. 303–327).
Bingley, UK: Emerald Group.
Cohen, G. L., Steele, C. M., & Ross, L. D. (1999). The
mentor’s dilemma: Providing critical feedback across
the racial divide. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 1302–1318. doi:10.1177/0146167299258011
Coopersmith, J. (2009). Characteristics of public, private, and
bureau of indian education elementary and secondary school
teachers in the United States: Results from the 2007–08 schools
and stafﬁng survey. First Look. NCES 2009-324. Washington D.C.: National Center for Education Statistics.
Dynarski, S. M., Hemelt, S. W., & Hyman, J. M. (2015).
The missing manual using national student clearinghouse data to track postsecondary outcomes. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 37(1), 53s–79s.
doi:10.3102/0162373715576078

Middle School Trust Gap
Fagan, J., & Tyler, T. R. (2005). Legal socialization of children and adolescents. Social Justice Research, 18, 217–
241. doi:10.1007/s11211-005-6823-3
Gallup. (2015). In U.S., conﬁdence in police lowest in
22 years. Retrieved from http://www.gallup.com/poll/
183704/confidence-police-lowest-years.aspx
Gambetta, D. (1988). Can we trust trust? In D. Gambetta
(Ed.), Trust: Making and breaking cooperative relations (pp.
213–235). New York, NY: Basil Blackwell.
Goffman, E. (1963). Stigma: Notes on the management of
spoiled identity. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster.
Gregory, A., Hafen, C. A., Ruzek, E., Mikami, A. Y.,
Allen, J. P., & Pianta, R. C. (in press). Closing the racial
discipline gap in classrooms by changing teacher practice.
School Psychology Review. Advance online publication.
Gregory, A., & Weinstein, R. S. (2004). Connection and
regulation at home and in school predicting growth in
achievement for adolescents. Journal of Adolescent
Research, 19, 405–427. doi:10.1177/0743558403258859
Gregory, A., & Weinstein, R. S. (2008). The discipline gap
and African Americans: Deﬁance or cooperation in the
high school classroom. Journal of School Psychology, 46,
455–475. doi:10.1016/j.jsp.2007.09.001
Harber, K. D. (1998). Feedback to minorities: Evidence of
a positive bias. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 622–628. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.74.3.622
Heckman, J. J. (2006). Skill formation and the economics
of investing in disadvantaged children. Science, 312,
1900–1902. doi:10.1126/science.1128898
Irvine, J. J. (2003). Educating teachers for diversity: Seeing
with a cultural eye. New York, NY: Teachers College
Press.
Killen, M., Mulvey, K. L., & Hitti, A. (2013). Social exclusion in childhood: A developmental intergroup perspective. Child Development, 84, 772–790. doi:10.1111/
cdev.12012
Laupa, M., Turiel, E., & Cowan, P. A. (1995). Obedience
to authority in children and adults. In M. Killen & D.
Hart (Eds.), Morality in everyday life: Developmental perspectives (pp. 131–165). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Lee, K. H., Siegle, G. J., Dahl, R. E., Hooley, J. M., & Silk,
J. S. (2014). Neural responses to maternal criticism in
healthy youth. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience,
10, 902–912. doi:10.1093/scan/nsu133
Lepper, M. R., & Woolverton, M. (2002). The wisdom of
practice: Lessons learned from the study of highly
effective tutors. In J. M. Aronson (Ed.), Improving academic achievement: Impact of psychological factors on education (pp. 135–158). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Levi, M. (1997). Consent, dissent, and patriotism. New York,
NY: Cambridge University Press.
Levi, M., Sacks, A., & Tyler, T. (2009). Conceptualizing
legitimacy, measuring legitimating beliefs. American
Behavioral
Scientist,
53,
354–375.
doi:10.1177/
0002764209338797
Lewin, K., Lippitt, R., & White, R. K. (1939). Patterns of
aggressive behavior in experimentally created social

17

climates. The Journal of Social Psychology, 10, 269–299.
doi:10.1080/00224545.1939.9713366
Lord, C. G., Ross, L., & Lepper, M. R. (1979). Biased
assimilation and attitude polarization: The effects of
prior theories on subsequently considered evidence.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37, 2098–
2109. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.37.11.2098
Masten, A. S., Roisman, G. I., Long, J. D., Burt, K. B.,
Obradovic, J., Riley, J. R., . . . Tellegen, A. (2005).
Developmental cascades: Linking academic achievement and externalizing and internalizing symptoms
over 20 years. Developmental Psychology, 41, 733–746.
doi:10.1037/0012-1649.41.5.733
McKown, C. (2013). Social equity theory and racial-ethnic
achievement gaps. Child Development, 84, 1120–1136.
doi:10.1111/cdev.12033
McKown, C., & Weinstein, R. S. (2003). The development
and consequences of stereotype consciousness in middle childhood. Child Development, 74, 498–515.
Muthen, L. K., & Muthen, B. O. (1998-2011). Mplus user’s
guide. Sixth Edition. Los Angeles, CA: Author.
Okonofua, J. A., & Eberhardt, J. L. (2015). Two strikes:
Race and the disciplining of young students. Psychological Science, 26, 617–624. doi:10.1177/0956797615570365
Okonofua, J. A., Paunesku, D., & Walton, G. M. (in
press). A brief intervention to encourage empathic discipline cuts suspension rates in half among adolescents.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. Advance online publication.
Okonofua, J. A., Walton, G. M., & Eberhardt, J. L. (in
press). A vicious cycle: A social-psychological account
of extreme racial disparities in school discipline. Perspectives on Psychological Science. Advance online publication.
Olson, K. R., & Dweck, C. S. (2008). A blueprint for social
cognitive development. Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 3, 193–202. doi:10.1111/j.1745-6916.2006.00007.x
Paunesku, D., Walton, G. M., Romero, C., Smith, E. N.,
Yeager, D. S., & Dweck, C. S. (2015). Mindset interventions are a scalable treatment for academic underachievement. Psychological Science, 26, 284–293. doi:10.
1177/0956797615571017
Peper, J. S., & Dahl, R. E. (2013). The teenage brain: Surging hormones—brain-behavior interactions during
puberty. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 22,
134–139.
President’s Task Force on 21st Century Policing. (2015).
Final report of The President’s Task Force on 21st Century
Policing. Washington, DC: Ofﬁce of Community Oriented Policing Services.
Purdie-Vaughns, V., Steele, C. M., Davies, P. G., Ditlmann, R., & Crosby, J. R. (2008). Social identity contingencies: How diversity cues signal threat or safety for
African Americans in mainstream institutions. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 94, 615–630. doi:10.
1037/0022-3514.94.4.615
Roberts, B. W., & Caspi, A. (2003). The cumulative continuity model of personality development: Striking a

18

Yeager, Purdie-Vaughns, Hooper, and Cohen

balance between continuity and change in personality
traits across the life course. In U. M. Staudinger & U.
E. R. Lindenberger (Eds.), Understanding human
development: Lifespan psychology in exchange with other
disciplines (pp. 183–214). Dordrecht, NL: Kluwer
Academic.
Ruble, D. N., Alvarez, J., Bachman, M., Cameron, J.,
Fuligni, A., Garcia Coll, C., & Rhee, E. (2004). The
development of a sense of “we”: The emergence and
implications of children’s collective identity. In M. Bennett & F. Sani (Eds.), The development of the social self
(pp. 29–76). New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Sagar, H. A., & Schoﬁeld, J. W. (1980). Racial and behavioral cues in black and white children’s perceptions of
ambiguously aggressive acts. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 39, 590–598.
Sellers, R. M., Copeland-Linder, N., Martin, P. P., &
Lewis, R. L. (2006). Racial identity matters: The relationship between racial discrimination and psychological functioning in African American adolescents. Journal
of Research on Adolescence, 16, 187–216.
Shouse, R. C. (1996). Academic press and sense of community: Conﬂict, congruence, and implications for student achievement. Social Psychology of Education, 1(1),
47–68.
Skiba, R. J., Michael, R. S., Nardo, A. C., & Peterson, R.
L. (2002). The color of discipline: Sources of racial and
gender disproportionality in school punishment. The
Urban
Review,
34,
317–342.
doi:10.1023/A:
1021320817372
Spencer, M. B. (2006). Phenomenology and ecological systems theory: Development of diverse groups. In W.
Damon & R. M. Lerner (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology, Vol. 1: Theoretical models of human development (6th
ed., pp. 829–893). New York, NY: Wiley.
Swanson, D. P., Cunningham, M., Youngblood, J., &
Spencer, M. B. (2009). Racial identity development during childhood. In H. A. Neville, B. M. Tynes, & S. O.
Utsey (Eds.), Handbook of African American psychology
(pp. 269–281). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Taylor, P., Funk, C., & Clark, A. (2007). Americans and
social trust: Who, where and why. Washington, DC: Pew
Research Center.
Terburg, D., & van Honk, J. (2013). Approach–avoidance
versus dominance–submissiveness: A multilevel neural
framework on how testosterone promotes social status.
Emotion Review, 5, 296–302.
Treisman, U. (1992). Studying students studying calculus:
A look at the lives of minority mathematics students in
college. The College Mathematics Journal, 23, 362–372.
doi:10.2307/2686410
Tucker-Drob, E. M. (2012). Preschools reduce early academic-achievement gaps a longitudinal twin approach.
Psychological Science, 23, 310–319. doi:10.1177/
0956797611426728
Tyler, T. R. (2006). Restorative justice and procedural justice: Dealing with rule breaking. Journal of Social Issues,
62, 307–326. doi:10.1111/j.1540-4560.2006.00452.x

Tyler, T. R., & Blader, S. L. (2003). The group engagement
model: Procedural justice, social identity, and cooperative behavior. Personality and Social Psychology Review,
7, 349–361. doi:10.1207/S15327957PSPR0704_07
Tyler, T. R., Fagan, J., & Geller, A. (2014). Street stops
and police legitimacy: Teachable moments in young
urban men’s legal socialization. Journal of Empirical
Legal Studies, 11, 751–785. doi:10.1111/jels.12055
Tyler, T. R., Goff, P. A., & MacCoun, R. J. (2015). The
impact of psychological science on policing in the united states procedural justice, legitimacy, and effective
law enforcement. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 16, 75–109. doi:10.1177/1529100615617791
Vanderbilt, K. E., Liu, D., & Heyman, G. D. (2011). The
development of distrust. Child Development, 82, 1372–
1380. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2011.01629.x
Vasquez, J. A. (1988). Contexts of learning for minority
students. The Educational Forum, 52, 243–253. doi:10.
1080/00131728809335490
Yeager, D. S., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., Apfel, N.,
Brzustoski, P., Master, A., . . . Cohen, G. L. (2014).
Breaking the cycle of mistrust: Wise interventions to
provide critical feedback across the racial divide. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 143, 804–824.
doi:10.1037/a0033906
Yeager, D. S., Romero, C., Paunesku, D., Hulleman, C. S.,
Schneider, B., Hinojosa, C., . . . Dweck, C. S. (2016).
Using design thinking to improve psychological interventions: The case of the growth mindset during the
transition to high school. Journal of Educational Psychology, 108, 374–391. doi:10.1037/edu0000098
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological interventions in education: They’re not magic.
Review of Educational Research, 81, 267–301. doi:10.3102/
0034654311405999
Yeager, D. S., Walton, G. M., Brady, S. T., Akcinar, E. N.,
Paunesku, D., Keane, L., . . . Dweck, C. S. (2016).
Teaching a lay theory before college narrows achievement gaps at scale. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America, 113, E3341–
E3348. doi:10.1073/pnas.1524360113

Supporting Information
Additional supporting information may be found in
the online version of this article at the publisher’s
website:
Figure S1. Exploratory Mediation Analysis of
Effects of Seventh-Grade Trust (Measured, Top
Panel; or Manipulated, Bottom Panel) on on time 4Year College Enrollment, Via Eighth-Grade Behaviors, for African American Participants Only
Figure S2. Cross-Lagged Models Show That
Awareness of Bias Predicts Subsequent Trust for
Seventh- and Eighth-Grade Hispanic/Latino Students, Controlling for Gender

Middle School Trust Gap

Figure S3. Individual Differences in Awareness
of Anti-African American Procedural Injustice in
School Policies Do Not Predict the Onset of Overall
Mental Models of Trust of School Among White
Middle School Students in Study 1
Figure S4. The “Trust Residual Predicts College
Enrollment” Model, Excluding Treated Students
Figure S5. The “Trust Residual Predicts College
Enrollment” Model, White Students Only
Figure S6. Cross-Lagged Analyses Among African American Participants in Study 1, Showing the

19

Reciprocal Relations Between Perceived Bias and
Loss of Trust Across the Middle School Years
Table S1. Study 1 Racial Group Differences in
School Trust
Table S2. Study 2 Ethnic Group Differences in
School Trust
Table S3. Descriptive Statistics for Study Variables (Study 1)
Table S4. Descriptive Statistics for Study Variables (Study 2)

